 We have disasters for breakfast; mined ships for luncheon; burned cities for dinner . We have trenches for dreams, trenches for small talk, and bombarded towns for small-talk .
 Using this new manufacturing paradigm and mechanism, a completed automobile could be put together in three hours . A completed car could be built in three minutes .
 The era of independent craftsmen producing customized goods, each one unique and imbued with its maker's personality, gave way to automated, one-size-fits all, dehumanizing, demoralizing, cog-in-a-wheel world of machine-driven manufacturing .
 Lizzie Huddleston gave credence to the credo ""Third time's a charm" with her marriage to James Branstuder on April 23 rd .
 Her first short-lived marriage to Harry Kollenborn had produced their son Albert . Her first marriage had produced a son, Albert .
 Lizzie was twenty-six when she commenced married life for the third time with Jim Branstuder . She was married to Jim BranStuder at the age of 26 .
 Both Lizzie and her new husband were residents of DeWitt, Missouri, in Carroll County, Missouri . As when she married Harry Kollenborn in 1906, both she and her husband were still living in the town .
 Branstuders would soon move to Brunswick, a few miles east in neighboring Chariton County . But the Branstuder family would soon be moving to neighboring Brunswick .
 In order to marry Jim, Lizzie had to first divorce her middle husband, Charles E Davidson . Jim was Jim's first wife . Jim is Jim's wife of six years .
 The day before she married Jim, she obtained her divorce from Charles, who did not even show up for the proceedings . Charles did not show up in court .
 Wednesday April 22 nd 1914 Eighth day of Term Elizabeth L Davidson Plaintiff vs. Elizabeth L. Davidson . Plaintiff against. Davidson, a woman in 1914 .
 It is therefore ordered, adjudged and decreed by the Court that the plaintiff be divorced from the defendant Charles E Davidson and be forever freed from the obligations of said marriage . It is further ordered and adjudged by the . Court that . the plaintiff have and retain the care custody of
 The Branstuders' union held— they remained married for forty-five years, up until Lizzie's death in 1959 . They remained together for forty years .
 Anna Lee Huddleston apparently ended up marrying Lizzie's father-in-law Squire Branstuder . The aunt and aunt ended up having a daughter together . Squire is now married to Anna's aunt .
 Both Chillicothe and Hale are in the vicinity of Carrollton, DeWitt, and Brunswick, the towns where the Kollenborns/ Davidsons/ Branstuders had lived .
 Deborah and Robert had become estranged sometime after their move to California in 1891 . Deborah had been estranged from Robert since the move to the U.S.
 Deborah lived with their daughter Marian in California and is buried in Dinuba in that state . She must have been visiting her other children in Canada at the time of death .
 The global conflict which began in 1914 and didn't end until 1918 was first called ""The Great War,"" but got a name change in the 1940s when another world conflict broke out . The Great War ended in 1918 .
 Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria had been warned to stay out of Bosnia . The Serbian population was seeking independence from Bosnia .
 Later on the same day, a Serbian student named Gavio Princip was successful in his plot to assassinate the Archduke and his wife, the Duchess . The Duchess was also killed in the plot .
 The first bullet hit Sophie in the abdomen; the second struck Francis in the jugular . Ferdinand's wife Sophie was hit by the first bullet; the first struck his wife Sophie . Francis was killed by the second bullet .
 The First World War began on July 3 rd when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia . The Serbia government apparently did not sponsor or condone the murder of the Archduke and Archduchess . Serbia did not . sponsor the murder .
 One declaration of war led to another, until practically the entire world was involved, at least tangentially . Almost the whole world, including the U.S., was involved in the conflict .
 Britain, France, Russia, and China banded together . Banding together was chiefly Britain and France, France and Russia .
 In the view of many, the Victorian era ended with the advent of this terrible bloodbath . In the world of the Victorian period, this was the end of that era .
 This global cataclysm, although not as costly in terms of lives lost, was even more a watershed event than the Second World War . This global catastrophe was even even more costly than the WWII, says David Cameron . It was a 'watershed event' for the world, he says
 It brought a greater break with the past, gravely altering people's view of the world and its future . It brought an end to the world, and the future, as well as the future .
 At the time of the war, it would have been difficult to imagine a more devastating one . The war was a devastating one for the British Empire .
 Ten million died in battle, and twenty million more died of hunger and disease related to the war . Ten million people were killed in battle and hunger related to war .
 To an even more dramatic extent than in most battles, there were no winners— only losers . To the extent of this battle, there are no winners, only losers, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 To provide an idea of just how devastating and world-changing this war was, all one has to do is consult history books . History books expound on the era and put the conflict in context .
 Before the war, most people thought world conditions were improving, and that the future looked bright . The war ended in 1945, but the war was still raging .
 Prior to the war, people and nations felt secure enough, and trusted each other enough, that passports were not required when traveling from country to country .
 As just one example of just how far-reaching and fundamental this jolt to the world was , note this translation of an excerpt from a German history book Kursbuch Geschichte by Dr. Dr. Paul Schoenfeld .
 Artillery and machine guns, battle cruisers and submarines, as well as the first tanks and bombers, led to an extermination of people and materials, which exceeded anything previously imagined . Artillery, machine guns and submarines led to the death of thousands of people .
 Poison gas, first employed in 1915, was one of the especially dreadful battle means employed . Poison gas was used in World War One .
 It signified the great downfall of the values of civilization in the consciousness of contemporaries, says the author of the book .
 The war-waging nations mobilized every member of their societies for the war at the front and on the ""homefront, "" which led to a shaky separation between the military and the civil sphere . The war in the 1930s and 1940s saw the rise of the civil war in
 In the course of the war almost the entire civilian population, male and female, was involved in the war, both in the armaments factories and in the ""normal"" work positions .
 The First World War meant the breakdown of the system of states, but not simply because all great powers were part of it, as a hundred years before in the Napoleonic Wars . The World War was the first major war in the world, with the collapse of the entire system of
 All the states and peoples involved felt and experienced it as an existential struggle for survival . Rather all the states, peoples involved in the struggle for their survival, they said .
 War patriotism developed a tremendous power of integration, which concealed the tensions within populations and consequently deepened the chasms between the nations . Actually this war patriotism developed . It concealed tensions between populations and therefore deepened .
 Not since the wars of religion in the 1 6 th and 1 7 th centuries had the population been drawn in such measure into the occurrences of war as both fighters and sufferers . That meant mobilization, nationalization, fanaticism, in completely new dimensions .
 Even the beginning of the great conflict in old Europe may have had an adverse affect on the man's health . The man's illness may have been caused by the start of the conflict .
 John Muir wandered the Mojave Desert to meditate in solitude . Muir spent time in the desert during his time there . He spent time meditating in the area .
 Roy Webster was a good worker, with a head on his shoulders and could get up in the morning . If you couldn't read, write, spell, and quote all twelve multiplication tables by then you probably never could... "" from ""Under a Buttermilk Moon a Country Memoir
 The Lusitania did not dawdle in its descent to the depths of the sea . Attacked by a German submarine on May 7th, 1915, it was the last ship to leave the port .
 A mere eighteen minutes after being struck, it vanished beneath the ocean's surface . A mere 18 minutes after it was struck, the oceanic vessel vanished beneath surface .
 One thousand one hundred ninety eight men, women, and children perished . One thousand and one hundred and ninety eight people perished .
 Outrage over the incident played a large role in getting America directly involved in The Great War . Germany offered apologies and reparations for the Americans killed .
 Americans' view towards Germans changed drastically after this incident . Americans' views towards Germans have changed drastically since the incident .
 Theodore Shannon began working full time this year as a logger, at the age of 13 . Shannon began his first full-time job as a logging worker at 13 years ago .
 The area had previously experienced a gold rush . Redwood trees were now the valuable commodity to be extracted from the soil . The area experienced a similar gold rush in the 1970s .
 Coast Redwood of northwestern California is taller than its cousin, the Giant Sequoia that is found inland, such as in eastern Tulare County, but is not as wide of girth . Coast Redwoods are taller than their cousins, but are more wide-ranging than Giant Sequ
 Both are tall, thick, but each one takes decided precedence over the other in one of the two characteristics . Both are taller, both are thick .
 Coast Redwoods live approximately 2,000 years, whereas Giant Sequoias endure for approximately 3,000 cycles of the seasons . Another difference between the two species is that Coast Redwood live approximately two thousand years, while Giant sequoias live approximately three thousand years .
 As do Cypress trees, Redwoods hold up well against fire . Fire seems necessary for this insect-, rot-, and fire-resistant marvel .
 Location of groups of redwoods coexisting together may correspond to areas where there had been localized hot spots in past fires . Thriving in areas where lessrobust trees had been victims of previous fires, experts say .
 At the time Theodore was finishing his formal schooling and beginning his life-long career as a logger, some were still using ox teams for transporting logs out of the woods . Theodore was a logger in the early days of his time in the area .
 As the form of transport to market changed from sail to steam to diesel, the logging industry went from using oxen to horses to ""donkeys" to ""cats" in the woods .
 The Green family's Ozark home came to an end after just one decade . Two thousand miles away, in northwestern Arkansas, the family's bucolic times in the home ended after just 10 years .
 Belle would have to carry on without Tommy in caring for their seven children, ranging in age from two to 14 . The couple's seven children are aged between two and 14 .
 Thomas Green of near Dug Hill on Sugar Creek died last week . Green was a member of the Sugar Creek community .
 The family doctor, as well as relatives, offered to adopt the two youngest children . Alice, who was five years old, and Andy, two-year-old Andy, were adopted .
 Belle was determined to keep the family together, though, and declined the offers . Belle declined to accept the offers to keep her family together .
 She had to sell most of the stock, but managed to retain the land for which Tommy had traded . Tommy's estate was sold to her by the end of the war, but she was able to keep it .
 This retention of the beloved family property did not come easily, though, though . This retention came with the loss of the family home .
 As a child, every time she entered one with her mother, she ended up leaving the bank with less land than they had when they entered . The bank had confiscated some of the land for back taxes, she says .
 Today, a golf course has supplanted the formerly productive land nearby . Today, it has replaced the once productive land .
 Will acted as ""midwife"" in this instance also, and helped to deliver his sixth child and fourth son . Will also acted as "midwife" in the delivery of his fourth son and sixth child .
 Robert was named for Will's brother; however, Robert was also the name of Will's father, who had died in 1901 . Gertie says that Robert was called Robert by Robert's father . Robert died in 1903 .
 Robert Taft's middle name was Robert, but documents indicate it was Robert . Other documents indicate that the middle name given Robert was Taft . Taft died at the age of 92 .
 If he was actually named Robert Lee, one would assume that it were given him in honor of the Confederate General Robert E Lee . However, if he was given the name Robert Lee it would be assumed that it was given him the name of Confederate General Lee .
 Will's uncle James, who served for four years on the Union side in the Civil War, might have disapproved of Will's actions . If so, Will's aunt, Will, served on the side of the war .
 Ishi died on March 25 th of a disease he had contracted while living amongst the Euro-Americans at the San Francisco Museum of Anthropology . He had contracted a disease while living in San Francisco .
 Since his time, term limits have been imposed on the presidency, limiting the officeholder to two consecutive terms . The officeholder can only be re-elected to a second consecutive term .
 Of the forty-three Presidents in all of U.S. History, there have only been 14 who served two or more full terms . Only 14 have served two full terms in the United States .
 Of the first seven Presidents, the only ones to be held to serving a single term were John Adams and his son John Quincy Adams . John Adams was the only one to serve a one term .
 In the next four hours Hughes piled up a commanding lead in the other eastern states . Hughes' lead in eastern states was extended to four hours in four hours .
 Neither the United Press or Associated Press declared him elected, although it seemed certain until Wednesday morning . Neither did the Associated Press or United Press .
 In California, all of the counting had been completed, even though the balance of the State had cast 925,000 votes . All of the California votes had been cast .
 Election observers realize the outcome would depend on who won the State's 13 electoral votes . Election observers began to realize that the outcome of the election depended on the outcome .
 It was the isolated county in the Redwood Country which held the history -making answer . The isolated county was the site of the discovery .
 Morris DeHaven Tracy of the United Press, San Francisco, was a former Eureka newspaperman . Tracy was a newspaperman for the United States Press . Tracy is a former San Francisco newspaperman. Tracy is now retired .
 He traced the final results through his old friend, County Clerk Fred M Kay . Going to work, he traced the results back to the County Clerk .
 For blocks down Fifth Avenue, I wept over the pitiful spectacle . In spite of my best efforts, I could not keep back the tears, and for blocks .
 "I could not look at those long lines of fine looking men, marching so gaily along, and with so little realization of what it all means, without afresh outburst of tears," she writes .
 "How little they realized that they were endorsing a system which means that great armies of splendid manhood shall go forth and slay other great armies. How little they . They were endorsing that they . were endorsing . a system . that means that . great armies . shall go forward and slay
 Because stupid diplomats were too avaricious, too selfish, too ambitious to sanely handle the affairs entrusted to their care, diplomats are not sanely handled . The world's worst diplomats are stupid diplomats, too greedy and selfish .
 All the lunatics turned loose from all the hospitals in the world could not have made so sorry a mess of things as have the diplomats of Europe . Europe's diplomats have made a 'mess of things' with the world, writes David Cameron .
 And yet we, blind and stupid as we are, are rushing into the same horrible cataclysm . And yet, we are rushing to the same catastrophic cataclysm. We need to be more prepared for the next thing .
 The United States of America purchased the Virgin Islands for $25 million . United States enters the ""Great War"
 Woodrow Wilson had previously emphatically asserted that America would not sacrifice its young men and women to the war effort . As FDR would later say regarding the second World War while it was raging, LBJ would later later say about Vietnam . Wilson had earlier said that U.S. would not
 Wilson's earlier assertion about America not fighting proved to be a hollow promise . Whether reluctant or otherwise, Wilson's assertion about fighting proved hollow . Wilson: "America not fighting proves to be fighting"
 The hatchway had been opened to America's direct involvement when Germany sunk an American merchant vessel . Germany sunk the U.S. merchant vessel in 1941 .
 Germany claimed the vessel was carrying weapons bound for use against her by Germany's enemies . Germany said the ship was carrying arms bound for the use of her enemies .
 In retrospect, it appears the vessel had indeed been transporting weapons for use against the Germans . The vessel was believed to have been transporting arms for use in the war .
 Wilson told an aide, "My message 12 today was a message of death for our young men" Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of War on Germany, which was met with thunderous applause . Wilson told aide, ""My message today was ... death for my young men."
 Reportedly, Wilson then returned to the Oval Office, laid his head on his desk, and wept . Wilson then reportedly wept, according to reports . Wilson was reportedly in tears when he returned to his office .
 Now it must turn with its whole might to combating the greatest enemy of all-infectious disease .
 Germany, considered the primary instigator of the war, was slapped with heavy reparations costs by the victors in the war . Germany was considered the main instigator in the fight against the Nazis .
 Many feel that the strain put Germany under inexorably led to a bitter and belligerent Germany in the 1930s and 1940s that would later resume an aggressive stance against its enemies . Many feel the extreme strain that this led to an aggressive Germany that would resume aggressive stance .
 Tomorrow is the last day for the German alien enemies to register at the local police department . The last day is the final day for them to register with the police department.
 Some of the local unnaturalized citizens have been hesitant to make the fingerprint impressions . The officers say it is no disgrace .
 The names of the registrants will be published in tomorrow's Register to show good faith of the German-born citizens in their willingness to co-operate .
 Fourteen states in the Union have abolished the teaching of the German language in the schools . In 1 6 other states a campaign to eliminate German is underway, according to American Defense Society .
 Every male in Allen County between the ages of 18 and 45 must register tomorrow under the new manpower bill . Allen County men must register to register under the bill .
 The local board has completed arrangements for the registration in every voting precinct in the county . The local elections board has also set up arrangements for every precinct .
 It is expected there will be about 2, 5000 men go to designated places in each precinct to register . It is not known if 2,000 men will register at the time .
 The draft call which has been expected for the first week in October has been postponed indefinitely by the government . The government postpones indefinitely due to the epidemic of Spanish influenza in the military camps .
 We know he did not die from Spanish influenza, but yet he apparently only had a couple of years to live . We know that he didn't die of Spanish influenza .
 The pestilence that appeared this year was to prove costlier, in terms of lives lost, than all the bullets and bombs of the war combined . This year's costlier than all of the bullets, bombs and bombs combined .
 More Americans died as a result of the pandemic in a single year than had died in both world wars . In fact, more Americans died in that year than in both the world wars.
 Some were already in the fire when the remainder of the contents of the frying pan were overturned into the flames . Thus the War and the Flu overlapped— some were already . Some were . already in . the fire . The rest of the . contents were overturned .
 The flu originated in a war setting, and spread further and faster because of war conditions . The flu spread further because of the war conditions in war conditions, experts say .
 In fact, it first appeared on March 9 th at an army base just seventy miles west of Topeka, Kansas .
 Fort Riley also happened to be the home base of George Custer and the 7 th Cavalry . A cholera epidemic swept the fort and the surrounding region in the early 1900s . The fort was also home to the 7th Cavalry during the epidemic, when it was swept
 Spain was the first locale to report on the widespread deaths . Due to wartime news censorship, Spain was first to report .
 From Fort Riley, and another base in Kansas, Fort Funston, the flu quickly spread to army bases throughout the country . The flu has been reported at Fort Riley and another Kansas base .
 Thousands who carried the virus were sent to Europe . Not understanding the danger, the military sent thousands who carried it to the continent .
 Conditions in the trenches there only encouraged further rapid spreading of the flu . Conditions were so bad that the flu continued to spread across the country . It is not the first time the flu has been reported to be reported in the UK .
 The unhygienic conditions that prevailed there due to all the casualties, wounded and dead, were a perfect breeding ground for the virus, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The deaths came so fast and furious that some feared germ warfare was being used on them by the Germans . Many died within 24 hours of becoming ill and some feared that germ warfare had been used .
 By the fall every major army in combat in Europe had a significant number of its troops sick . By that time the fall all major armies in combat had significant numbers of sick soldiers sick .
 A strange thing about the flu was that it most affected the healthiest cross-section of the country — those between 20 and 40 years of age . The flu most affected those between the ages of 20 to 40 years .
 Most public gatherings were prohibited, and unnecessary travel was discouraged . Public gatherings were also prohibited .
 In Chicago, a man who refused the order to don a mask was shot dead on the street by a city health official . The man was shot by a health official in Chicago .
 A remarkable aspect of the flu was the suddenness with which it could strike . The flu is the flu that can strike with a suddenness, experts say .
 A lift operator in a mine in South Africa was overcome by sweating paralysis . He could no longer control his machine, and the lift fell to the bottom of the shaft .
 In Washington, D.C., a young woman called the authorities, reporting that two of her three roommates were dead, and the other one was sick . She was the only healthy one in the room, and she was the last healthy one .
 All four of the young women were killed in the early hours of the morning . By the time they reached the apartment shortly afterwards, all four were dead .
 More than half of American casualties in the war were a result of the flu . Forty-three thousand American soldiers died from the disease .
 Upwards of 550,000 Americans lost their lives as a result of the flu, which was more than ten times the number of soldiers who died in battle throughout the entire World War . The flu was the most common cause of death in the U.S. during the Second World War
 By the time the pandemic was over, a total of 675,000 Americans had died from it . It was greater than the number of American soldiers killed in all the wars of the 20 th century combined .
 During the month of October 1918 alone, over 195,000 Americans died from the flu . During that month alone, more than 200,000 people were killed in the United States .
 Two women in the extended family had another kind of ""flu"" this year, a strain they had had before and would have again . Two women had another strain of "flu" this year and will have again this year .
 Ruie M Branstuder was named for her mother and possibly her mother's great aunt, Ruth Elizabeth M Huddleston . Lizzie and Jim's first child Ruie was also born this year .
 Ruie Barner was born in DeWitt, Arkansas, as her brother Albert was . Ruie lived in and around Arkansas most of her life . Her brother Albert also lived in Arkansas .
 When the Branstuders were growing wheat and oats in Verdigris, Oklahoma, in the northeastern part of the state, harvest time would bring workers to their farm . Workers boarded with them throughout their term of employment .
 Ruie would unscrew the bolts on the sides of the bunk beds until they were almost all of the way out . Ruie unscrews the bolts to keep the boards attached, but very loosely, in order to keep them attached .
 When the harvester allotted the top bunk grabbed ahold of the board to climb into bed, the board would come off and clatter onto the floor . The dumbfounded farm laborer presumably sprawled on the floor, doubtless to the amusement of his companions .
 Ruie would also play a similar trick with the salt and pepper shakers, loosening the tops so that when they were overturned, their tops would come off, pouring copious amounts of spices all over the food and across the table .
 Her half-brothers Albert Kollenborn and Buck Davidson were also recipients of her keen sense of humor . She was also a good friend to her half-siblings .
 On cold winter days, she would hide a metal poker in the snow, and then stuff the icecold poker under the covers of her brothers' bedsheets .
 Three planes flew over Trinity County on December 18th bound for Eureka . Three planes were bound for Trinity County bound for the town of Trinity .
 Such an event which would hardly be noticed today was quite a thrill in those early days of aviation . Such a thrill would have hardly been noticed today, but it was a thrill for aviation enthusiasts .
 All in the county seat of Weaverville went outside to see them . Some even climbed onto the tops of buildings for a better view .
 I would say that the things our corporatecontrolled government has done at best are shameful, and at worst, genocidal . The things we have done are shameful and at the worst, Genocidal, he says . He says the government's actions are shameful .
 "There's an incredible and a permanent culture of resistance in this country that I'm very proud to be apart of," she said . "But there's an amazing and an incredible ... culture in the U.S. that's very proud of," the actress said .
 It's the tradition of the Frederick Douglasses, the Underground Railroads, the Chief Josephs, the Joe Hills, and the Huey P Newtons . It's not a slave-owning founding father, it's a tradition of slave-owned founding father .
 People often get tricked into going overseas and fighting Uncle Sam's Wall Street wars, but these are people who knew what they were fighting for here at home . People often don't know what they're fighting for, but they knew what it was fighting for .
 When the telephone was invented in 1876, men were hired as operators . Men were hired to work as operators for the first time .
 This didn't last long, though, as they were found to be too rambunctious with one another and tended to be surly with the parties they were employed to connect . The pair were soon to be found out of work .
 Being a telephone operator soon became primarily a woman's profession . The telephone operator is a telephone caller .
 This year, operators of either gender started becoming more scarce . For the first time, telephone users could dial direct . Operator of either sex is no longer available in 2015 .
 Theodore Roosevelt Shannon was twelve days shy of being seventeen years old when he died . His namesake, Theodore Shannon, was the 19th President of the United States . Shannon's father had followed the 19 President's career closely .
 Had the Great War not ended the previous year, he probably would have been a candidate for direct involvement in that bloody contest . Had the WWI not ended in 1918, he would have had direct involvement .
 Theodore Roosevelt Shannon was not the only baby named for the President . Shannon was named for President Roosevelt Shannon .
 Jackie Roosevelt Robinson was born this year . He would make quite an impact on history as well as on baseballs .
 This physically and emotionally resilient individual would break the color line in baseball . He was a member of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1940s . He would go on to play for the New York Yankees .
 The Brooklyn Dodgers organization, and even more so Robinson himself, displayed the content of their character in the roles they played in obliterating the ""color line"" in baseball .
 Jackie Robinson was added to the Dodgers' squad in 1947 . He was subjected to animosity and cruelty from fans and fellow players alike . Robinson was the first African-American to be added to Major League Baseball .
 Opponent Joe Garagiola deliberately spiked Robinson during his career as a player . Robinson was the subject of a series of incidents in the baseball world .
 Some players, such as southerner ""Pee Wee"" Reese went out of their way to befriend Robinson . On the other hand, some players such as Reese went .
 The heavily favored Chicago White Sox lost to the Cincinnati Reds five games to three in the World Series . The Reds beat the White Sox five-game-to-three in five years .
 Certain members of the Chicago White Sox had accepted bribes to ""throw"" the Series . After investigation, it was determined that certain members of . the Chicago . White Sox members accepted bribes .
 Joe Jackson, a country bumpkin batting phenom, was banned from baseball for life . Joe Jackson was one of those indicted, and banned, from the sport for life in the 1930s .
 Superstitious and eccentric, ""Shoeless Joe" would send his bats to the South for the winter and practice his batting concentration by having stare-outs with lit matches . The eccentric and superstitious batsman would practice his concentration by using lit matches in the winter .
 Jackson's .375 batting average in the series led all hitters, and his twelve hits tied a world series record . Jackson's 12 hits in the world series tied a record for a single World Series record .
 Gertie Shannon related in her memoirs that her sons Theodore and Kenneth relocated to Tulare County in 1919 . The two sons moved to the county in 1919 and moved there in 1920 .
 After finding work and getting settled there, they asked their parents to move down with them . They asked them to move with them after finding work in the U.S. and finding work .
 Will and Gertie did come down, with their other four surviving children, Howard, Marian, Robert, and George . Howard and Marian's other surviving children survived .
 Theodore and Kenneth returned to work as loggers in Tulare County, California . The two moved to Tulare in order to get their Trinity County family to join them . Not long after they had got their family to relocate with them, they moved back to work in the woods .
 Will and Gertie's daughter Marian Adele broke her arm after falling off her horse at school and breaking her arm . Prior to the move south, Will's daughter was seven years old and broke her own arm .
 The teacher carried Marian into her own home about a half mile away and doctored her up . The teacher, Miss Holtorf, did a fine job of setting the arm"" according to Gertie .
 It was not uncommon in this era for workers to spend six days a week, twelve hours and more per day, on the job . Workers would spend six-day days, twelve-hour days and more days per day on the jobs .
 The eight-hour workday was established this year as a standard for the workplace . It is still not the norm for everybody, but it has been established as an eight hour workday .
 Belle Green badly injured herself while cutting sorghum cane for winter molasses in Arkansas . Belle Green injured herself in the cane cutting accident in Arkansas.
 Hurley was called, the poison had spread rapidly and developed into gangrene . Hurley died of gangrene after being poisoned by the poison . The poison was called Hurley and spread rapidly .
 Belle's only hope was for him to amputate above the poisoned area . He explained to Belle that her only hope is for her to be amputated . Belle was told she had to wait for her life to be saved .
 Belle refused, saying, "But doctor, I have a farm to run and seven children to raise" Despite the dire prognosis, Belle refused to give up .
 The doctor did all he knew how to do, but left the Green farm with little hope . The Green farm was devastated by the loss of the animals .
 Hurley was amazed to find that Belle's heartbeat was stronger and her temperature was lower . Hurley returned to the hospital and found that she had improved her heartbeat and temperature .
 He said, "Belle, when I left last night, your heart was pounding like a rusty tin can. He said . He said: "When I . left last . night, when . I left, your . heart was pounded like a rusting tin can."
 The doctor could only shake his head, feeling he had just witnessed a miracle . The doctor shook his head as he watched the scene .
 Ruth became nurse and second mother to her three youngest siblings Mary, Alice, and Andy, while ""Man"" and Effie did the outside chores, which consisted of milking, feeding the stock, cleaning the stalls, and cutting wood . Ruth became a nurse and mother to Mary,
 They recall a neighbor named Port Howard who came with a big load of wood during a blizzard . Port Howard was a neighbor of the area who came in with wood during the storm .
 Men opposed women getting the vote feared they would use their newly gained power to mandate the prohibition of alcohol . Men feared that women would use the vote to mandate prohibition . Women were able to vote in 18th century .
 Preparations were already being made for that, though, even without women's suffrage . Preparations for that were being made even before the election was made .
 This Pharisaical law defined just what products constituted ""alcoholic beverages,"" paving an ultra-puritanical path that would lead to the imminent ban of all such . The law defines what products are considered alcoholic beverages .
 Disallowance of the production, sale, and consumption of alcohol became law throughout the nation with the passing of the 18 th Amendment to the Constitution . The 18th Amendment was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 In many cases it also meant a degradation of quality of the spirits imbibed . In some cases, the quality of spirits was also degraded .
 Some of the illegal liquor sold was downright dangerous to drink . And this was not just a case of less taste, but a case where some of the alcohol sold was actually dangerous .
 This good-intentioned social experiment was not only welcomed by teetotalers and temperance advocates, but also by many who saw in it ""business"" opportunities .
 Enterprising individuals who didn't mind breaking the law broke the law to make their living went into the bootlegging/ rumrunning trade . The bootleggers/ rumrunners trade was a popular way to make money .
 Family lore has it, in fact, that Albert Kollenborn was a bootlegger for a time . There is, as one would expect, no documented evidence, that there is .
 If true, it was probably when he was in his early twenties, at the time the family was living in northeastern Oklahoma . He was probably in his twenties .
 A natural destination for him to deliver his wares would have been Wichita, Kansas, Kansas .
 The only big cities that are closer to Verdigris are Tulsa and Oklahoma City . Tulsa is the only big city that is closer to the site . Oklahoma City and Tulsa are the only cities that have a bigger population .
 It could also be the case that Albert had been involved in this activity while living in northern Missouri in his late teens, taking his wares .
 Prohibition was an understandable idea, viewed from the perspective of those who had seen homes shattered as a result of alcohol abuse . Prohibition was seen as a good idea by those who saw homes shattered by alcohol abuse.
 It was impractical, though, as a means of solving the problem — and punished the innocent along with the guilty . It's impractical, but it was impractical as a way to solve the problem, though .
 This experiment failed miserably and was finally repealed in 1933 . People who like to smoke as well as drink had an even tougher time in Kansas than elsewhere .
 As National Prohibition lasted from 1920 to 1933, the outlawing of both tobacco and alcohol in Kansas overlapped during most of the 1920s . National Prohibition was in place during that period .
 Before women even got the vote, a woman was running the affairs of the country . Before women were even allowed to run the country, women were in charge of its affairs .
 The woman in question had not been elected to the post, nor did she act in an official capacity . She had not acted in a public office, nor was acting in a political role .
 Edith Wilson made presidential decisions on the sly for her husband while he was incapacitated for a time following a stroke this year . Woodrow Wilson's wife Edith made the president's decisions while he had a stroke .
 A law was passed that allowed the Vice President to take over the Presidential duties in the event that the President were to become incapacitated . Following this state of affairs, a law was . passed that allows the vice president to take . over the duties of the President .
 For the first year of the decade, more Americans lived in cities than in rural areas . More Americans live in cities, more than rural areas, for the first time, in 2010 .
 The population, at 1 10 million, was about one third of what it is today . The population of 1.10 million in 1970s was about a third of that today .
 Men and women who were middle-aged in the 1920s had lived through more change than did citizens during any other period of American history up till then . The 1920s was the most significant period of change in American history .
 They had seen the introduction of rockets, movies, movies and radios, advertisements, ""brands"" of products, chain stores, and now women voting and working outside the home . Some protested because of the inroads these made on the traditional ""mom and pop" shops .
 Considering his statement that he didn't like the ""country"" in Colorado due to the great volume of snow, one wonders about his last choice of domicile . Considering his statements that he did not like the 'country'
 He was apparently one of the last surviving members of the 16th Michigan Infantry . He is believed to be a member of the Army's last surviving unit .
 Only 19 of their number attended the annual reunion they had been holding since 1881 . The year before, only nineteen of them attended the reunion . The reunion was held for the first time in 1881.
 If Ruth was in fact African-American (even according to the ""one drop rule,"" which states that any African ancestry at all constitutes one as being ""colored""), he ""passed"" as a white man throughout his career . Ruth's career ended with the death of Ruth
 The National Football League was founded this year in the city which houses the Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio . The NFL was founded in Canton .
 The Decatur Staleys, who moved to Chicago in 1921, moved to St. Louis after the 1959 season, then moved to Arizona in 1988 . The Stalys moved from Chicago to Arizona after the 1960s and then moved from St.Louis to Arizona .
 Amateur football had already been played in the country for several decades . Amateur football was already played in Pakistan in the 1970s .
 Yale, Princeton, Columbia and Rutgers Universities had drafted the first code of football rules in 1873 . The first code was drafted by the universities of Columbia, Princeton and Columbia .
 Thora Louise Wheeler is the only surviving child of Harry and Myrtle Kollenborn . She was born in 1926 and is now married to Harry Wheeler . She is one of only surviving children of the Kollenbirths .
 Harry disappeared at some point after that in that year, but the exact date is unknown . As Harry was included in it, he disappeared from that year .
 Thirty-one-year-old Harry left his wife and five children for a young lady of nineteen . Harry was married to a young girl who was 19 at the time of his death .
 Harry was never seen again . No family member has ever reported seeing him after that .
 It has been speculated that the whole affair was a ""setup"" to allow the brothers to ambush and rob Harry . The brothers are believed to have ambushed and robbed Harry Harry .
 If such is the case, they apparently killed him also, although his body was never recovered . If such a case, the body of the man was never found .
 His car was found near a river with his drafting tools still in it . His architectural drafting tools were still in the car .
 Harry was listed as a farmer in the 1920 census . Family lore has him as a draftsman at this time . Harry was also listed in the census as a draft draftsman .
 Iola and Allen counties were growing quite a bit at the time, so there was certainly a lot of work in that field . Iola County was growing a bit of a bit, and the county was growing rapidly .
 A small farm does not require full-time year-round attention and many farmers work at other jobs during the winter . Harry could have been pursuing both professions simultaneously .
 Harry could have simply left, with no ""foul play"" being involved, but it is thought that if he had done that he would have taken his drafting tools along, he would've taken them along .
 He may have deliberately left them for that very reason — so that the family and// or the authorities would be less likely to consider him alive and go looking for him . Naturally, he may have left them to keep them alive .
 Harry's brother George is said to have thought that Harry ""rode the rails"" out of town and concluded that he had probably died somewhere along the way . Harry's sister is believed to have believed that Harry had died somewhere in the town .
 Men abandoning their families in that area at that general time period was not a rare occurrence . Men abandoned their families at that time period wasn't a rare event .
 The sacred bonds of matrimony seem to be as the tiniest thread around the hands of a giant so far as the holding power on Iola husbands is concerned . Iola has been married for more than 20 years .
 Scarcely a month passes that some husband doesn't desert his wife and children and leave them for friends or the county or their town's feeble efforts to support .
 Another daughter, Eda Irene, was born to Will and Gertie Shannon on September 4 th of this year, in Tulare . Charles, James, Emma, Emma and Roy were also born .
 Eda was the first of Will and Gertie's children to be born in a hospital . Eda is the first child of the couple to have been born in the hospital .
 Will and Gertie's later children also 26 stayed in school longer than the first ones had . The couple's children also had a longer education record .
 Most of those born in the Central part of the state graduated from High School, Eda among them . Eda is one of the most prominent women in the state .
 Thora was born to his father Harry and Juanita Branstuder . Juanita was also born to her mother Lizzie and Jim BranStuder .
 Albert may not have known about Thora at the time, as the Kollenborns and Branstuders did not seem to stay in contact with one another . Albert reportedly only saw his biological father once in his life .
 Albert and Thora never did meet one another, although she had tried to stop by and see him once when passing through Coos Bay, Oregon when the Kollenborns were living there . Albert's wife tried to see him when she was visiting him in Coos .
 Thora's brother James and Albert did meet, years later, toward the end of both of their lives . Albert and Thora met in the late years of his life .
 Juanita and Albert grew up together, in Missouri and Oklahoma . Juanita was well-known to Albert, though .
 Juanita and Juanita would also live near each other in northwestern Arkansas, where Juanita died at a young age .
 Juanita Branstuders was born in DeWitt, Missouri, in 1920 . Juanita's parents were still in Missouri, but she was born there .
 Although it is possible that Juanita was born in 1921, it is most likely that she was born 1920 . Juanita and Juanita were married in 1921 .
 The reason for drawing that conclusion is that she was nine years old in the 1930 census, which was taken early in the year, in April . She was nine when she was taken in April 1930 census .
 It is most likely she was born after April, and so she would have turned ten in 1930 in that case . She would have been born in April 1930 .
 Not the hypothetical overseas movement that has had the Lords ducking, but a home-made epidemic that will be shoved right up to the men of Iola, of Allen County and of Kansas to decide .
 She desired information as to the attitude of this paper toward a state campaign for equal suffrage . She wanted to know about the state's attitude toward the campaign .
 She stated that such a campaign is now on and that the state has been divided into districts and that she is the district manager in 27 this district . She said that such an election is now being held .
 In the 1920 census, Harry Kollenborn was listed as a farmer in Carlyle, Allen County, Kansas . In the 1930s, he was listed in the Kansas City, Kansas, population .
 Harry claimed that his mother was born in Missouri, whereas in actuality his biological mother, Nellie Jean Moore, had been born in Pennsylvania . Harry claimed to have been raised in Missouri .
 Harry was referring to his stepmother Rosa Pennington, who indeed had been born in Missouri in 1872, in the appropriately named tiny town of Tina .
 In the census, Harry's father James and his second wife Rosa were listed as living nearby in La Harpe, which is also in Allen County, Kansas . Harry's mother and father were listed in the census as living in the area .
 Rosa's father John J died on July 2 nd 1917, at the age of 75, and is buried in the town cemetery . Rosa's parents had also apparently relocated along with the Kollenborns to La Harpe .
 Richard Lee Kollenborn was also in Allen County, Kansas at this time, Osage township to be exact . Another son of William and brother of James, Richard Lee, also in Kansas, was also .
 Coincidentally, the Belle Green family was also listed as being in Osage township, but the one in Benton County, Arkansas .
 Lizzie Huddleston's father Bob, living in Kansas City, Missouri, was listed as working as a miller for a flour company . Bob was listed in the family as working for a Kansas City-based company .
 Emma Laura Silva was in Eureka, California, on Clark Street to be precise . She visited Clark Street in the early days of the day .
 The ""Donald"" is actually Gerald; the census taker obviously misunderstood or mis-read the boy's name . The boy is Gerald .
 Emma, who would later cook for California Governor (and future Supreme Court Justice) Earl Warren, was a waitress at the time .
 Emma's future son-in-law, Theodore Shannon, was farming in Tulare township, California . Theodore Shannon was the son of Emma's mother, Emma's grandmother .
 Myrtle had siblings in the central part of the golden state who urged her to move out, telling her that she could find work there . Myrtle's siblings said she could work in the state, but Myrtle refused .
 Youngest daughter Thora says about the move, "We all worked as soon as we could," says Thora . Thora is the youngest daughter of the three sisters .
 I should say the boys did, we girls kept up the house and did the cooking . We girls did the house, we did the cookery, she said. She said .
 My brothers were old enough when our father left to know, and always said they hoped he didn't come back, because he was mean to all of us . My brothers said they wanted him not to come back because of his meanness .
 To say such a thing indicates that they may have felt he was still alive, somewhere . To say that, it indicates that . They may have thought he still . somewhere, somewhere. He may have been alive .
 Kern County, where the Myrtle Kollenborn household 29 lived, borders Tulare County, which borders Kern County . This is so because Kern County is known as Kern County and Tulare .
 Will Shannon family and Myrtle Kollenborn family were both in Kern County for a time, as the 1930 census shows . In fact, the Shannon family was in the county for more than a time .
 Roy Webster: "Sometimes I wonder whether the world is being run by smart people who are putting us on or by imbeciles who really mean it. We never heard of such things; hard work and long hours took care of everything — kept you lean and rugged. "" from ""
 Harry and Myrtle's last child, Lula Mae, is still living . As is also true of Thora Wheeler, Thora, Wheeler, still lives in New York .
 Siloam Springs, Arkansas, is located on the boundary between northwestern Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma . Lula Mae was born in 1877 . She was a pioneer in Arkansas .
 Smith, Arkansas, is two hundred and three miles from Siloam Springs, Missouri . Smith, Smith, Missouri, is one of the world's largest cities . Smith is located in Smith's hometown .
 Wanna-be Davy Crocketts would have no more opportunities to try to grin down grizzly bears in California . "Davy Crockett" would be the last grizzly bear in the state of California .
 What was thought to have been the last one in the state was killed in Sequoia National Forest this year . It was believed to be the last of the state's wild animals to die .
 This was considered a grand achievement at the time, an event to celebrate . Apparently this was considered by the authorities as a 'grand achievement'
 Harry Kollenborn abandoned his family and subsequently mysteriously disappeared two years earlier . Myrtle divorced him this year following the events of his disappearance .
 Harry was to pay a total of $102 in Attorney's fees and related costs . Harry was also to pay $102 for attorney fees and other costs .
 Myrtle was unable to cover the costs of her hospital treatment until early 1928 . Myrtle died of her injuries in February 1928 .
 Blue cotton overalls are used by almost every male workman of the West instead of the more expensive article . They were not breeches proper at all, but the ordinary blue overalls .
 A comely matron, still on the bright side of forty, who, with ""Boss of the Road"" on a label at the small of her back, carried out her domestic duties without a skirt .
 Her trousers might have been more comfortable had they been made a little wider, she went about her work unashamed .
 Oklahoma declared martial law this year in response to terrorist activity carried out there by the white-robed, lily-livered do-badders .
 Many things are so commonplace today that we take them for granted, and imagining matters otherwise seems bizarre . Many things we take for granted today are commonplace today, and imagine them otherwise .
 On May 28 th of this year, the Attorney General declared it legal for women to wear trousers whenever and wherever they pleased .
 Having the legal right to do something and that something being acceptable or fashionable are, though, not always one and the same . Having the right to say something is not always acceptable, it's not always fashionable or fashionable .
 It would be decades before it would become commonplace for women to wear pants in public .
 While we were living at Carl's, and Robert was about seven years old, he gave me a scare . "Robert was about 7 years old," she says .
 I had been outside with the boys, picking up the chips and carrying wood in, and the boys were playing and everything was all right . The boys were all right. I was picking up wood and carrying it in, but everything was fine. The boys had been playing, and everything
 Robert was sitting in the swing with his tongue sticking out and the rope all around his neck . Everything got quiet and I went out to check on my children, and . I went . out and found Robert was . sitting in . the swing . Robert was found with the rope around his
 His tongue was black and I pulled him out of the swing, laying him on the ground, and ran into the house, calling for Dad . He ran for Dad. He ran to find his tongue black .
 Mr Reeves heard me calling but thought it was the children at play and didn't realize anything was wrong until he saw Dad carrying Robert . Mr Reeves was carrying Robert when he saw him being carried .
 George didn't realize anything was wrong and was playing around and under the swing through all this. "George didn't know anything wrong," he said. "He didn't think he was going to be able to play."
 Robert Coolidge Shannon was born in 1924 . Coolidge died in 1949 at the side of his brother Calvin Coolidge . Calvin was born the same year as Robert .
 There were no casualties as a result of that accident . But that's not what killed the President .
 He died in August after suffering apoplexy while his wife was reading to him at his bedside . Bronchial pneumonia was soon thereafter diagnosed .
 Coolidge was serving out Harding's term, but would be elected by the populace to continue in the post in the election at the end of this year . Coolidge would be serving out his term, and would be chosen by the public to continue .
 Will and Gertie name their son born this year for the current President . As they had named their first son for the President who was in office at the time, they named their son .
 Will apparently didn't follow Roosevelt into the Progressive, or ""Bull Moose"" camp .
 Progressives nominated Bob La Follette of Wisconsin as their Presidential candidate . Progressives nominate him as their candidate for 2016 .
 Or, if Will did follow Roosevelt in his party change , Will simply went with the winner of the election as regards his choice of name for his son .
 In those days before ultrasound, they may not have known twins were on the way, and thus possibly only had one name selected . The name of the baby may have been chosen by the couple .
 Some of the Iroquois declined the offer to become citizens . Some of them, such as the Iroquois, declined to accept it .
 The ""Indians"" had been in the country for thousands of years before the Euro-Americans arrived . The "Indians" were in the U.S. before they arrived in Europe .
 There is no known record of Native Americans granting citizenship to members of Congress . Native Americans granted citizenship to Congressmen .
 "I look at national affairs with rose-colored glasses, as it were. On the contrary, I look at . national affairs," he says . "I don't think it's a problem, but it's not a problem," he adds .
 William Kollenborn died in Iola, Kansas, on July 7 th of this year . Albert Kollen born 's great-grandfather' William died in July 7th this year at home .
 Albert and his great-grandfather William apparently never met, although their lives overlapped for eighteen years . Albert and William never met . Albert's life overlapped with William's life in 18 years, although he never met William .
 Olive Hathaway of this city, died suddenly early Tuesday morning at his home here, aged 97 years and 9 months . Hathaway died at the age of 97 and nine months .
 Funeral services will be held Thursday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Presbyterian church . Interment will be made at the Moran cemetery in Moran .
 Most documents indicate William was born in 1833, and was thus ninety-two, not ninety-seven, when he died . William's obituary says he died at the age of 92, not 93 .
 William and Charlotte were living with their youngest son Richard Lee Kollenborn in their final years . The couple were living in their last years with their son Richard .
 It was customary for rural families to pass on the family farm to the youngest son, and as a recompense for that live out their retirement years being taken care of by the youngest . The youngest son's family is now living on the farm .
 Parents are usually not ready to retire when the oldest son leaves home and starts a household . But by the time the youngest son begins his family they would usually be at least close to being ready for retirement .
 It should not be inferred from this that the older sons got nothing in the way of an inheritance, though, though . The older sons are not likely to get anything from this inheritance .
 Charlotte, who was seven or eight years younger than William, would survive her husband and live one more year, until 1926 . Charlotte's husband William died in 1926 . William's wife, Charlotte, died in 1924 .
 The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How it Changed America"" by John M Barry . They had the power of the times, when it was believed that men with money knew better and acted better .
 "I've never seen anyone put out a river. Say what you will about fire 's speed and efficiency, but I'm never seen it," says fire chief .
 There was a time when what was modern in films was based more on whether it was a ""silent" film or if it had sound . There was also a period of uncertainty as to whether a film was a silent or silent .
 The Mississippi River floods on a regular, albeit random, basis; that is to say, floods on the Mississippi are not rare, but they are also not predictable . Floods on the river are not as predictable, but as unpredictable .
 The floods of 1927 were especially bad— so bad, many wanted to take matters into their own hands . Many wanted to engineer a way to control the river .
 Various theories were put forth on how best to protect people and property . Various theories have been put forth as to how to do that so as to safeguard people, property .
 This year, New Orleans, among other localities, was seriously threatened by the floodwaters . This year's floodwaters were the worst of last year .
 New Haven remained dry without floodwalls or levies for a century . That's why New Haven, like other intelligently situated river towns, remained dry .
 Heat-Moon wrote the previous passage, and the following one, describing a flood that he and his crew were experiencing on the Missouri . At the time of the passage, he was describing a flooding .
 It was only the foolishness of trying to control the Missouri that was not as it should be, it was foolishness . It's only foolishness to try to control Missouri that's not as well as the Missouri .
 President Obama said there isn't any way to manage the Missouri because only it can manage itself . And he said only it could manage itself. And he, ""I'm saying there isn’t any way . to manage it."
 My grandfather never had to do this, and old What's-his-name over there at Treloar . The bottomland the river did it, and with no chemicals to get into our drinking water, it's safe to say .
 We've seen two fivehundred-year floods in two years in the last two years . So now we got levees and rock dikes and we've seen flood warnings, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 St. Louis, Missouri, is located at about the midway point of the Mississippi River . The Missouri and Mississippi Rivers meet, mix, meld, and eventually mesh .
 He ended it amidst an ecstatic crowd at the Paris airport the next day . Exhausted, he ended it with a crowd of ecstatic crowds .
 Charles Lindbergh and his wife would suffer heartbreak as an indirect result of their fame and fortune in the near future . More on that in the 1934 chapter .
 Albert Kollenborn and the rest of the Branstuder household apparently remained in Carroll and Chariton counties, Missouri, until the late 1920s . Albert and the other family lived in the area until the end of the 1930s .
 Albert's sister Lula Mae recalls Albert building a large model airplane while they were living in Brunswick in the latter part of the '20s . Although they were in Oklahoma by the time of the 40 1930 census, Albert's family lived in Brunswick, Oklahoma . The family moved to Oklahoma
 Albert didn't spend all of his time in the Branstuder household . Albert was a member of the family .
 He stayed off and on with his grandfather Bob Huddleston in Kansas City, Missouri . He stayed with him in the city of Kansas City .
 Albert worked both for the railroad and on Missouri river boats . As a young man, Albert worked on river boats in Missouri . Albert worked as a railroad and river boatman .
 Kansas City, which is a rail hub and lies on the Missouri River, lies near Brunswick . Brunswick is adjacent to the river; Kansas City is located on the river .
 The St. Louis, Kansas City & Northern Railroad ran its tracks through the Brunswick area, also . The Brunswick area .
 Albert also lived in Joplin, on the Missouri/ Kansas border for a time after he married, and in Oberlin, Kansas— both of which were railroad towns . Albert was also known for his work on the Kansas-Missouri railroad .
 Albert "sprung" his ankle while ice-skating on the Grand River near Brunswick . Lula Mae also recalled a time when Albert ""sprung"" his ankle one winter .
 The Branstuder girls (Ruie, Juanita, and Lula Mae) placed Albert on a sled and pulled him up the riverbank back toward the house .
 They pulled him partway up the hill, then let go of the sled and watched him slide helplessly back down the hill again . Ruie, the practical joker of the bunch, was pulled up by Ruie .
 The Branstuders may have left Brunswick due to flooding this year . The flooding took place not only on the Mississippi River proper, but also on many of its feeder rivers, such as the Missouri .
 Lula Mae recalls that she was five years old when they left Brunswick for Claremore, Oklahoma . She was five when they moved from Brunswick to Claremore in Oklahoma .
 Branstuder family moved to Oklahoma to transport goods by train . Branstuders had to use trains to transport their goods to Oklahoma .
 It is possible that Albert may have been an employee of the railroad at this time and been able to get his belongings on board at a reduced rate .
 Branstuders had lived near the Missouri River in northern Missouri . During the heyday of river travel and commerce, the Missouri river was a major thoroughfare . The Branstuder family lived near it .
 George Herman ""Babe" Ruth hit sixty home runs this season, a new single-season record . Ruth hit 60 home runs in a single season . Ruth set a new record for most home runs of all season .
 Micky Mantle got injured late in the season . Mantle was hoping to break the home record with teammate Micky .
 The added media attention this brought Maris distressed him so much that he began losing his hair . Maris lost his hair due to the media attention he received .
 Many wanted Ruth's record to stand or, if to be broken by somebody, then by the more gregarious Mantle, not Maris . Many of the fans wanted Ruth to break Maris' record, not Ruth .
 Even in little Hibbing, Minnesota, Maris Maris turned out to be only the second most famous hometown boy . Maris is the son of Maris Field Fielder .
 Robert Zimmerman, better known as Bob Dylan, also hails from that town . Bob Dylan was born in that town, and Bob Dylan is a native of it .
 Barry Bonds broke the record again, with seventy-three round-trippers . Just three years later, Barry Bonds set the record for round trippers . Barry Bonds hit the record three times in four years, breaking it .
 Ruth and Maris might have hit more home runs if they'd taken steroids . Baseball legend Maris Maris may have taken steroids and similar chemical supplements . Maris and Ruth hit more than 100 home runs each year .
 "Wall Street, by Wall Street, and for Wall Street" is no longer a government of the people, by the people and for the people . It's a "government of Wall Street," by Wall St, and by Wall Wall," says President Obama .
 Barbers, stenographers, and elevator boys seized opportunity to make money in expanding economy . Speculation in stocks became widespread .
 Too much of everything -food, clothes, cars and too few people - left too much to buy . Too much food, clothes and cars left too little people to buy it . That left too many people buying too much food and cars .
 The Untold Story of Those Who Survived the Great American Dust Bowl"" by Timothy Egan . Gertie Shannon had given birth to her first child, Theodore Roosevelt Shannon, on January 18 th , 1902 .
 Gary Gene Shannon was born this year on January 14 th in an adobe house that Will built in Shafter, California . Will built the adobe home that he built .
 Three years later she would become a grandmother, when her firstborn named his firstborn son William after his father . William was William's firstborn .
 While living in Shafter, Marian got married, George and also Robert, went back to Tulare to farm . We met Lavern Cordy because he was a car salesman and sold Dad his first pick-up .
 At this time, a very amusing and at the same time a very serious thing happened to Dad . Dad's father was in the middle of the ordeal . He was taken to hospital with a broken leg .
 Gary Gene's father Will was a contemporary of Herbert Hoover . Hoover was about to take office when Gary Gene was born . Will and Gertie did not name any of their boys Herbert .
 Will's sympathies were still with Calvin Coolidge, for whom he had named an earlier son . Like Will, Coolidge had borne the pain of the loss of a child . Perhaps Will was still with Coolidge .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. was born in Atlanta, Georgia to a minister who was himself the son of a minister . He was born to an Atlanta-born minister . MLK was the only African-American civil rights leader in America .
 America has experienced many economic downturns, recessions, and even downright depressions over the centuries . America's economy has suffered from many of the most recent depressions and recessions of the past century .
 When modern people speak of The Depression, they are referencing the one that began this year . These ""hard times"" have been of varying magnitudes . The Depression is one of the most severe periods of history .
 The Wall Street Stock Market Crash of 1929 began on October 29 th with a precipitous plunge of stock prices . The crash of 1929 was the first major Wall Street stock market crash to hit the U.S.
 This depression turned out to be even worse than the calamitous one of 1873 . The depression was caused by the depression of the year 1873.
 The Untold Story of Those Who Survived the Great American Dust Bowl"" tells of the immediate reaction to what would in hindsight be viewed as the start of the Depression . It was nothing, brokers said, a correction at the end of the dizzying decade, the most prosperous in the
 Over the next three weeks, the market lost 40 percent of its value, more than thirty-dive billion dollars in shareholder equity . That's money enough to float a hemisphere of nations . The market lost more than 30 billion dollars .
 More likely, they had bought more shares on margin, borrowing on the bet that stocks were going skyward . More likely they had just borrowed on margin .
 To pay the margin loan after the crash sometimes as high as 18 percent they had to sell at a time when many stocks did not get any bids at all . The margin loan to pay the loan was often as high a 18 percent .
 Banks had gone on their own speculative binges, reaching into people's savings accounts to make millions in interest-free loans available to bank officers and other insiders for stock purchases . Banks reached into savings accounts and made millions of interest free loans .
 One company, Union Cigar, went from $113 a share to $4 in a single day . One of the biggest companies in the world went from a $113 per share price to a $4 per share .
 The company's owner jumped to his death from a building on Wall Street . The owner of the company jumped from the building in New York City .
 Only one in thirty Americans at the time counted themselves as such as stockholders . As bad as it was for stockholders, only one in 30 Americans in the 1930s counted as such .
 Those without a literal stake in the market were unaffected, though by no means . This did not mean those without a physical stake in a market were affected .
 President Hoover kept a ""hands-off"" attitude toward government intervention in the economy . Hoover was a multimillionaire millionaire who kept a hands-off attitude towards government intervention . Hoover kept the government out of touch with the poor .
 Society was shaken, and so many people ""fell through the cracks"" that even some schools went bankrupt and closed down . Society was so shaken, some schools closed down and even some people were left homeless .
 Two hundred fifty thousand teenagers ended up ""on the road"" during the Depression years . Sometimes following the harvest, sometimes chasing rumors of work somewhere else .
 In 1932 alone, Southern Pacific evicted a half million people illegally riding their freight trains . Southern Pacific had evicted half a million people in 1932 alone .
 Sometimes they were simply escorted to the police station, where they were arrested for vagrancy . Sometimes the homeless were charged by the police with vagrantcy, a crime punishable by fines or incarceration .
 These 'hobos' were dealt with more severely and violently, oftentimes even being killed by the ""bulls"" who kept as many of these ticketless passengers off the trains as possible . Other times, these ""hobos"" were dealt . with more severe and violently .
 The railroads of Kansas have discarded harvest leniency toward side door sleeper tourists . It's not the first time the railroads have given up on side door sleeping tourists .
 Clary, special agent for the MoPac, said his work chiefly is the elimination of the hobo . Clary was here yesterday on a mission for his road and said he was here to help .
 Hoover's laissez-faire approach to the country's problems would contrast dramatically with those of Franklin Delano Roosevelt . Roosevelt would be the first of a record four times in the White House .
 "You bested my giant. "" from the movie ""The Princess Bride" "Put your hand on a hot stove for a minute and it seems like an hour"
 Some of the movements promoted by Kansans, prohibition for instance, seem ill-advised and extreme, at least in hindsight . Some of these movements, prohibition prohibition, are now an example of extreme conservatism .
 The Sunflower Staters took up the cudgels at this early date . Their concerns regarding the proliferation of chain stores and corporate farming seem downright prescient in the present-day world .
 Up until 1930, he had only lived in Missouri and Oklahoma . Arkansas and Kansas would soon follow, with three western states added later . Arkansas, Kansas and Kansas were soon followed .
 Albert was not the first of the Kollenborns to live in Kansas . Albert was born in Kansas, but it is not the only of the family to live there .
 His father Harry, his grandfather James, and his greatgrandfather William had all resided at the home of his ancestors .
 Albert made his home, for the most part, in the four corners area of the AMOK states . Before finally ""lighting out for the Territory"" and heading west in the early 1940s, Albert lived in the area .
 New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona and Utah meet at the meeting point of the 'Four Corners' region . The region is known as the Four Corners, where one can — theoretically — be in four states simultaneously .
 Four Corners in America is not the most famous, though — provided, at any rate, that a smidgen of ""poetic license"" is granted . That's not the only Four Corner in America .
 The ""almost"" Four Corners of the AMOK states would meet, if the Oklahoma line was dropped down just a tad, at the junction of southeastern Kansas, northeastern Oklahoma, northwestern Arkansas, and southwestern Missouri .
 This is not as "clean" and obvious as the Four Corners area of the UNMAC states (Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, Colorado) but nevertheless worthy of note .
 Albert Lee Benjamin Kollenborn and Alice Gladys Green got married by the Justice of the Peace in Bentonville, Arkansas . On September 23 rd .
 The Greens had been a somewhat somewhat successful family until the time of Tommy's death . The Greens were still making a go of their job a quarter-century after their death .
 Albert was an odd-jobber and field worker (and, perhaps, part-time bootlegger) at the time . The Greens would engage in odd-jobs on their farm during fruit-picking time .
 Albert and Alice met when Alice went to visit her pregnant sister Ruth in Oklahoma . Alice and Albert were married at the time of her death . Albert died at the age of 92 .
 Albert walked across a field in which he was working and introduced himself to Alice, a family member says . Albert and Alice met on the Green farm in Benton County, Arkansas, on the time of writing . Another family member (who still lives in Arkansas) says, though, that
 Alice found the tall, handsome, musical, and athletic Albert more appealing than her current ""beau,"" a man named Stringer . Alice found Albert more attractive than Stringer, a man she dated for years .
 Alice, with her green eyes and auburn locks, was the most beautiful girl they had ever seen . Alice's green eyes, green hair and green eyes were among the things they thought of her .
 The elderly Stringer revealed no fury as a result of the ""scorning"" Alice had given him . Six decades later, the elderly Mr Stringer showed no fury .
 On seeing a relative of Alice's, he asked about his old flame and 47 volunteered anew that Alice was the most ravishing beauty he had ever laid eyes on .
 Albert vowed that he was going to get Alice one way or another . Albert was no less impressed with Alice's charms .
 Albert tried to impress Alice by impressing her with his physical strength . Albert was impressed by the strength of his body .
 Taking her to the circus on a date, he won a $50 prize (a fair amount of change in those days) in the wrestling ring . He won her a date in the ring .
 The prize was offered to anyone who could remain in the ring with the circus ""strong man"" for five minutes . That prize was given to anyone with a circus "strong man" who could stay in ring with circus 'strong man'
 Albert did more than simply tough out a five-minute pummeling and thrashing administered by the traveling tough . Albert lifted the strong man up and heaved him out of the ring .
 Alice was perhaps not convinced that this feat qualified Albert as good husband material . Alice was also not convinced Albert would be a good husband .
 Theodore Shannon, by contrast, apparently didn't have the same flair for the dramatic that Albert exhibited . Theodore Shannon was the son of Albert Shannon, who was born in 1916 .
 According to family lore, he was turned down when he asked the father of a certain girl's father for her hand . The story is said to have been true .
 Reportedly, the man felt that the Shannons were socially ""below"" his family . Reportedly felt that they were socially "below" his own family .
 Theodore would not have married Esther without the rejection of his marriage . Theodore's descendants can be thankful it occurred, for the rejection .
 In that case their children, and their children's children, would never have been born . And that would have been a disaster of the highest magnitude, for that . Their children would never be born .
 Albert did not have to face the gauntlet of asking Alice's father for her hand in marriage, as Tommy had been dead some fifteen years when Albert and Alice tied the knot . Tommy was dead some 15 years when Alice married Albert and Albert .
 The Branstuder's wheat and oat farm in the Verdigris river bottoms, between Claremore and Tulsa in the eastern part of the state, was probably not going so well, due to the prolonged drought the region was suffering .
 Dust bowl ranchers in Kansas got hay trucked in for their livestock from eastern Oklahoma . The Branstuders may also have grown hay, too .
 Eastern Oklahoma did suffer drought (or ""drouth") during the ""dirty thirties,"" they did not bear the brunt of the wicked ""dusters"" those in the panhandle to the west did .
 The dust storms are not the only ones to ever suffer from the dust storms . That having been said, those living in those regions were not the first ones to suffer .
 On May 9 th , 1939, a storm 48 emanating from the plains carried three tons of dirt for every person then living in America first to Chicago and finally to the eastern seaboard .
 It covered Chicago at night, dumping an estimated six thousand tons of dust . The dust slinks down walls, slinking down walls as if every home and every office had sprung a leak .
 In Manhattan, streetlights came on at midday and cars used their headlights to drive . In New York City, the streetlights were turned on for the first time .
 A sunny day, which had dawned cloudless, fell under a haze like that of a partial eclipse . The sun fell under that haze, which fell under the haze of the eclipse .
 From the observatory at the top of the Empire State Building, people looked into a soup unlike anything ever seen in midtown . People looked into the soup from the Empire Building .
 People coughed, rushed into hospitals and doctors' offices asking emergency help to clear their eyes . People rushed in to hospitals and offices asking for help clearing their eyes.
 The grass of the parks and the tulips rising to break the Depression fog were coated in fine sand . The grass was coated with fine sand in the Depression .
 From Governors Island, visibility was so bad that a person could not see the boats just beyond the shore . Visibility was also bad for Governors Island residents .
 Dust also reached the White House, where FDR was discussing drought relief . FDR was talking about drought relief at the time of the drought .
 People from the east still didn't fully appreciate the sheer immensity of the plains, or what it would take to stop the soil from flying away . People now had a taste of what the plainspeople had been experiencing .
 One man suggested blacktopping the prairie . Another idea was to transport junk cars to the plains, to use them as weights to hold down the dirt .
 September, 1931, goes down as the lousiest month on record at the Iola Weather Bureau . September was the weather bureau's worst month ever .
 The mean temperature for the 30 days was 79 degrees, the highest recorded for the month in the 27 years since the bureau was established here . The mean temperatures were 79 degrees in the month .
 Rainfall was only 1.93 inches, compared to a normal reading of 4.93 . Rainfall in the city was 1.02 inches .
 Trains were halted, schools closed and business paralyzed over a large section of the Southwest by a new dust storm .
 The dense swirl of fine soil reached the Kansas-Missouri border by noon . It was sweeping rapidly farther east . The fine soil was reaching the Missouri-Kansas border by midday .
 As far east as Topeka, Ottawa and Lawrence, highway patrolmen blocked roads against traffic . In many places visibility dropped to absolute zero in many places .
 Branstuder's farm had formerly been a Creek Indian farm . It is likely that the Branstuders' farm had once been a Cree Indian .
 Creeks had farmed in that area for a time after being assigned that part of Oklahoma during the Indian Removals of the previous century . The Creeks were assigned that area during that time .
 The fictional Joad family of John Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath were from Sallisaw, Oklahoma . The fictional family of the Joads were only about one hundred miles south of Verdigris, Oklahoma, .
 Neither Albert nor the Branstuders became "exodusters" — those who moved away, usually to the West and California, during the Dust Bowl period . Albert and Branstuder moved away from the family home in California in the 1930s and 1940s .
 ""Rosasharn"" Joad was matched with Lula Mae Branstuder . Ruthie Joad matched to Ruie BranStuder . Winfield Joad and Juanita Joad were matched to each other .
 On the census record, Ruie is listed as Ruth, probably due to the census enumerator misunderstanding the girl's name . Ruie's name was Ruth, but she was actually named Ruth .
 Many blamed God or drought for the hellacious conditions brought on by the Dust Bowl . Lizzie's children Joad children Albert Al Charles Tom Lula Mae ""Rosasharn""
 The region that was hit hardest by the ""dusters"" had been grassland since time immemorial . The region hit hardest was grassland grassland . The 'dusters' had been on the ground for centuries .
 Ranchers brought in cattle and fed their beeves on the seemingly endless miles of grass . Later, as the buffalo were slaughtered as a way of indirectly destroying the red man .
 Europe's supply of bread was cut off when Russia's wheat crop became unavailable . The world's bread supply has been cut off since Russia's crop was unavailable .
 Grassland by the millions of acres was ripped out of the plains, and wheat was planted in its place . Wheatland was ripped from the plains and planted in the place of grass .
 The plains experienced an above-average amount of rainfall for the first few years, and the wheat bonanza continued . The plains had an average of above average rainfall .
 The soil's nutrients had been depleted by years of wheat cultivation . By the time the weather returned to its normal pattern, the soil's nutrient reserves had been lost .
 Many farmers abandoned their fields, without planting anything on their uprooted land to bind the soil together . To make matters worse, with the onset of the Depression, many farmers simply left their fields .
 The combination of dry conditions, dirt held down by nothing, and wind (for which the prairie is famous) was a recipe for disaster . The prairie was a begging for trouble, and it was a beg for trouble . It was a disaster for the first time .
 It comprised a ""perfect storm"" scenario for the violent transfer of soil from the plains to wherever the wind cared to carry it . The soil was transferred to wherever it was carried it .
 The dust storms which plagued the region in the 1930s were ominous in appearance, sound, and effect . Dust storms were the most powerful dust storms in the world .
 Produced static electricity so powerful that it could short out automobiles, stranding motorists, and knock people over if they kissed, or even shook hands . Embed so much grit and grime in the eyes of people and animals that these sometimes went blind . Precipitously drop temperatures
 The tiny dust granules were so invasive that they could get through windows and doors, even when these were sealed shut . They could get into automobile carburetors, clogging them, according to the EPA .
 The dust was extremely abrasive, so much so that it scraped paint off houses . Beyond invasive, the dust was abrasive enough to scrape paint off the walls .
 People even died from the respiratory problems brought on or exacerbated by the dust . The dust was so bad that some people died from it .
 To guard against static shock suffered by touching metal objects during storms, homeowners covered doorknobs and oven handles with cloth .
 Chains were attached to cars to serve as a ground for the electricity in the atmosphere as the cars were driven . Chains would be attached to the cars to keep the electricity on the ground . Chains were used to keep electricity on cars from being driven .
 Hospitals had to postpone surgical procedures due to the impossibility of maintaining the necessary standard of cleanliness in the operating rooms . Hospitals were forced to stop surgical procedures because of the impossibility .
 Farmers tied strands of rope from their houses to their barns, so that they would not lose their way between the two in the howling, vertigo-inducing brownouts . Similar to the necessary precautions taken during times of blizzard, farmers tied strands from their homes to barns
 More than one person was later discovered dead between where they were when they were hit and their aimed-for place of relative safety .
 The atmosphere was so choked with dust that rain often fell as mud, hail as dirt clods, and snow in dark flakes . And on the rare occasions during the 1930s when precipitation did occur in dust bowl country, the atmosphere was choked .
 Such storms were called ""snusters"" by those who experienced them firsthand . Such storms are known as "snusters"
 The Dust Bowl lasted the entire decade of the 1930s . It followed abruptly on the heels of the freewheeling and uproarious 1920s . Dust Bowl was a decade of free-flowing, uproarious free-spirited free life .
 A dispute with Texas concerning the boundary lines between the states was decided in Texas' favor by the U.S. Supreme Court . Elsewhere in Oklahoma this year, a dispute between Texas and Oklahoma was decided by the United States Supreme Court.
 The economic downtown that began with the stock market crash the previous year showed no signs of improving . The city's economic downtown has been hit hard by the economic downturn .
 Farms can be bought all over eastern Kansas for $25 to $35 an acre . Farms are now as cheap as they were 40 years ago . Farms in eastern Kansas can be found at $25-$35 per acre .
 Lee Wiener, 55, committed suicide by hanging this morning in the rear end of his store, The Hub, 10 West Jackson . Wiener was a veteran Iola merchant . The Hub is located in Iola, Mississippi .
 Salvation Army is maintaining a wood pile at which they may saw or chop enough fuel to earn their meals during the 24 hours they are permitted to spend in town . The Salvation Army maintains the wood pile in which they can cut enough fuel for their meals .
 Meal tickets of 15 and 30 cents value are given according to the amount of work done . Meal tickets are given based on the work done by the person who does the work .
 Police usher floaters with whom they come in contact out of town after 24 hours . Police say floaters must leave town 24 hours before they leave .
 Chamber of Commerce secretary says he was accosted by seven panhandlers while walking half a dozen blocks on the square . Dorsey, secretary of the chamber of commerce, says he has been harassed by panhandler people .
 Census data will not become available to the public until 2012 at the earliest . The final census to which we have access to the data was taken this year .
 Based on the way legislation regarding such seems to be heading, though, those records may never become available .
 As for the Branstuders, the census enumerators made many mistakes this time around . The census enumerator's mistake was not the first time they had made it .
 Juanita's name is misspelled as Wannita (northeastern Oklahomans perhaps being unfamiliar with Spanish names), and Lula Mae's as LulaMay . Juanita was misspelled by Juanita, and her name is also misspelled in the region .
 Elizabeth's oldest boys are listed simply as Albert K and Chester D . Perhaps Lizzie unofficially changed Charles' name to Chester so that he wouldn't have the same name as his father .
 The Branstuders may have been placed in Verdigris, Arkansas . The Green's were always thought to be living in Dug Hill, Arkansas, rather than Dug Hill .
 Dug Hill was Dug Hill, Dug Hill . Dug Hill is Dug Hill in Dug Hill Township, now Bentonville, near Bella Vista . Osage township is today part of Bent onville .
 Virginia Belle Myers' daughter Effie and son-in-law William ""Cogstone,"" as well as Lillian, Ruth, Alice, and Alice, were among those living with the widow .
 Emma Silva is listed as head of house, married 20 years, in Humboldt County, California . Silva, who lives on the northwest coast of California, has been married for 20 years . Silva: "Emma Silva is a very happy, very happy woman, very proud
 The same three children that were in the 1920 census are listed, but the boy is this time correctly identified as Gerald rather than Donald . This time, Gerald is correctly named as Gerald .
 Emma is a housekeeper in a private home, and her daughter Esther is a janitoress at a church . Emma and Esther are both housekeepers in the book .
 He may have drank some lager on occasion to boot, notwithstanding the ongoing prohibition of such such .
 Portuguese fishermen in the area practically guaranteed that at least a little wine would be available . Port is a popular port of choice from Portugal .
 Family believes he worked for and eventually retired from the railroad while in that state . The family believes he retired while there .
 The census freezes Myrtle Buster in time as living in ""Township 3"" and employed as a laundry worker . Living in the same county, the census freezes Buster in the census freeze him in time .
 Her sons Charles L and Roy E Kollenborn are listed as ""operators"" at a service station in or near Bakersfield . Her sons Roy and Charles L are also listed as "operators" at the station .
 Shannons in Township 3 and the Kollenborns in Township 9 may well have crossed one another's paths from time to time, or possibly even been acquainted with one another .
 James was 18, and thus four years older than the oldest Shannon child still living at home . Emma Kollenborn was 15, and her sister Thora was 10 when the Shannon children were still living .
 Emma may have known 14-year-old Robert Shannon, and Thora Kollenborn may also have known George Shannon and Eda Shannon . Thora may have also known eleven-year old George Shannon .
 For millions of people, taking the world over, it has been a hard year . For many, it's been a year of disappointments, loss, hardships, discouragements . For millions, taking over the world has been hard .
 Surpluses of everything, money, food, all manner of products and commodities, clothing, wood, cotton, lumber, lumber . "Surpluses" included clothing, clothing and wood .
 No war, no flood or fire, no wide-sweeping pestilence, no cataclysm of nature, and yet the times all out of joint . Yet the times were all out in joint. No war or fire or fire .
 Douglas Schomerus, city manager, will manage the city program to give part-time work to men owing utility bills . January 5 th : Douglas Schoomus will manage a program to work to help men owing utilities bills .
 Schomerous is working on a way to stagger the jobs available, about 25, among the men who owe bills . He hopes to stagger about 25 jobs available among those who owe money .
 Hundreds of dollars worth of accounts have been paid with wood this winter, it is reported . Hundreds of thousands of accounts were paid using wood, it was reported .
 So far as possible, men 55 will be used on the new job who were not employed on the last one . So far, they will be men 55 who have not been employed in the previous job .
 Only men owing utilities bills and unable to pay them because of unemployment will be hired . Only men owed utilities bills will be able to be hired by unemployed men .
 The county commissioners will make an $18,000 tax cut at the township level possible this year by suspending paving projects ""until times get better" County commissioners suspend paving projects until 'times get better'
 Although the economic depression was ongoing, the normal routines of life continued . Eating, drinking, buying, selling, marrying and being given in marriage— continued .
 Theodore Roosevelt Shannon married one-eighth Indian Esther Sylvia Nelson on June 27 th in Garberville, California . Shannon was known to his family, friends and acquaintances as ""Pop" throughout his adult life .
 It was a Saturday, and Pop had to report back to work the following Wednesday, so they honeymooned nearby, in Gold Beach, Oregon . Pop and his wife had a honeymoon in the state of Oregon .
 Theodore and Esther eventually made their home at what came to be known by the extended family simply as ""The Ranch,"" which for some time served as a sort of home base, touchstone, and benchmark, to the family . The Ranch was known as "The Ranch"
 At the start of their life together, they lived in Samoa, a small Humboldt County town . They now live together in Samoa .
 Even today, logging is not an occupation for the faint of heart or weak of spirit . Logging is still an occupation even today, even today .
 Stihl's gas-powered chain saws were not mass-produced until the 1 930s . axes and oneand two-man felling saws are the common tools used in farming .
 A falling tree sometimes went where it was inclined to go, regardless of sawing angles and driven wedges . The tree was found dead at the scene of the accident .
 The benign and peaceful tree trunk became a projectile of huge weight and momentum when it snapped off its cutting hinge . The tree trunk snapped off the hinge of the hinge and snapped off a tree trunk .
 Sawn trees hung up on those still standing were called ""widow-makers" for good reason . Sawn tree hung up by the still standing are called "widow trees"
 Theodore was noticeably taller than his father, Theodore, at better than six feet . Theodore was born Theodore Theodore Theodore Jr. Jr. at 6 feet .
 It is unknown whether he also attributed this characteristic to Trinity County's mountain air .
 Trinity County is a remote and sparsely populated county in Trinity County . Many of the families in remote Trinity County have been there for untold generations .
 Will and Gertie Shannon's homestead had been located in Hoaglin Valley . The Shannon family lived on a homestead that was located near the town . The family's home was located in the area .
 Theodore employed an Indian ranch hand named Bill Hoaglin, doubtless a descendant of the valley's namesake . The valley was named after Theodore Theodore, who lived in the valley .
 Charles Arthur Floyd, better known as "Pretty Boy" Floyd, was responsible for the murder of the Young brothers . The perpetrators were not just the brothers, but also the young Floyd brothers, as well .
 Six Springfield and Greene County law enforcement officers were killed by the gunman . Six Springfield, Greene County police officers were shot to death by the terrorists .
 Theodore Roosevelt Shannon and Esther Shannon welcomed a son on March 26 . William Frederick Shannon was named for his paternal grandfather . He was born to Theodore and Esther .
 Theodore and Esther married and had four children during the Great Depression . William in 1932, Laura in 1933, Theodore Russell in 1934, Theodore in 1934 and Gertrude in 1936 . The couple died in 1936 at the age of 92 .
 1940 gave the U.S. a bit of a respite between disasters . As far as the United States was concerned, anyway, 1940 gave a little respite .
 Theodore bought the old homestead from his father this year, who had been gone from Trinity for 13 years . Theodore bought his father's old home from him this year . Theodore's father, Theodore, had been missing from Trinity since the 1970s .
 Tempers often flared on both sides of the idealogical aisle, between capitalists and socialists . Socialists and capitalists often clashed between the ideal and ideal .
 In the midst of the depression, a large group of "Bonus Marchers" converged on Washington, D.C., demanding immediate disbursement of the funds .
 Instead of an early retirement of the debt, they got a brutal eviction . Instead of early retirement, the debtors got an early eviction, they were evicted from their home .
 General Douglas MacArthur led a contingent of soldiers who burned the marchers' camp and drove them forcibly from the city .
 Also among the soldiers with MacArthur were his aide Dwight Eisenhower and future General/then Major George S Patton, Jr. Also on the list were future General Eisenhower and General Patton Jr. Patton .
 During the violent repulsion, many people were injured, several seriously, and two World War I veterans were shot to death . Many people were hurt during the repulsion .
 She would ascend to greater heights yet before disappearing over the Pacific Ocean on July 2 nd , 1937 .
 Less than a month after work on the Golden Gate Bridge began, on January 30 th , Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of economically ravaged Germany .
 Before The Great War, a Deutsch Mark was worth the equivalent of approximately twenty-five cents, or four Marks to one Dollar . A Deutschmark was worth about twenty-25 cents, before the war .
 By 1929, it took three hundred million Marks to equal the value of one U.S. dollar . By 1929 it had taken 100 million Marks for one United States dollar .
 Franklin Delano Roosevelt would begin his first term of office in the White House in 1945 . Roosevelt would be the president of the United States .
 Both men would play huge roles, not only in their own countries' economies, but also in world affairs for the next baker's dozen of years . Both men died within a few months of each other, and would play a key role in the world .
 As Hitler would change the face of Germany, Roosevelt's influence in the U.S. would also be far-reaching . FDR's influence on the United States would be far beyond his reach .
 Many babies, especially in the South, are given ""standalone"" single-letter middle names . Albert and Alice were not unique to Albert . Many babies are given 'standalone' middle names in the south .
 There was no David in either Albert or Alice's family . At any rate, the parents rejected the tradition of naming their first son after family members . Albert and Alice's first son was named David .
 Early on in their marriage, the Kollenborns worked in the fields picking fruit . The couple's first marriage was a fruit picker .
 Many from the AMOK states were relocating to California, where there were reports of much work and big wages working the crop harvests . Many of the states are relocating .
 Albert and Alice would resist the lure of California for another decade and a half, though, though . Albert and Albert lived in California for more than 20 years . Alice and Albert would move to California in the 1950s .
 Alice would lay David down in the shade under a tree when he was a baby, and go about her work in the fields with Albert . Albert's wife would lay him down under the shade of a tree under the sun .
 When David got older, Alice would tie him with a length of rope to a tree or pole while she worked . David's mother tied him up with a rope while she was working in the garden .
 David apparently became too old to cope well with this sort of treatment — but not yet old enough to help in the fields . Eventually David became too tired to cope with this kind of treatment, but not enough old to help .
 David lived with the Logstons, his aunt and uncle (Alice's sister and brother-in-law) in Benton County, Arkansas . David lived there with Alice and Alice's sister, Alice's brother and uncle .
 David Logstons spent a lot of time with his paternal grandparents at that time, too . The Branstuders also lived in the area and were good friends of the logstons .
 David attended Lizzie Branstuder's funeral in Arkansas in 1959, and possibly Jim's there also, in 1970 . David remembered those early years with his grandparents, apparently, as well as his grandparents .
 The baby girl is apparently named for Esther's mother Emma Laura Nelson . The baby is named for her mother, Emma Laura .
 The 21 st Constitutional amendment canceled out the 18 th amendment of 1919 which had made consumption, production, and trading in alcohol a crime . The 21st Amendment of 1919 made consumption of alcohol illegal .
 Roosevelt took bold and decisive steps to jump-start the moribund economy . Hoover's laissezfaire approach to solving the nation's financial and social troubles was different from Roosevelt's .
 Among the elements of this multi-faceted ""New Deal" were many public works programs . The New Deal was part of the 'New Deal'
 Wind-break provides wind-break, check soil erosion; provide jobs for unemployed .
 FDR introduced revolutionary ideas which are now taken for granted and are represented by everyday acronyms such as SEC and FDIC . FDR also introduced the FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), which insures bank deposits .
 Social Security Act established old-age pensions as well as unemployment, unemployment, workers compensation, and welfare benefits . The act was part of the ""New Deal" package, establishing old age pensions and unemployment .
 Branded by many as socialistic, it remains unknown whether these maverick maneuvers by the new President opened the door to more and more socialistically-slanted government programs .
 The writer is everybody's best friend and only true enemy the good and great enemy . He is the author of the book, "Everybody's friend and enemy"
 With organized crime and smalltime scofflaws no longer cornering the market on liquor, people will consume in good times and bad, in sickness and in health, whether legal or not . The big names of the underworld were scrambling to find other ways of earning a dishonest buck .
 Al Capone was already in jail, having been nabbed for income tax evasion three years earlier, in 1931 . Capone had already been caught in jail for income evasion .
 The FBI was organized this year to combat gangsterism, a social plague that had been fertilized by prohibition and exacerbated by the Depression . Gangsterism was a social problem exacerbated by Prohibition .
 Bonnie Parker and Clyde Champion Darrow were killed by FBI agents May 23 rd in Sailes, Louisiana . Bonnie Parker was killed by the FBI agents on May 23 . Clyde Darrow and Bonnie Parker were killed in the shootout .
 Anti-heroes Charles Arthur ""Pretty Boy"" Floyd, Lester J Gillis and John Dillinger were also killed in separate incidents this year .
 Many of the outlaw gunman happened to be from the Midwestern states . Floyd was from Oklahoma, Bonnie 85 Clyde from Texas, Dillinger from Indiana, and the Barkers from Missouri .
 The victims were drawn to crime partially due to the lack of economic opportunity in their respective areas at the time . Perhaps they were drawn into crime partly due to a lack of opportunity in those areas .
 The farming areas from which these gangsters hailed were especially hard hit . The double whammy for some of the gangsters was the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl . Gangsters hailed from farming areas .
 This is not an excuse for their actions, but may have provided a nudge in that direction or provided them with a convenient ""rationalization"" for their misdeeds .
 While police forces were cleaning up some of the vestiges of the 'Roaring '20s,"" the American populace chose a return to less suggestive entertainment .
 In Hydesville, California, on September 3 rd , Theodore Roosevelt Shannon and Esther Shannon had another son . Theodore Roosevelt .
 They were apparently still living in Korbel, where they had moved in May . They had moved there from Korbel in May, but were still living there . They are believed to still be living there now .
 Official records state Junior was born in nearby Eureka, but Esther states that Theodore was actually born in Hydesville, California . Esther states Theodore in her ""biographical sketch"" (see Appendix III)
 Pop and Esther's first son William had been named for his paternal grandfather . Pop's first child was named William after his grandfather .
 Theodore Jr. was born a week after Roger Maris was born . Charles Kuralt and Roger Kuralts were born one week after Theodore .
 Upton Sinclair was running for Governor of California on the Democratic ticket . Upton Sinclair wrote "The Jungle" which had prompted the Meat Inspection Act 64 and the Pure Food 85 Drug Act .
 Sinclair was actually a Socialist, but ""converted"" to the Democratic party so as to stand a better chance in his bid for the State's preeminent political post . Sinclair was originally a Socialist .
 Frank Merriam won the vote on November 6 th by a 5:4 margin over Sinclair .
 John Steinbeck was to the Salinas and Monterey area, Saroyan was to Fresno envirals . He was to Salinas, Monterey, and Fresno, but Saroyans were to the Fresno area . He died at 93 .
 Two of Saroyan 's novels were made into movies, namely The Time of Your Life and The Human Comedy . Two of the novels have been made into films .
 The 1930s were a time of great unrest in the labor market . The San Francisco longshoreman strike was followed by a general strike in that city .
 Sometimes the price paid is not worth the accolades and the material amenities . Sometimes the cost of the game is too much to be worth the game .
 Charles Lindbergh and his wife learned this vicious lesson the hardest way imaginable . Charles Lindergh and wife learned the lesson from Charles and Edith Linderph . Charles, Edith, died in a plane crash at the age of 50 .
 Charles and Anne Morrow Lindbergh's lives were shattered this year . Charles, Anne and Anne were both married at the time of their deaths . Charles and his wife died in a plane crash in June, 1969 .
 Bruno Hauptmann, a German immigrant arrested six months after the misdeed, was eventually convicted of the crime and executed . Although asserting his innocence to the end, he maintained his innocence until the end .
 Hearst newspaper syndicate known for its yellow journalism, knew a sensational story when they saw one . Hearst syndicate was known for their yellow journalism .
 Bruno Hauptmann's wife persuaded his wife to fire their original lawyer, who was an incompetent alcoholic . Bruno's wife paid for a replacement lawyer who was incompetent alcoholic, and paid for it .
 With their man in place, they were assured exclusive scoops to sell papers . The man is now the president of the United States' largest city .
 An apparent snow job suppressed evidence of Hauptmann's guiltlessness in the matter, while ""proof against him was manufactured and bought," says Hauptman .
 The Lindberghs had received a ransom note purportedly from Hauptmann . The ransom note raises some questions about the identity of the man responsible for the note .
 The diction and spelling used in the letter seem almost like a parody of an evil and dull-witted German . The letter was almost like an attempt at a German parody .
 We have warned you to make any ding public also notify the police now you have to take consequences — means we will have to holt the baby until every ding is quite .
 It is redly necessary to make a world affair out of this, or to get your baby back as soon as possible to settle those affair in a quick way will be better for both . Don't by afraid about the baby — keeping care of us day and night .
 Ransom was made ausfor 50000 $ but now we have to take another person to it and probably have to keep the baby for a longer time as we expected . And ransom was made for $500,000 but we will have to wait for ransom .
 The amount will be 70000 20000 in 50 $ bills . 25000 $ in 20$ bills 25,000 $ . in 20 $ bills and 150000 $ in 10$ bills and 10000 in 5$ bills . Don't mark any bills or take them from one serial nomer
 Police is out of the cace and the poppers are qute. But we will note do so until the Police is . out of . the . cace . We will note . do so .
 Rather than appearing genuine, this reads more like a letter written by someone who knows a little German and wants the reader to think he is a native German-speaker having difficulty writing in English .
 Anyone knowing even just a smidgen of German would be able to come up with these type of affectations . This all seems reasonable enough .
 Use of ""nomer"" instead of number or the corresponding German word Nummer . As an example, the use of "nomer" instead of the word "nummer" is a German word .
 German language does not normally add silent letters to the end of words . This too is odd, because the German language, which is very consistent and precise in pronunciation, does not .
 The letter ""c"" is not used in German to reproduce an ""s"" sound, as it often does in English . The letter "c" is used to reproduce the sound of the ""s" sound .
 The letter ""K"" is always used for a ""hard c"" sound, and ""s"" is used for an ""soft c" sound . The letter "K" is used in the sound of a hard c .
 A German would spell case case ""cace"; ""kase"" would be a much more likely misspelling . So it seems bizarre that a German would misspelling case case "kase"
 The spelling of the word ""papers"" as ""pappers"" doesn't correspond with German spelling or pronunciation . Also, the spelling of ""papers" as "pappers" as ""Pappers" doesn't match German spelling .
 It seems strange that a German would add a silent letter to a word, but it seems strange to a German .
 It would be more likely that he would use the German word ""still"" which has a similar meaning in English and could have been used in conversation with an American without causing undue confusion .
 The sentence structure is that of a native speaker of English . Strangest of all, the part about the letter that simply does not ""ring true,"" is that it simply doesn't "ring true"
 This could be understood with the meaning of the English word ""also,"" but makes more sense considering the German meaning . The German word "also" means "also," or "also;" .
 Based on the contents of the letter alone (disregarding any other evidences establishing guilt or innocence), I can only say that while I don't know who kidnapped and killed the Lindbergh baby, I am not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that it was Bruno Hauptmann .
 Seminole Indians had claimed Osceola as one of their forebears and inspirations . They fought against deportation during the Indian Removals of the 1800s, retreating into the swamps .
 Seminole holdouts didn't sign a treaty with the U.S. until this year . Seminole chiefs signed a treaty this year with the United States . The last of the Seminole standouts signed the treaty in 2010 .
 As for individual Indians, two-thirds of them either had no land at all or did not have enough to derive a living from . Individual Indians were either not on land or had enough to make a living .
 The so-called ""Indian Reorganization Act"" (officially the WheelerHoward Act, AKA ""The Indian New Deal"") was passed this year . It was officially known as "The WheelerHoward" Act .
 The Dawes Act had abolished the Reservation system; the Indian Reorganization Act re-established it . The Indian reorganization Act re-established it .
 Merriam Report documented the impact that the Dawes Act had had had on Indians . This was prompted, at least partially, by the results of the report . The report was prompted by the findings of the Merriams Report .
 The results had proven to be a dramatic increase among them of poverty, disease, and untimely death . The results were proven to have been a huge increase in poverty and death .
 The Indian Reorganization Act restored to Indians the right to live and worship in a traditional manner . The Act was intended to restore the right of Indians to their traditional worship and self-government .
 Dust storms on the plains increased in frequency and intensity this year . Dust storms increase in frequency, intensity and frequency this year, experts say .
 Four dust storms in January, seven in February, the same number in March, and then 14 in April . One of them lasted twelve hours . One was twelve hours long .
 The duster so bad that the day on 68 which it took place came to be known as ""Black Sunday" was to take place in 1935 .
 Even in this early stage of dust storms on the southern plains, conditions were more than bad enough . Even in the early stages of the storms, though, conditions are more than good enough .
 Pregnant wife's labor pains intensified as her husband drove to hospital . His car got stuck in a drift on the way to the hospital .
 His car was eventually extricated with the aid of a farmer and his tractor . The accident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The man continued his journey to see his wife and baby when, visibility being what it was, he entered a corner too fast and tipped his car over . He continued to drive to see them when he tipped it over .
 The driver thought he was pinned in the wreckage, but was able to crawl out of the passenger-side window . He pulled the car back over onto its wheels and continue his sojourn .
 He walked into the delivery room, bruised and battered and bleeding from the accident, eyelids mud-clogged, fingers stained with oil, just in time to see his wife give birth to their firstborn . The accident happened in the middle of the night .
 The joy of seeing his wife and newborn baby was rewarded by seeing them again . Doubtless he felt the travails he had been through to get there had been amply compensated .
 This time, the father was not able to make it to the hospital until an hour after his child had died . The father was able to get to his child's hospital an hour later .
 Nothing unusual was noted at the time as respects his pelvis, and he was born without a crown or royal entourage . He was born with no crown or an entourage, and was not born with a crown . His birth was the first of its kind, and his birth was
 The moving mob of dirt measured two hundred miles in width, reached an estimated two thousand feet into the sky, and was propelled by sixty-five mile-per-hour winds . The mob was propelled into the air, propelled by 60-five mph winds .
 It was just one of hundreds of dusters in the decade, but one etched itself ignominiously in the memories of those who endured it .
 He built a large model airplane while still a young man in northern Missouri . The model airplane was built in the state of Missouri .
 Albert learned to fly while living in southwestern Missouri, near the Kansas border, in Joplin, early in his married life . Albert's first flight was in southwest Missouri . He was also a pilot .
 He claimed to have learned the skill from World War I ""ace"" Eddie Rickenbacker . He claimed he learned the skills from none other than  World War I "ace"" Rickenbacker .
 Albert earned money taking up passengers for short sightseeing flights . Albert progressed to the point where he earned money from taking passengers on sightseeing .
 Charles Lindbergh was the first American to fly on the world's most famous flight of the year . He died in a plane crash on June 18, 1918 .
 Albert may have known Louise personally, as he did, in her home county on and off for a number of years . Albert may even have even known her personally, living in the county .
 Will Rogers died near Point Barrow, Alaska, in an airplane crash on August 15 th at the age of fifty-five . Rogers was a well-known wit and movie actor .
 The pilot and only other occupant of the plane, Wiley Post, also died in the crash . Post had become the first person to fly solo around the world in 2007 .
 Albert Kollenborn was involved in flying himself, and since he had lived in Rogers County, Oklahoma, which was named for Will's father Clem . Will Rogers was doubtless another well-known personage to Albert .
 In the midst of the Great Depression, the Social Security Law was passed . In the 1930s, many people were concerned about their financial future . The law was passed in response to the Depression .
 The first benefit was paid either less than three years later, on April 27th, 1937, or on January 31st, 1940 . Depending on which authority you lend more credence, the first benefit may have been paid in 1940 .
 Hetch Hetchy had to be dammed in order to provide water for the San Franciscans . Water from the northern and eastern parts of the state began to be diverted this year to support Los Angeles .
 Max Schmeling gained Boxing's Heavyweight Championship by knocking out Joe Louis in a their June 19 th bout . In an event which was perceived by many as determining racial supremacy, many thought the fight was a racial issue . Max Schmeling gained Boxing's
 Jesse Owens won four medals at the Olympics in Berlin this year . Jesse Owens was the first black American to win four medals in the Olympics . Owens won the four gold medals in Berlin .
 Benton County, Arkansas native Louise McPhedren Thaden won the Bendix Transcontinental Air Race this year . The winner of this year's race is a Bendix Air Race winner .
 She was doubtless a ""local hero"" to the Benton County Kollenborns and Branstuders . Before the advent of aviatrixes such as Amelia Earhart and hometown hero Louise, such feats may have seemed as unexpected as an invasion of Martians .
 As the Ozark mountain community was sparsely populated in those pre-Wal*Mart times, the Green and McPhedren families may well have known each other .
 Alice was a very popular name in Benton County at the time . Based on historical documents of the area, it was a popular name . Alice was the name of a popular family name .
 Alice Green's sister Alice McPhedren was four years older than Alice Green . One of the other Alices in the area was Alice's sister, Alice's older sister Alice . Alice Green was born in New York City .
 Their next child, a daughter, had apparently been named for Esther's mother . The couple's next child was apparently named Esther .
 Esther's mother Esther is Esther, Esther's second child . Esther's daughter is Esther's fourth daughter, Esther, and Esther's third daughter .
 Gertrude Irene Shannon was named for her paternal grandmother . Instead, she was named instead of her maternal grandmother . Shannon was born in July 2010 .
 Albert had lived in Rogers County, Oklahoma, where he had lived for a time . Albert's parents may have been inspired by the patriarch of Rogers County .
 Prior to statehood, the area in Oklahoma where the Branstuders had farmed was known as the Cooweescoowee district of the Cherokee Nation .
 Rogers County was named Rogers County in honor of Will Rogers' father Clem . Clem was an elder member of the Oklahoma Constitutional Convention . Rogers County became Rogers County after statehood .
 The Albert Kollenborn family was probably living in Oberlin, Kansas, at this time . The family may have been living there at the time .
 Albert applied for social security in February 1937 at the latest, as that is where they were living . Albert applied to social security that month . They were there by the latest at the earliest of February 1937 .
 Albert was probably working for the railroad at this time . Oberlin is located between Omaha, Nebraska (headquarters of Union Pacific Railroad) and Denver .
 Albert and Alice had a rough row to hoe at first . Albert was married to Alice when they were young . Albert's marriage to Alice ended in a tragedy .
 Albert landed a job with the 73 railroad, which was doubtless a big step up for the family financially . After at most a few years, Albert landed at least a few more jobs . Albert's father died of a heart attack .
 Alice did not like the frequent absences from home that were necessary with Albert's railroad job . However, Alice did like being away from home with the job .
 Albert loved being a railroad engineer, Alice persuaded him to give it up so as to be home with the family every night . Alice persuaded Albert to give up his job as an engineer so he could be at home with his family .
 Alice wanted Albert to be a farmer when she married him . Albert's mother wanted him to become a farmer . Albert was a farmer during his childhood .
 He may have developed an aversion to farming while working for or with his stepfather on farms when he was growing up .
 Albert loved transportation machinery, such as trains, planes, and automobiles . Albert loved planes, trains, trains and automobiles. Albert loved traveling machinery .
 Albert's grandfather James Wesley Kollenborn was at this time in his mid-70s . Albert's grandmother was in her mid-80s .
 He did want to visit his grandchildren who had moved to California, and asked permission of their mother Myrtle to come out from Kansas to do so .
 Myrtle did not object, and when James came he brought his daughter Nellie, his son George Wesley, and his daughter-in-law Verva . Myrtle didn't object to the visit, and James brought his family .
 James' only other son besides Harry, namely George, had no biological children of his own . James' son, George, was born in 1964 and died at the age of 92 .
 Myrtle's sons were all James had to carry on the Kollenborn name through his line . Thus, Myrtle was all he had to do .
 "Good heavens, something 's wriggling out of the shadow like a gray snake," says Fields . Fields. Fields .
 The mouth is Vshaped with saliva dripping from its rimless lips that seem to quiver and pulsate . The mouth appears to be dripping with saliva .
 The Buffalo or ""Indian head" nickel was retired this year, and replaced by a nickel bearing Thomas Jefferson's visage . "I can 'tfind words..."" — Quote from ""War of the Worlds"" radio broadcast .
 Superman, the Kryptonite-challenged Metropolitan, also made his debut this year . Superman, Superman, also appeared in the film .
 More than half of the movie ""Gold is Where You Find It,"" starring Olivia de Havilland, was filmed in Trinity County, and premiered there this year .
 In the latter part of the year, they relocated again, this time to American Tank, near Carlotta in neighboring Humboldt County .
 The Albert Kollenborn family had moved back to Arkansas from Oberlin, Kansas, probably sometime between May of 1937 and the end of the year . The family moved to Arkansas temporarily between May and September 1937 .
 Alice apparently wanted to go back to the family farm so that she could be with her mother during her third pregnancy . Alice's mother is expecting her third child .
 Alice may also have felt that her family had already left that part of Kansas once for Arkansas, and never looked back . Alice felt she was taking a step backwards in moving from fertile and hilly northwestern Arkansas to flat Oberlin .
 Oberlin was located in the region hardest hit by the dust bowl . The Kollenborns may have taken the health of the family, especially that of the children they already had, into account .
 Northwestern Arkansas was certainly a more salubrious clime than the dust-choked over-plowed plains of that time . The area was a better climate than the plains of the past .
 First of three Kollenborn daughters was born in the very same room where Alice had been born twenty-seven years earlier . Alice's first of three daughters born in same room as Alice's birth .
 It was common for babies to be born at home at the time, especially in northwestern Arkansas . The first modern hospital didn't open in that area until 1942, when one was built in Bentonville .
 It was just at this time that it became the norm in the United States— rather than the exception— to be born in a hospital rather than at home .
 Albert's step-grandmother, Rosa Kollenborn, had married Albert's grandfather James in 1902 . Another possibility, though much less likely, is that the ""Rosie" was for Albert's mother, Rosa .
 If James and Albert had kept in contact with one another, Albert would have known Rosa, who had died five years earlier, in 1933 . Rosa had died in 1933, five years before her brother James .
 The names her father had given her were combined to form a new middle name . The names she'd had been given to her father were combined into a new name .
 Rosie Lee was told by her parents that she was named for the 1937 Cole Porter song ""Rosalie,"" which was featured in the movie of the same name . Rosalie Lee's parents named her for the song .
 Cole Porter's version of "Rosalie" reached # 1 on the charts . Horace Heidt's version reached #6 on the chart .
 If one wants to get technical about it, another bone can be picked regarding what is stated on the birth certificate as to location of the birth . The birth certificate states that the child was born in the state of birth .
 The certificate states Bentonville, apparently because that was the closest ""city"" to the Green family farm in Dug Hill, Dug Hill . The certificate was made in 1903 .
 The old Green family homestead would look out upon a playground of the polyester set, a land-usurping, water-guzzling golf course . Instead of looking out on fertile fields and verdant valleys, the homestead — if it still stood! — would
 After their daughter's birth, the Kollenborns took up residence in Joplin, Missouri, on the Kansas-Joplin border . Langston Hughes and Dennis Weaver were among Langston and Weaver's neighbors .
 Branstuders had to try to cope with three deaths in quick succession . The Branstuder family had to deal with the deaths of three of their relatives .
 Albert's unmarried half-sister Juanita got pregnant at the age of 17 . Juanita is described as a beautiful girl with dark hair and naturally red cheeks . Albert's mother is Albert's half-brother .
 Juanita gave birth to twins at the family home in Hiwasse, near Bentonville and Dug Hill . Juanita and Juanita have been married for more than 20 years .
 Both twins died shortly after they were born; 77 Juanita, too, possibly too despondent to fight for her own life, also died . Juanita and Juanita died shortly before their twins had died . Both twins had been born .
 Jim Branstuder, Buck Davidson, and Bill Logston all worked together in Earl Keith's apple orchards and on his ranch . Keith raised prize bulls at his ranch in Texas .
 The Greens and Logstons comforted the Branstuder's grief and comforted them as best they could in their hour of need . The Greens, Logsons and Branstuders comforted each other .
 On hearing of the tragedy, Albert went to Arkansas to be with his family and attend the funeral of his sister and nieces . Albert, who was then living in Joplin, went to the funeral . Albert's sister and niece were killed in the shooting .
 Alice called and told him to come home before the funeral had actually taken place . The neighbor's house had burned down . After spending three days in the house, Alice called him home .
 He would also be unable to attend his mother's funeral twenty-one years later . He was unable to watch her funeral because of his illness .
 This year, the forty-hour work week gained the same status, when the Fair Labor Standards Act, passed in 1938, went into effect . This year's work week became the same as the 40-hour week .
 These figures became the standard length of time to work, and since that time those who exceed them in a day and/ or in a week are customarily (but by no means always) paid overtime .
 It took stepwise refinement for workers to gradually achieve the milestone of a forty-hour work week .
 It first had to be reduced from seventy-two to sixty, and then fifty, before it could settle at forty . It had to reduce from sixty to sixty before it settled at forty.
 When this was reduced to six 10-hour days for the lumber mill workers in Humboldt County in 1892, they rejoiced . The lumber mill mill workers rejoiced when they were reduced to just six days .
 The Real Western Frontier Tells its Own Story reported on this in a story entitled ""Advent of the Short Ten Hour Day"" Back in May 15, 1892, things around the edge of Humboldt Bay had a brighter hue, for the mill workers .
 In a rematch of the 1936 bout, Joe Louis regained the Heavyweight Boxing Title on June 22 nd by defeating the man who had bested him two years prior . The Aryan muscleman and ""Great White Hope" Max Schmeling .
 The underdog Seabiscuit won the DelMar race in southern California this year . The big blueblood Eastern horse Ligaroti was favored to win the race .
 Well, you can go to the well once too often, even when it's a job well done, even if it's not a well done . Well, it's time to be careful not to visit the well too often .
 Wells' story The War of the Worlds was apparently too well done, or at least too realistically portrayed . Wells' novel was published in 1897 and published in 1898 . Wells died in 1918 .
 The story of a Martian invasion of the earth was presented in such an authentic manner as if the events were actually happening and being reported live by radio newscasters . Many listeners actually believed that Martians had arrived on earth and were attacking .
 There were not one, not two, not three, but four explanatory announcements before, during, and after the broadcast clarifying the fictional nature of the presentation . Welles was not accused of being callous or irresponsible .
 Orson Welles also became famous as an actor and producer, especially of the movie Citizen Kane . Citizen Kane portrayed, it was supposed, yellow journalism magnate William Randolph Hearst . Welles became famous for his role in Citizen Kane, starring in the film .
 John Steinbeck wrote a series of articles and then a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel on the situation . Steinbeck was researching living conditions of migrant workers moving into California from Dust Bowl states this year .
 The climatic catastrophe in the Midwest was causing 10,000 new settlers per month to pour into California . Ten,000 people per month were expected to arrive in California .
 Many of the landlords in the states most heavily affected by the Dust Bowl were very similar to the landlord in Ireland during the potato famine . The Dust Bowl was the first Dust Bowl in the U.S. and second Dust Bowl .
 Tenants were doing the best they could to pay their rent but were simply unable to do so . That is to say, they heartlessly evicted their tenants, although these people, in most cases, were trying to pay the best .
 An explorer named Caveth Wells said the only place he knew as bitterly hot as Wichita was Cairo, Egypt . In Cairo they dressed for it, and in Cairo they would dress for it .
 James' son Harry lived at the time of his disappearance in 1920 and where his father William lived until his own death in 1925 . Wichita, the most populous city in Kansas, lies about one hundred twenty miles to the west .
 Wichita, Kansas, is still the largest city in Kansas today . Wichita was even in 1939 a thriving metropolis .
 By 1887 this site of Indian wars and an 1865 treaty signed by Osage Chief Black Kettle was the fastest-growing city in the nation . Although not incorporated until 1870, by 1887 it had become the nation's fastest growing city .
 By the Turn of the Century it was the most industrialized city in Kansas . The city was known for its industrialism .
 Walter Beach and Clyde Cessna both lived there and operated their aircraft companies in the city . Beach Beach lived there as well as his aircraft company company .
 White Castle, camping equipment supplier Coleman, and pasta purveyor Pizza Hut are among those with headquarters in Wichita, Kansas .
 With his farming background, this may have been the industry which James was involved in . James was also involved in the farming industry in the 1980s .
 It's possible that he and his grandson Albert had seen each other in the stockyards . Albert was working for the railroad out of Oberlin when he was at the time .
 Harry Kollenborn was born in Prospect, Kansas, in 1910 . He later joined his grandfather William in Allen County, Kansas .
 Kollenborns had lived in and around Wichita, off and on, for around thirty years at the time of his death .
 William was buried in Moran, and James seven miles away in La Harpe, where his second wife Rosa Pennington was also buried in 1933 . William and James were both buried in the same town .
 James W Kollenborn, 76, died late Saturday in a local hospital following a short illness . He died at age of 76 .
 He was a retired farmer and had lived in and near Wichita most of his life . He was one of the most prolific farmers in Wichita, Kansas .
 Mrs. Widner has two sons Mitchell, Mitchell, and George, George, Coolidge, Ariz. She also has three sisters, Mrs. Nellie Widner, Chloride, Arizona, and three sisters .
 Lillie Ball and Miss Lottie Kollenborn, both ofClovis, N.M., and two brothers, R.L. and Charles, all of Genesee, Idaho, were also in the family .
 All of James' siblings had also headed west— for Texas, New Mexico, and Idaho .
 Albert Kollenborn was living in Joplin, Missouri, less than two hundred miles from Wichita . He was born in Wichita, Kansas, in 1881 . He died in a house fire that claimed his life in the city .
 Albert was probably not aware of his grandfather's death . Being out of touch with that part of the family, Albert probably didn't know his grandfather had died .
 The Grapes of Wrath chronicles the plight of the ""Okies" coming to work the crops in California during the Dust Bowl and Great Depression era . John Steinbeck would win the Pulitzer Prize for the novel . The novel which chronicles  the "Okies"" coming to
 Steinbeck's fictional Joad family had lived in eastern Oklahoma . Neither eastern Oklahoma nor Arkansas were part of the Dust Bowl area . Cotton farming in both Arkansas and Missouri had tanked .
 The general exodus to the west included many from these areas in addition to the dust bowl area proper . Thus, the general exodus included many .
 Thousands of banks failed, whereupon the life savings of many families vanished . Thousands of people's life savings have been wiped out .
 People in such desperate straits yearn for an escape, even if but a temporary one, from their worries and misery . People in desperate circumstances yearn to escape from their misery .
 Movie ticket prices were low enough that sixty percent of the populace were able to attend at least one movie per week . Movie ticket price was low enough to allow 60 percent of people to attend one movie a week .
 Gone with the Wind, the pro-southern story of Reconstruction in the South, starring Clark Gable and Vivian Leigh . The Wizard of Oz, starring Judy Garland, and Stagecoach, starring John Wayne . Goodbye, Mr Chips, from James Hilton's novel of the same
 DC Comics followed up on it success of the previous year with the man of steel who came from space and landed in a grain field in Illinois with the debut of Batman . Batman is the latest superhero to make the world famous .
 The first safe and practical automatic washer and dryer came to existence this year . Automatic washers and dryers are now available in the world .
 Washday drudgery, although still with us, is not nearly as strenuous or time-consuming as it had been before . It's not as hard as it was before, but it's still a part of our lives .
 Albert Einstein wrote a letter to President Roosevelt this year . He presented his arguments for the scientific feasibility of atomic weapons . Einstein wrote the letter to Roosevelt .
 Einstein urged President to pursue rapid formation of a U.S. atomic program . Einstein urged the President to form a rapid form of an atomic program.
 Seabiscuit's well-wishers were not the only ones feeling frisky this year, though, though . The dog was enjoying some of the best-liked photos .
 Some have referred to 1940 as a ""time-out year"" between the Great Depression, which ended in 1939, and America's involvement in World War II, which began in 1941 . Some have called 1940 a 'time out year'
 "People could catch their breath, so to speak, as things began to pick up economically. People could catch . They could catch the breath, as well as the economy, they say . People were able to breathe again after the recession, they said .
 Many had no inkling of what the next year would bring, or how American would eventually be affected by the war in Europe . The war in the U.S. was the first year of World War One .
 First peacetime conscription bill in U.S. history was completed today by Senate military committee . Senate will consider the bill next week for consideration .
 Carleton Howard Shannon was born January 16 th to Pop and Esther Shannon . He was born to a family of six children .
 If Carleton had waited another two days to be delivered, he would have made his appearance on his father's thirty-eighth birthday . Carleton's father's birthday would have been his birthday .
 Pop's mother gave birth over a span of twenty-seven years . His wife Esther gave birth to all five of her children in less than eight years .
 The great events of the world have been tragic pageants, not personal involvements, says David Cameron . "The great events have been the world's greatest pageants," he says .
 Pop had been on the outskirts of eligibility during the previous World War, also — he was 16 at the conclusion of that war . Pop had already been on his way to eligibility during that war, also .
 In March, the United States embarked on a program they called lendlease . The U.S. embarked on the program they call lendlease.
 This was a way to lend war materials and other supplies to any nation whose victory in the war America felt was vital to its own interests . America lent supplies to nations whose victory was vital in its interests .
 China and Russia were also rendered aid by the United States . Britain was chief recipient of aid, along with other allied nations, including China .
 By war's end, 50 billion dollars had been doled out by the U.S. to 38 nations . The United States gave $50 billion dollars to 38 countries .
 The assistance was given to help these nations in their prosecution of their war against Germany and the rest of the Axis powers . The aid was given by the Allies to help them in their fight against Germany .
 A large minority, if not a outright majority, of Americans still opposed direct involvement in the war .
 Practically the entire U.S. Pacific fleet — ninety-four warships — was wiped out, along with almost four hundred warplanes . The entire United States Pacific fleet, including almost four thousand warplanes, were wiped out in the war .
 According to his daughter Laura, Pop ""melted"" to the floor out of shock and distress on hearing the news about Pearl Harbor . Pop 'melted' on the floor when he heard the news of the attack .
 Laura says that Pop tried to enlist in the military despite his age and the number of dependents he had . Laura says Pop then attempted to enlist with the military .
 He was told he was needed more on the home front, where he continued in the logging business . He was also told he needed to focus more on logging .
 In September, the Shannon family moved again, this time to Camp 3, Ten Mile Camp . The Shannon family is now living in Camp 3 at Ten Mile camp .
 Albert Kollenborn also contemplated joining the Air Force at this time . Albert Kollmann also contemplated a career in the military .
 With several children to care for, he ultimately decided against it . He decided against leaving the country .
 There was a Kollenborn from Idaho who did fly in WWII, namely Mac Kollmannborn . Mac was an Idaho native .
 December 7th will live in infamy . December 7 th changed America and the rest of the world . The day will live "infamy" for Americans .
 It set into a motion a sequence of events which are still very much on the surface of our national and global consciousness today . It set . into a . motion which set into . motion . The events which occurred in the 1930s and 1940s are still relevant today .
 On the 9th of December, China declared war on Germany and Italy as well as Japan . One day later, China also declared war against Italy, Germany and Japan .
 Next day, Japan invaded the Philippines, concentrating first on the capital, Manila . The next day, the Philippines was invaded by the Japanese .
 By the middle of May, Japanese forces had taken control of all the Philippine Islands . Japanese forces took control of the Philippines in May .
 Hong Kong, Burma, Java, Singapore, Thailand, Indochina, British Malaya, Sumatra, Borneo, parts of New Guinea, Netherlands East Indies, as well as scores of Pacific islands, fell into Japanese hands .
 The Asiatic blitzkrieg was thus not one whit behind its European counterpart . The war was the first of its kind in Europe .
 The German Catholic bishops' conference announced its support for war against the Soviet Union this year .
 First mass gassings in Auschwitz concentration camp took place . Also, the first mass gassingings in a concentration camp . Auschwitz camp was a German Nazi camp .
 In 1944, the pope would ask the warring nations to spare his home of Rome . Pope would ask for the safe passage of Rome to be spared in the war .
 He apparently didn't consider any other city worthy of special consideration . The mayor of New York City should have considered other cities .
 Following the attack on Pearl Harbor and the declaration of war between the U.S. and Japan, the Pacific coast became vulnerable to attack from the sea . All coastal communities were placed on alert, Humboldt County included .
 Areata, near Eureka in Humboldt County, was visible from the ocean . Life in the town changed because of the town's proximity to the ocean.
 Each block had a Civil Defense captain whose responsibility was to check every residence and building for visible light showing during the declared blackout alerts .
 Street lights were turned off for the duration of the mandatory blackout, and automobiles driven after dark were restricted to using just their parking lights .
 Humboldt State College was officially declared a highly visible target . The college was declared a 'highly visible target' on the hill above the town .
 In response, it was painted a camouflage pattern of olive drab and brown . The camouflage pattern was painted in response to the criticism .
 Pearl Harbor should not have been so shocking to everyone, it's not really a conspiracy theory, necessarily, but a bit of background information to show why the attack on Pearl Harbor was not so shocking .
 Admiral of the Japanese Navy used a predicted surprise attack scenario on Pearl Harbor as his blueprint for how to proceed against America . Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto used the scenario as a blueprint for a surprise attack on the US .
 Kevin Starr has written a series of books that provide an in-depth and interesting coverage of California history . Kevin Starr's books include a book on California history.
 Homer Lea was rather sketchy when it came to details of the Japanese naval strategy in the Pacific . He was brilliant in his depictions of the land war in California .
 Hector By water is an English civilian naval intelligence specialist based in London . The scenario was left for Hector by water, a specialist from the UK .
 A Study of the American-Japanese Naval Problem, By water outlined a complete naval strategy for Japan in the Pacific in the event of a war with the United States . The study was published by the U.S. based on a study of Japan's naval strategy .
 Almost matter-offactly, By water suggested that the war would begin with a surprise attack by Japan on Pearl Harbor .
 For the U.S. to contain Japan in the Pacific, By water wrote, it would have to establish a naval base and fleet in the Philippines . Secondary bases at Midway and Wake islands would also be needed, he wrote .
 The Philippines presented the U.S. with its only foothold in the Far East in its only base of operations for a blockade against Japan . As matters stood, the Philippines was the only foothold of operations in Japan .
 Bywater's Pearl Harbor scenario impressed a young Harvard-trained Japanese naval captain, Isoroku Yamamoto, then serving as a naval attache in Washington . Homer Lea's contention that the 89 Japanese could launch a major assault on the Pacific Coast greatly impressed Yamamoto .
 Yamamoto submitted a detailed report on the scenario to naval officials in Tokyo . Yamamoto lectured on Bywater's book when he returned to Japan to learn about his work .
 Admiral Yamamoto put many of Bywater's strategies into practice, beginning with an attack on Pearl Harbor . Fifteen years later, Yamamoto attacked Pearl Harbor in Japan .
 The Mount Rushmore National Memorial was completed in October . 14 years of blasting and chipping, polishing and sanding have been completed . The memorial was completed after 14 years .
 From left to right, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln, are depicted . George Washington is shown standing stone-faced against the windy plain in the Washington Monument .
 Roosevelt was only eight years in his grave at the time of his death . Roosevelt was eight years old when he died . He was the last president of the United States .
 Albert Kollenborn family relocated to Idaho from Arkansas this year . The Albert family moved to Idaho this year after moving from Arkansas to Idaho .
 The Kollenborns had not gone to California from the AMOK states during the Dust Bowl . Many others from that area had gone to that area during that period .
 They didn't go during the great migration there in the early 40s to work in the defense industry, either . They also didn't work in defense industry during that migration .
 The Kollenborns doubtless had some acquaintances back in Arkansas who had visited them . They had no idea they were in Arkansas, though .
 Many from Benton County moved to California to work in the defensive industry . Many moved to the U.S. after the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Charles and Bill Logston's sister Grace and her husband George Cottrell had moved to southern Idaho from Oklahoma from Oklahoma . The Logston family had talked up the move by relatives of the Logston brothers . Charles Logston: "It was talked up by relatives' relatives"
 The Cottrells were able to convince the Green ""girls"" that Idaho was great farm country . Idaho was a better place for them to live than Arkansas, they said . The Green "girls" were the reason for their move to Idaho .
 Once irrigated, the "sagebrush,"" as the desert -y part of southern Idaho was called, had proven to be a very fertile crop-growing region . The area is now a very popular tourist destination for tourists .
 This was an apt sobriquet for the area not only because of the transformation that irrigation had brought but also because of great change wrought by promotional pamphlets that had drawn many into the area .
 Idaho may very well be the least thought of and most misunderstood State in the Union . Idaho is the least-known State of the Union in the United States .
 Idaho is not one giant potato patch . They do grow potatoes there, yes, but Idaho does not grow potatoes . Idaho is a state of origin .
 When the Kollenborns lived there, Idaho's spuds played second fiddle to those of Maine . Maine's spud population was smaller than Idaho's . Maine was smaller .
 Idaho became the nation's foremost potato pantry in the late 1950s thanks to chain fast food restaurants and their ubiquitous french fries . It wasn't until the late '50s that Idaho became a nation's top potato supplier .
 Idaho's reputation for its ""famous potatoes" began near where the Kollenborns lived . Idaho is known for its famous potatoes .
 The Simplot Company supplies McDonalds with more than half of its French fries . Today the Simplot Co. supplies McDonald's with over half of their French fries.
 Per capita consumption of French fries grew sevenfold from 1960 to 1984 . Per capita French fries consumption grew from two pounds per year to 14 pounds . This was a better business than simply filling a demand — a demand was actually created .
 Thomas Jefferson introduced French fries to the United States by Thomas Jefferson . Jefferson enjoyed the strips of fried potatoes while serving as Ambassador to France .
 "Pommes frites,"" as they are known in Europe, are of Belgian origin . For this reason, apparently, they became known as ""French fries" here .
 Rupert, which is in Minidoka County, and Burley and Declo, which are located in Cassia County, are located . Rupert is located in Minnesota and Cassia counties . Burley is in Minnesota; Declo is also in Minnesota County .
 This area may have reminded Albert, in a way, of Carroll and Chariton Counties in northern Missouri . Albert: "This area reminds me of Carroll County, Missouri."
 Cassia and Minidoka are divided by the Snake River . Cassia is bounded by the Missouri River . Minidok and Cassia are located in the same counties as Cassia .
 Before the Snake joins the Columbia River in south-central Washington State this 1,000 mile river slithers its way across southern Idaho . The Snake River is the largest river in the world and flows from Idaho to Washington .
 Snake River originates just south of Yellowstone Park; as it approaches the Oregon border, it plunges into the continent's deepest gorge . The gorge is thirty miles in length and up to one half mile in depth . The Snake River is up to 30 miles long .
 Indian attacks were usually unlikely on the Oregon trail, especially prior to the mid1850s . There was more danger of such in the Snake River Plain than elsewhere along the trail .
 Idaho, home of the Nez Perce, Coeur d' Alene, and many other tribes, was the last of the fifty states to be entered by Euro-Americans . Idaho is the last state of the 50 states to enter into the U.S.
 Green women and their families were by no means the first to come to Idaho from the Ozarks . The Green women were moved to Idaho by the Green family .
 In 1863, large wagon trains from Missouri and Arkansas brought families desperate to escape the guerrilla warfare perpetrated by ""bushwhackers"" (such as Jesse James and his ilk) that was raging in their home states .
 The automobile, invented in Germany in 1886 by Karl Benz, took over as the prime method of transportation for families relocating to the Western U.S. The automobile was invented in 1886 .
 The Kollenborns and Logstons stayed in Idaho for most of the 1940s before moving on . The Logsons would eventually be confronted with that decision here .
 The Kollenborns would (at first, anyway), decide on California, while the Logstons would opt for Oregon . The Logsons would (and probably not) opt for California, anyway .
 Idaho is no insignificant state, at least when its sheer size is taken into account . Idaho is the largest state in the United States .
 It is as large as the six New England states of Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts combined . It is also as big as New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, and Delaware .
 Forty percent of Idaho National Forest is National Forest . It contains some of the most rugged terrain in the country, such as Ruby Ridge .
 Idaho was almost named Montana . Colorado was also almost named Idaho . The state of Colorado was named Colorado .
 Its owner apparently got the name from a Colorado mining man who said that it meant Gem of the Mountains . The owner got it from a mining man .
 Colorado almost had almost been named Idaho . Coloradan claimed that it was of Indian derivation .
 Three of the Green women went to work on their husbands . After hearing the glowing report of the area from the Cottrells, three of the women decided to help .
 Ruth Logston's husband Charles Logston was the first of the men to see the wisdom of the move . The Logston family was married to Ruth's sister-in-law .
 The Logstons, the senior of the three couples, persuaded Ruth's sister Mary and her husband Marion McCool, as well as Albert and Alice Kollenborn that the three families should all make the move together . The Logsons were then able to persuade Mary and Marion McC
 Belle Green, who loved her Ozark farm, couldn't bear the thought of losing so many of her children, as well as grandchildren, but was forced to reconcile herself to the idea when her girls proved intractable in their desire to move to the West .
 Her daughters later admitted that a key factor in their decision to leave the Ozark mountain community was that they didn't want their children to end up marrying their own cousins . It was a common occurrence in that area in those times of sparse population and relative isolation .
 Moving with in-laws to a new area was nothing new for the Kollenborn clan . Moving with relatives to new areas is nothing new to them .
 Albert Hilly's grandparents had moved together with the Hilly family from Jersey County, Illinois, to Jasper County, Missouri about a century before . Albert's grandparents also moved together in the same place .
 J.J. was probably William's brother, and Nancy was probably Charlotte's sister . J. J. was likely William's son, and Charlotte was probably his sister .
 The Kollenborns, Logstons, and McCools all packed up and headed fifteen hundred miles northwest . Whether it was wanderlust, a quest for a better life, or concern over the health of their grandchildren, they headed north .
 Albert had an aversion to farming, which was perhaps due to his Dust Bowl farming experiences in Oklahoma or the hard times he experienced in Missouri following the great flood of 1927 . Despite the stated attraction of the area, Albert had a dislike of farming .
 Albert only grudgingly and sporadically farmed, and only then because Alice always wanted him to . Since it wasn't ""in his blood,"" Albert only farmed . Albert only rarely farmed because of his mother's insistence .
 Albert Kollenborn, along with the rest of his family, attended the Mormon church while living in Idaho . It is ironic when you consider his birthplace, but he attended the church while in Idaho, Idaho .
 DeWitt, Missouri, where Albert was born, had forcibly driven out the Mormons when they attempted to settle there . Albert's birthplace had been driven out by the Mormons . Albert died at the age of 92 .
 After trying and failing to rid himself of the tobacco habit, he quit attending the church instead of attending church .
 Albert probably didn't know it, but some Kollenborns had long since migrated to Idaho . Albert didn't realize that some of his ancestors had moved to Idaho from Germany .
 Archie Louis and Clarence Roy Kollenborn were both listed in the WWI draft records as living in Canyon, Idaho . For example, Archie Louis was listed as a member of the Army in the draft .
 Albert Kollenborns can be found in census records in Idaho in decades prior to moving there . Albert and his family moved to Idaho in the 1950s and '60s . Census records show many of them were found in Idaho census records .
 These Idaho Kollenborns are probably all distant cousins, aunts, and uncles of Albert's . Albert's family is likely to be related to Albert's ancestors . Albert is a German-born American .
 Alice wrote faithfully to her sister Effie back in Arkansas . Alice wrote to Effie . Effie wrote to Alice .
 Effie passed Alice's letters on to Albert's mother Lizzie, to whom Alice didn't write . Effie's letters were passed on to Effie, who wrote them to Alice's mother . Albert's father Albert died at the age of 92 .
 Albert's fourth-grade education may or may not have had something to do with his not writing . Albert was in the fourth grade of his fourth grade .
 Lizzie would cry as she read about her grandchildren that she would never see again . She would be devastated when she found out she had never seen them again . The family was devastated by their loss .
 Alice's mother Belle never saw her grandchildren again, either . Alice's grandmother never saw them again . Alice never saw any of her children again .
 The same was true for the grandchildren, too — they never got to see their grandparents, on either side . "They never got the grandparents, either side," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Grandparents had some of their grandchildren there in Arkansas with them, but the grandchildren in Idaho didn't have but two grandmothers and one grandfather, and they were all in Arkansas . Arkansas was, for all practical purposes, as distant as the moon .
 The Kollenborns lived in Declo, which had an attached blacksmith shop, which Albert used as a mechanic shop . Albert used the blacksmith's shop as an mechanic shop in the 1930s .
 Theodore Geisel: "If the misery of the poor be caused not by the laws of nature, but by our institutions, great is our sin" "You could only play ball if your bellies had stars, and the Plain-bellied children had none upon thars" "
 The friction between Japanese-Americans and Euro-Americans was not so dissimilar to that between Germans and Jews in Germany during this time period . The friction was similar to that of that between German Jews and Jews during this period period .
 In California, it was not necessarily so much so much a case of Japanese men consorting with Euro-American females, but rather that they were excelling in business, particularly in agriculture .
 By 1920, there were more Euro-Americans working for Japanese employers in California than vice versa . In 1920, the number of Euro-American workers in California was higher than in 1920s .
 Tens of thousands of Japanese families were turned out of their homes and businesses and forced to spend the duration of the war in concentration camps throughout the U.S.
 Fear that these Japanese-Americans would collaborate with the Japanese military prompted these violations of their rights . It was, ostensibly at any rate, fear that these . Americans would collaborate .
 Anyone with as little as one95 sixteenth Japanese blood was a candidate to be in these camps . Similar to the ""one drop"" rule which relegated anyone with any African-American ancestry to a life of slavery in the old South .
 Native Americans were also taken advantage of during the war as a result of government action . Native Americans took advantage of the government's actions .
 One and a half million acres of their land in Arizona, South Dakota, and Alaska was taken from them for use in the war effort . The land was used in Arizona and South Dakota .
 As gunnery ranges, for nuclear test sites, and... internment camps for these very JapaneseAmericans, they were interned . The camps were used as gunnernery ranges for nuclear tests, and as gunnery sites for nuclear weapons . They were also used as bomb sites, as
 As of October 12 th of this year, Italian nationals would no longer be considered enemy aliens . Italian nationals are no longer considered enemy alien .
 A year and a day later, Italy would reverse its alliances and proclaim war on Germany, its former Axis power partner . A year after the war, Italy declared war on the former Axis partner, Germany .
 One of the Japanese internment camps was located in Minidoka County north of Twin Falls and near the town of Hunt . The camp was located near Hunt, Idaho .
 Minidoka County described as having hot and dusty summers and frigid winters . The county is known for its hot and dry summers and cold winters .
 Japanese-Americans already living in Idaho were not relocated to any of these camps . Oddly enough, they weren't relocated to Idaho .
 Some Japanese-Americans from other areas voluntarily relocated to the state . For that reason, some Japanese Americans from other parts voluntarily relocated .
 Some of the refugees are still at risk of being taken to the camps, but not necessarily from prejudice and distrust on the part of some of their fellow citizens . The refugees were forced into a refugee camp, but were able to stay .
 Pearl Harbor was the first salvo in a series of attacks on the U.S. The Japanese did not intend their attack on Pearl Harbor to be a singular event, but just a salvo .
 Japanese sub commander Kozo Nishino's next assignment was to move with eight other submarines to the Pacific Coast of the United States . They were to disrupt shipping and communication and disrupt shipping .
 Nishino went south from off the coast of Washington state to San Francisco . Nishino then traveled further south to Cape Mendocino, near where Pop Shannon's family lived .
 Nishino sank an American freighter in mid-January . Nishino was operating off San Francisco, operating off the coast of San Francisco . The ship was sunk by Nishino in the early 1990s .
 In February of 1942, Commander Nishino received orders to head for the coast of Southern California . Nishino was ordered to head to Southern California in February 1942 .
 From San Diego, he turned north towards Santa Barbara, running submerged by daylight, and cruising on the surface past the lights of the California coast in the evening .
 Nishino stood in the conning tower of his submarine and raised his binoculars to his eyes . On February 23 rd , shortly after sevenm., shortly after 7m. Nishino . Nishino was killed in a sinking attack on a Japanese submarine in February .
 Commander Nishino could have torpedoed this American city at the very moment FDR was conducting a radio address to the nation . FDR was speaking at the time of the attack when Nishino was attacked .
 Such an attack on a mainland American city would have instantly earned its place in American history . Occurring just two and one half months after the strike on Pearl Harbor, such an attack would have been instantly recognizable .
 This would have been the first time since the War of 1812 that a foreign power had directly attacked an American mainland city .
 In fact, the military was already claiming that the Japanese had been operating in California airspace . The U.S. military says the Japanese were operating in its airspace .
 The day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, a large number of unidentified aircraft had approached the Golden Gate in the late hours of 7-8 December but vanished . Searchlights from the Presidio of San Francisco flooded the sky .
 I don't know how many planes there were, but there were a large number of planes . "There were a lot of planes," says CNN's John Sutter .
 They got up to the Golden Gate and then turned about and headed northwest . They got into the San Francisco Bay area before heading out for the Bay .
 Every surviving Japanese-American internment camp victim received a belated twenty thousand dollars . Every surviving survivor of the camp received the same amount of money .
 Some had lost millions of dollars in property during the two-and-a-half years of internment . Some of the families of those who were interned lost millions .
 A century after losing California to the United States, Mexico was sent an offer from Germany to receive it back . The offer was made to Mexico if Mexico would join forces with the Axis powers against the U.S.
 Germany promised Mexico the other land in the southwest that she had lost to the U.S. in the 1840s . Germany also promised Mexico that the land she lost was also promised to Mexico .
 The communique proposing this scheme was intercepted by U.S. intelligence, and thus did not reach its intended recipient . However, the communique did reach the intended recipient of the scheme .
 Thirty-five year old Albert Kollenborn wasn't completely assured of not being drafted . He already had four children by the time he was drafted in the war .
 It was only this year that men thirty-seven and older were excluded from the draft . The draft is now only exempt from men who are over 35 years old .
 Albert had given thought to joining the Air Force, but it was probably family responsibilities which prevented him from doing so . Albert had thought to join the RAF, but was probably not interested in it .
 During the war, California needed more workers because so many of its men had joined, or otherwise become, the military . California needed workers during the war because of the men's military service .
 People from other states flock into California to take relatively highpaying defense industry jobs . Workers from Mexico came also, to work at those jobs which whites no longer wanted .
 An agreement with Mexico allowed Mexican workers called braceros to come to California and work the fields . The agreement was part of an agreement to allow Mexican workers to come and work in California .
 In the 1960s, labor leaders such as Cesar Chavez, Dolores Huerta, and Larry Itliong would fight for farm workers' rights . They established unions to improve the living and working conditions of the laborers .
 The minimum draft age was reduced from twenty-21 to eighteen in the United States this year . In the U.S. this year, on November 13 th th th , on Nov 13 th , the minimum draftage was reduced .
 President Obama said he fastened his return with a paper clip, which according to your very own latest government pentagon spending figures will more than make up for the difference .
 The Pentagon, headquarters of the United States Department of Defense, was completed this year . The Pentagon was completed in 2010 .
 Each person was restricted to purchase at most three pairs for the remainder of the year . Each person had to buy at least three pairs of shoes .
 In Dug Hill, Arkansas, Belle Green offered the family farm to each of her children . Most of the children had moved away to the West, most of them had moved .
 None of them wanted the farm, or to farm, for that matter, and so she sold it . None of the family wanted to have the farm or farm .
 Port Chicago is not in or anywhere near Chicago, Illinois . West Coast and Great Lakes are not in same neighborhood as Chicago .
 The blast was not the result of an enemy attack, nor was the cause of sabotage . The blast did not cause enemy attack nor was sabotage .
 As the tempo of shipments of ammunition from Port Chicago to the Pacific increased, so did the risks . The risk of shipping ammunition from the U.S. to the Asia region increased .
 Two Liberty ships, afire barge, and a loading pier disappeared in a blast that was equivalent to five kilotons of TNT . The blast was comparable to that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima thirteen months later .
 A fireball covered approximately three miles and sent metal fragments nine thousand feet into the air . An Army Air Force crew flying overhead at the time reported a fireball that covered three miles .
 We raised six of our children in Trinity Co... three sons still living there . Three sons still live there .
 Theodore was on the job with his cats, keeping the fire clear of his place when the forest service came over . The forest service asked Theodore to leave his place to help them .
 He said he couldn't leave and they placed men at his place but the men thought the place was safe, and they went to sleep and it burned to the ground . He said, 'They placed men on his place and they thought it was safe. They went to bed and it
 Franklin Delano Roosevelt was re-elected to an unprecedented fourth term at the end of the year . Roosevelt had been President throughout the Great Depression and World War II .
 Such an unusual showing will remain unmatched, as consecutive Presidential terms are now limited to a maximum of two . Such an unprecedented showing will also remain unmatched .
 "You can't say that civilization don't advance, however, for in every war they kill you in a new way," says the author . Buildings are the most important buildings in history .
 World War II ended with the surrender of the Japanese and the sounds of a jubilant nation . The Japanese surrender of Japan was the sound of the war's end .
 "One of the biggest events in the legend of the man, something general, involving multitudes," he says . "Those clever fellows study all the facts," he adds .
 "I see it as a large thing too, only I break it into small units of one man at a time," says author . "I break it down to small units, and see it in a large and monstrous thing for each man involved"
 I see the war as death in one form or another for men dressed as soldiers, and all the men who survived the war, including myself, I see as men who died with their brothers . I see myself as a man who died as a soldier, dressed as soldier .
 I see death as a private event, the destruction of the universe in the brain and in the senses of one man, and I cannot see any man 's death' as a contributing factor in the success or failure of a military campaign .
 We know more about war than peace, more about killing than we know about living . We know about killing more about living than we do about living. We know war more about peace more than peace. We need to know about peace, not war .
 The controller informed the pilot that he could not see the top of the Empire State Building . The pilot was flying over New York City when the plane landed .
 The pilot was on his way to pick up his commanding officer in Newark, New Jersey . The pilot got permission from the military to continue the flight anyway .
 The fog was so thick that the pilot descended in an attempt to regain visibility . The pilot descended into the fog to try and get visibility back up .
 The pilot had to make some quick maneuvers in the middle of Manhattan, surrounded by skyscrapers . Once he saw where he was, he had to do a quick maneuver .
 He tried to pull up and away from the Empire State Building, but was unable to . First he avoided one skyscraper, then another; he avoided another .
 The plane's high-octane fuel exploded, hurtling flames down the side of the building . It hurtled through hallways and stairwells all the way down to the 75th floor .
 One engine, along with some of the plane's landing gear, tore loose from the bomber and hurtled across the floor, breaking through partitions and firewalls, bursting through the opposite side of the building . Finally came to rest on top of a twelve-story building .
 The other engine skidded across the floor, and plummeted down the elevator shaft . Other engine skid across the floors, and the other plunged down the shaft .
 The engine landed on top of the elevator car, driving the car in a free fall to the bottom of the shaft, igniting a fire in the basement . The car was driven by the engine, which landed on the car, causing it to fall free fall .
 The two women who were in the elevator car at the time survived . Amazingly, the two women survived the crash .
 Eleven of the office workers were not as fortunate, many of them burned to death while still sitting at their desks . Eleven were killed in the fire .
 The three crew members also died, and many people on the ground were injured by falling debris . The crew members were also killed .
 It was fortunate that the accident, if it had to occur, did so on a Saturday, when fewer people were in the building than would have been on a weekday . The accident happened on a busy Saturday, not a weekday, but it was fortunate it happened at the time .
 The floor into which the plane crashed was one of those in which people were working . It was quite unfortunate, though, that the very floor where the crash occurred was a work floor . The plane crashed into the ground into which it crashed was a floor into .
 Franklin Delano Roosevelt died April 12 th , shortly after beginning his fourth term as President . Roosevelt had died shortly after starting his four term in office .
 Mussolini and Hitler were also dead within three weeks of FDR's death . Mussolini, Hitler and Italy's Mussolini also died in three weeks . FDR and Mussolini were both assassinated .
 The man who brought the ""New Deal"" to America was dead, and the diabolical psychopath who had brought destruction and devastation to Europe was also also dead .
 By the end of the year, another key figure in the war, George Patton, would be dead . Patton's death would be one of the most significant events in the American Civil War .
 FDR had been the only President to have been elected to more than two terms of office . FDR was elected to two terms, FDR was the first President to be elected to three terms in office .
 A crater over a thousand feet in diameter is a sign of the explosion that left behind . The explosion left behind a crater more than 1,000 feet wide . The crater is the largest crater in history .
 Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Hanford, Washington; and Los Alamos, New Mexico, near where the test took place .
 The Germans had already capitulated, but Japan was not yet fully down for the count . It was too late to use the new super-destructive awesome force on the Germans, who had already surrendered .
 Two hundred thousand people were killed as a result of these bombs, many instantly, others as result of injuries and radiation poisoning . Many of the bombs were detonated in the early hours of the attack .
 Others had their lives curtailed as a result of the radiation to which this exposed them, contracting various forms of cancer in the years that followed . Innumerable others had their life curtailed due to the radiation .
 "The astronomical degree and extent of the resulting anguish— physical, mental, and emotional— is immeasurable," says the author . "It's an astronomical degree of anguish," she says .
 Statistics do tell some of the story, or at least provide some indication of the immensity of the devastation . Statistics show that the devastation is far beyond the imagination of Hurricane Katrina .
 The atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, bearing the cuddly name ""Little Boy,"" detonated with the force of seventeen thousand tons of dynamite . The bomb was dropped in Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945 .
 Radiation induced nausea, fever, and hemorrhaging . Those who died later suffered greatly — radiation induced nausea and fever .
 The plutonium bomb, this one dubbed, cutely, ""Fat Man,"" killed tens of thousands more civilians in Nagasaki . Tens of thousands of people were killed by the plutonium bomb .
 Some argue that the dropping of these bombs was justified, on the basis that they probably saved hundreds of thousands of lives in the long run . Others say that the drop of bombs was probably justified, and that it probably saved lives .
 Others have suggested that a test explosion over an unpopulated area might have been sufficient to force Japan into surrendering .
 The tension created by three years, eight months and seven days of history's cruelest war snapped in Iola at 6m. today . The tension was created by 3 years, 8 months and 7 days of war .
 Within minutes following President Truman's announcement, sirens were screaming and Iola's streets were jammed with pedestrians and cars .
 A younger woman was smiling as she fought back her tears, she now awaits her husband who has never seen their 20-month old son . The younger woman fought back tears as she waited for her husband to arrive .
 Cap Newman marched with stately tread, beating a tom-tom from an oil can . In contrast to those driving furiously around the square, in anticipation of the end of gas rationing, was Cap Newman marching .
 The Soviet Union had started the war aligned with the Axis powers, but after Germany turned on and attacked them, they quit that band of cutthroats . They formed an uneasy coalition with the Allies .
 As the war was ending, the Soviet Union and the United States were maneuvering themselves into positions of power for the post-war world . The Soviet Union was maneuvering itself into positions . The United States and the U.S. were both involved in the war .
 The Soviet Union declared war on Japan two days after Hiroshima and one day before the bombing of Nagasaki . Probably as a move in this political chess match, hoping to get in on the action and share some of the credit .
 In the final months of the war, thirteen countries declared war on Germany . Not unlike the dog who only begins barking and growling after the subject of his attention has turned away .
 The shock and awe generated by the atomic bombs that had been expelled from the belly of the Enola Gay crippled Japan not just militarily, but also the country's economy . The shock of the bombs was a huge blow to Japan's economy and its people .
 The worst war in human history, in terms of lives lost, was finally over . War was the worst in history, with more than 1,000 killed .
 Within hours of the Japanese surrender, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the independence of his country . The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was formed after the war . The country was declared independent in 1945 .
 Twenty-four years to the day later, in the midst of a war fought there, Minh died . Minh was killed in the Vietnam War .
 In September, Pop Shannon's brother Calvin returned from his overseas stint with the navy .
 President Harry S Truman did not officially proclaim an end to the hostilities until the last day of 1946 . Nevertheless, president Harry S. Truman did officially proclaim the end of the hostilities .
 The stated intent of the U.N. is to maintain international peace and security, the UN says . The United Nations is committed to maintaining international peace .
 Same as the Old Boss: Man is the only creature that consumes without producing . Same as saying "Man is the Only creature that consume without producing"
 He does not give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits . He is not able to pull a plough or catch rabbits, but he is weak enough to pull plough .
 Orwell's "Animal Farm" is an allegorical tale of how revolutionaries, even when justified in their criticism of the current regime, often end up as bad or worse than the regimes they displace and supplant, was released this year . Orwell's story is a look at how revolutionaries
 Calvin Coolidge Shannon was mustered out of the Navy on April 23 rd in San Pedro, California . Shannon was the only son of Coolidge Coolidge . Shannon died in June 1944 .
 On re-entering civilian life, Calvin purchased an airplane and got engaged to be married, not necessarily in that order .
 Calvin's decision to fly, an avocation that was pursued by many of the Shannons (Pop's brothers and sons) would prove to be a fateful one for Calvin . Albert Kollenborn was the son of Pop and Calvin .
 "If you 're going to spend your whole life in the grandstand just watching what goes on, in my opinion you ''re wasting your life," he said .
 'He was a special person. More significantly, and the reason why we remember him so fondly is that he was a very special person,' he said .
 He was asked if he was willing to be the forerunner— or some might say guinea pig or sacrificial lamb— to integrate the Major Leagues . Although a standout baseball player, it was not just his considerable skill on the baseball diamond which led to him being asked to be
 Jackie would be stubborn enough to stick it out, but also exhibit the self-control necessary to refrain from physically retaliating against those who would provoke him . Jackie would also exhibit self control to avoid physical retaliation .
 Jackie agreed to be the man who would go down in history as the one with the courage to pioneer the way for those who would come after him, and the guts to tough it out .
 Baseball was very much an integral part of American culture at the time . Baseball was a central theme in the warp and weave of daily American life . Baseball is now a major part of the American landscape .
 A broader program of integration would become official policy the next year . The program would be official policy for the next few years .
 President Harry Truman this year issued what is known as the Truman Doctrine . Fearing Russia taking over other countries, leading to a domino or virus-like effect on the balance of power, President Truman issued the doctrine .
 Its immediate catalyst was fear that Greece and Turkey could otherwise become communistic . Its immediate trigger was fear of a communistic split between them .
 The victorious, vibrant, virile returnees needed housing, and the GI Bill provided them with the money they needed . The GI Bill provides them with housing, providing them with money .
 Quickly-built, modestly-priced cookie-cutter homes laid out in planned communities on the outskirts of cities became de rigueur . The homes were quickly-built in suburban areas in the suburbs .
 She knew this was the great time in her life so far. And she knew it was the greatest time she'd ever had . She knew she was going to be free .
 When William Kollenborn family was living in Illinois, that area, located in what is now the middle of the country, was considered to be the West . When the family lived there, it was considered the West.
 William and Charlotte moved westward from Illinois to Missouri, then Kansas, to Kansas . Their descendants made kangaroo jumps into Idaho, Oregon, Washington, Arizona, New Mexico, and New Mexico . William's descendants continued the westward march to California .
 For several generations, the Kollenborns had resisted the lure of California . For many generations, they had resisted California's lure of fame .
 After first circling around the AMOK states, they had leaped all the way across the great Divide, landing in Idaho . They had first circled around the states, then circled the border .
 The Kollenborn family would finally succumb to the draw of the Golden State . But now they would be the first family to move to the state .
 Albert would spend the final decade of his life in California . Albert spent his final decade in California, spending the last decade there .
 Albert and Alice Kollenborn had moved to Idaho from Arkansas . They had been told it was a better place to farm and otherwise make a living and a life .
 After spending most of the 1940s there in south-central Idaho, the Kollenborns moved again, this time from Idaho to California . After moving to California in the 1950s, the family moved to California, where they lived .
 Alice's brother James ""Man"" Green, who had preceded them there, told them that California was a better place to live . Alice's family moved to California after their brother told them they would move to California .
 Albert struck out on his own and started his own mechanic shop . After working there for a time, Albert worked at a local mechanic shop in the U.S.
 As different as the two states are, the highest point in Missouri is Mt. Mt. St. Charles in Missouri .
 There are many connections binding Albert Timm's birth no state and death state to each other .
 The Pony Express went from St. Louis to St. Mary's, Missouri, to California . As some examples of these connections, the Pony Express was known as the "California Connection"
 The Overland Route started in and around St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California . The route was the first Overland route from Missouri to California .
 The California Trail began in Independence, Missouri, and ended in San Francisco, California . The trail began in St. Joseph, Missouri and terminated in the Sacramento area .
 Twain moved from Missouri to Washoe with brother Orion . Twain moved to California in the 1860s . Twain's brother Orion was the Territorial Secretary of California .
 Pop Shannon moved back to the ranch he owned in Trinity County, in order to develop it . For the last time, Pop Shannon returned to his ranch . Pop Shannon's ranch is still in the hands of a rancher .
 "No mercy, no power but its own controls it. He would live there for the rest of his life. ill ill .
 Calvin Coolidge Shannon of Westport was killed when his airplane was blown off a runway near the ocean while landing at Union Landing March 10, 1 949 . Shannon was killed in the accident . Shannon's plane was blown into the ocean .
 The plane was smashed on the rocks and his body was carried out to sea to be recovered later . The body of the pilot was recovered later from the rocks .
 Theodore of Westport, Kenneth of Carlotta, Howard of Areata, Robert of . Westport . George of Tulare, George of . Tulare . George, Gary Shannon of West . Shannon, Gary . Shannon and Mrs. Westport.
 Robert was not as badly injured as Calvin, but was able to fight his way back to shore . Robert was able, after searching for Calvin in vain, to fight back to the shore .
 We can plainly recall going to bed one night feeling so warm and so cozy, and Dad was listening to the news before going to sleep when he said that Calvin had been killed .
 I couldn't believe it as I just received a letter the day before from Belle & she told how Gary and Calvin were having the time of their life . I just got a letter from Belle telling me how she was having a great time with the couple .
 "I left the next morning with Gary, Kate, and Howard to spend some time with my son Theodore and his family," he says .
 Dad wouldn't go because of the way we had to bury Girlie and people thinking more of their fun than her, he says . Dad wouldn’t go because he was upset about the way she was buried .
 Virginia Belle Green preferred her middle name to her first name . Like the other Belle in the family, she preferred to be called Virginia Belle .
 Calvin's fiance, Jeannie Larssen of Westport, was also among those left behind . Although she was not mentioned in the obituary, she was also a relative .
 Idaho is sometimes confused with corn and pigrich Iowa . Many confuse this West Coast city with an Army base in North Carolina .
 Fort Bragg began as a military post in 1857 . It was established as a post for the first time .
 Lippitt, Commander of the Humboldt Military District, suggested a name change to Ft. Humbin .
 The name change didn't take place, and the nearby town was named for the abandoned fort . The abandoned fort was named after the abandoned Fort .
 Mendocino County is a very photogenic area, tending towards fog and dampness . Fort Bragg is located in the area which is prone to fog, damp weather .
 A few examples are the cold war comedy The Russians are Coming, which was filmed partly in a house in which Pop Shannon lived in Westport . The Summer of '42 and The Majestic were also filmed in the same house .
 Murder She Wrote, set supposedly on the opposite coast (as was The Summer of '42) was filmed in Mendocino . Also, the television show Murder She . Wrote was set on the same coast as The Summer .
 California itself is often portrayed in a stylized caricature reflecting, on the one hand, untruths, and on the other, gross exaggerations . Southern California is as different from Northern California as New Hampshire is from New Mexico .
 A tour of Alpine, Inyo, Siskiyou and Modoc Counties would set such ones straight, too . A tour would set some of the county's faults straight, and would set them straight .
 There is much more to California than the oversimplified stereotypes would lead gullible armchair travelers to believe . As is usually the case with much-maligned people, places, and things, there is a lot more to the state .
 California, the jewel of America, always seems to have one more trick up its sleeve, one more secret spirited away . California is the state of America .
 Eric Arthur Blair this year published ""1984,"" one of the most influential novels in English literature . Following up on the success of his short novel ""Animal Farm,""  Blair's novel is one of England's most influential novel .
 This year recommended that the government open up Indian lands to mineral exploitation, terminate government services to Indians, and remove the nontaxable status of their lands . Leave it alone, and eventually it will right itself .
 When things were bad for the white people, Hoover wouldn't lift a finger to help . Hoover would have been a hero for his efforts to get things under control in the 1930s .
 When things were bad for the Indians, he wanted to raise a gloved fist and an iron heel to smash and stomp them, he said . He wanted to 'raise and stomp' Indians .
 He hopes that for some future edition, at a time when it would not subject them to danger and reprisal, to be able to name these people and extend personal thanks to each in turn . It was first in 1920 that more Americans lived in cities than in rural areas .
 64% of Americans now live in cities . Just 30 years later, this had increased to 64% (almost twothirds) of Americans living in cities.
 In 1950, the average home cost $8,000 and the average car cost $1,500 . Rent was typically $75 per month and a uniformed attendant would pump a gallon of gas into your car for 18 cents . In 1950 the average house cost $9,000,
 He would also wash your windows, check your cars' fluid levels, and possibly give you stamps that could be saved up and redeemed for items such as towels and dishes .
 Joseph McCarthy was a Senator from Wisconsin who acted more like he was a superstitious and vengeful resident of old Salem, Massachusetts . McCarthy acted like a Salem resident from Wisconsin . McCarthy was not a senator from Wisconsin, but a resident of Salem .
 McCarthy accused over two hundred people in the U.S. State Department of being communists . McCarthy played on this fear of communism in the height of the Cold War . McCarthy accused two hundred State Department employees of being Communists .
 The Korean War began on June 25 th , when troops from the Northern, communist half of that divided nation invaded the Southern portion . The war began in the Southern half of the nation .
 Truman authorized military intervention to help protect proUnited States South Korea . Five days later, President Harry Truman authorized the intervention . President Truman authorized intervention .
 Albert and Alice's firstborn son David A Kollenborn would serve in the Second World War . Albert's son David would serve there during that war .
 Fighting between the two sides was officially terminated in 1991 . It was 38 years after fighting had ceased in 1953 . The two sides were involved for 38 years .
 North Korea and South Korea finally signed a treaty of reconciliation and nonaggression . It was not until then that the two countries agreed to sign a treaty .
 Many would consider the activities in Korea a war, regardless of its official designation . Of course, many would consider it a war .
 Up to this point, this was the most intense burst of heat the Cold War had given off . The Cold War was most intense period of Cold War in history . The U.S. has never seen a nuclear war in the world .
 The Americans feared a ""domino effect"" if they lost South Korea to the communist camp . The U.S. feared a 'domino-effect' if South Korea was lost to communism .
 They were afraid that one ""conversion"" to communism would lead to another, then another, until they were outnumbered and out-gunned by the opposition . They feared that one 'conversion' to communism led to another' then another .
 Th Korean conflict coincided with, and foreshadowed, another Asian conflict the U.S. would involve itself in. The U.K. would be involved in.
 France wanted its old colonies of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia back . France had lost many colonies since World War II, such as Algeria, such an Algeria .
 Knowing the United States was also interested in keeping communism in check, they asked for help in fighting communist rebels in Vietnam . Knowing the U.S. was also intensely interested, the Vietnamese government asked for the help .
 America responded by sending ""military advisers"" and supplies, and contributed millions of dollars to the cause . America responded to the situation by sending military advisers and supplies .
 This was just the beginning of American involvement in the quagmire there, though, though. This is just the start of American intervention in the Middle East .
 America would remain entangled in one way or another with the problems in Vietnam from Truman's Presidency to Eisenhower's, Kennedy's, Johnson's and finally end in Nixon's era . America would continue to be entangled in Vietnam through the next generations .
 Will and Gertie Shannon reached the milestone of 50 years of married life at the end of the year . The Shannon family has been together for 50 years .
 Although there would be a big family gettogether for their 60 th anniversary, this one may have come too close to Calvin's death for them to feel much like celebrating .
 Eight of their 11 children were still alive, ranging in age from 48 to twenty-one-year-old Gary . Eight of the couple's 11 children are still alive .
 Groucho Marx: "A full belly is little worth where the mind is starved. Every time somebody turns on the set, I go into the other room and read a book" Marx: Every time someone is on set I go to read a new book .
 Despite the state of the technology at the time, the general populace was certainly impressed . Nevertheless, and regardless of what we today might think of the state the technology .
 Many were enthralled and practically mesmerized by the contraption . Many were fascinated by it .
 The process of converting multitudes of fiercely independent Americans into homogenized nincompoops was well under way by 1951 .
 In that year, the number of television sets grew tenfold, from 1. million to 15 million . The number of televisions in the U.S. grew 10fold in 2011 .
 This is not to say that television does not have a great potential for good, says CNN.com . Instead, it has the potential to be a good thing for the world .
 The effect of television on families, today taken for granted by people who have never known life without the device, has been inestimable . The effect on families is inestimated .
 They saw commercials that created a desire for things they hadn't even known they wanted, they said . They said they were inspired by commercials that made them want things they knew they wanted .
 TV gave Americans more of a common culture, says historian John Sutter . TV also gave Americans a sense of common culture .
 Family communication suffered in direct relationship with the amount of time families spent watching television . Family communication suffers when people spend time watching television, study finds .
 Purchasing of goods gradually morphed from needs-driven to wants-driven, with the wants awakened, intensified and even artificially created, by crass commercialism . Purchasing has evolved from needs to wants to be needs-to-need to be wants, says author .
 Salinger's classic novella Catcher in the Rye, featuring the unforgettable protagonist Holden Caulfield, was released this year . The novel is based on the novel, which was written by Salinger .
 "Keeping the children in school, keeps us in Mendocino County," says county resident . "My business is keeping us in school," she says . "It's a good thing for the community," she adds. "I'm not going to let it slide"
 For the first time, the Shannons and Kollenborns were living in the same general area this year . The Shannonons are now living in a general area of the same area .
 This move was prompted by two families with whom the Kollenborns had become close friends . This move is prompted by the two families who had become friends with each other .
 Bud and Lucia Raines, and Jim and Adabelle Ritter, had moved to Fort Bragg . The Kollenborns followed them in the 1950s . They were the first family to move to the town .
 Lucia Raines, whose mother already lived in Fort Bragg, eventually became head nurse at the hospital . Raines' mother was also a nurse, and she eventually became a nurse .
 Ozzie and Harriet, a television show depicting a ""typical"" American family, began its fifteen-year run this year . The show depicts a typical family .
 It starred the real-life Nelson family, which included teen heart-throb rock 'n' roll singer Ricky .
 His most popular songs of the era were Travelin' Man and Hello, Mary Lou . He was also known for his hits including Hello Mary Lou and Travelin't Man .
 It is spending the sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its children . The government is spending it on the sweat and genius of the people it is spending .
 Edmund Hillary and Tensing Norgay reached the summit of Mt. Everest on May 29 th . Hillary: "It's a good day for the world," says Hillary . "It was a very difficult day for us to come to the summit," she says .
 Everest, at 29,028 feet, is not only the peak of the Himalayas, but the tallest mountain in the world . Everest is the highest mountain in North America .
 North Korea's capital of Pyongyang was captured by the United States -led United Nations forces at one point, and the South Korea capital of Seoul was overtaken by the communists at another point .
 First the communists would push the United Nations forces south, then the U.N. forces would regroup, retake the momentum, and push the communists back north . The United Nations would then regroup and push back north, according to the historian .
 After three years of frustration and futility, both sides decided to call the whole thing off . Both sides decided the project was called off after three years .
 Twenty-three thousand American soldiers died (almost as many as would die in Vietnam) in the war . Tens of thousands more were wounded .
 At least a million North Korean civilians died, and probably a like number of civilians from South Korea died, too . At least one million North Koreans died, including at least 1 million North and South Koreans .
 The first divorce ended in divorce this year, the second ending with his death in 1979 . The first ending in divorce ended with the death of his wife .
 The Kollenborns had considered moving to Areata, but decided against it when a strong earthquake struck that Humboldt County town . They decided not to move because of the earthquake .
 Bragg was to have a major impact on both the Kollenborn and the Shannon families . Bragg is a major influence on both of the families .
 The rundown all-black school where Brown's daughter was expected to attend was all the way across town . Brown's third-grade daughter was going to attend an all-African-American school . Brown: "I'm not going to let my daughter go to that school. It's
 Brown attempted to enroll Linda in the nearer school, but was told by the school board that he could not do that . Linda Brown was told she would not be allowed to attend a school closer to her home .
 As similar lawsuits were being brought elsewhere throughout the country, they were tried together, and before the Supreme Court, no less . The lawsuit was brought before the high court .
 Because the surname Brown came first alphabetically among the litigants, the composite case was known as Brown Board of Education of Topeka .
 Brown had attempted to enroll his daughter three years earlier, in 1951 . Brown had tried to enroll her daughter in 1951.
 The Supreme Court justices were split until the Court's chief justice Fred Vinson died . The justices were divided until Vinson's death .
 Former California Governor Earl Warren took his place in that position . Earl Warren is the current Governor of California .
 Warren felt it was necessary for the court to present a united front on this issue . Warren felt the court should present a unified front on the issue .
 He was able to gradually persuade all the justices to his way of thinking, and his goal of a unanimous decision was, in the end, achieved .
 As parents everywhere know, it is one thing to enact a law, and another thing altogether to enforce it . It's one thing for parents everywhere to say, but it's another thing for them to enforce .
 Within the next few years, public transportation and restaurants would be integrated, albeit only after much suffering . Public transport and restaurants will be integrated in the coming years, but only after suffering .
 John Lewis wrote of his reaction on finding out about the court's decision in the Brown case . Lewis: "Just absolutely turned my world upside down"
 The United States Supreme Court had finally handed down its decision in the school desegregation case of Brown the Board of Education of Topeka . The case was the result of a Supreme Court decision .
 I remember the feeling of jubilation I had reading the newspaper story all the newspaper stories that day . I remember reading the story of the plane crash that day.
 "No longer would I have to ride a broken-down bus almost forty miles each day to attend classes at a ""training"" school with hand-me-down books and supplies . No longer would be going to a "training" school, "no longer would she have to go
 Come fall I'd be riding a state-of-theart bus to an integrated school, and integrated school . Come fall, I would be riding the bus to a state of-the-art school .
 Alabama's plans for desegregating schools were announced in the spring of that year . "All that spring I searched the papers for news of Alabama's desegregation plans," she says .
 State politicians derisively refer to the day of that Supreme Court decision as Black Monday . Instead of obeying the ruling, they referred to the decision as "Black Monday" Instead, they made clear that they had no intention to obey it .
 White Citizens Councils coat-and-tie versions of the Ku Klux Klan -forming in Georgia and Mississippi -forming .
 There were reports of hooded marches and midnight cross burnings across the state of Alabama . The Klan was active in Alabama .
 There was talk that summer of black men being beaten and even castrated not in Pike County, but in places just like it . Pike County was a place where black men were beaten and castrated, but not Pike County . "There was a lot of violence against black men in Pike
 "The Board of Education notwithstanding, nothing in my life had changed," Brown said . Brown: "I had nothing changed. Nothing changed. I had nothing to do."
 This year is, in fact, considered the beginning of the modern Civil Rights moment . The producers of the book and video series ""Eyes on the Prize,"" from 19541965 .
 Montgomery bus boycott began three months after Brown Board of Education ruling . It was doubtless an impetus to the Montgomery bus boycot, which would begin in January .
 McCarthy went too far in 1954 when he accused the U.S. Army of being riddled with communists . McCarthy accused the Army of having communists in the Army in 1954 .
 To President Dwight D Eisenhower, this allegation seemed fishy, to say the least . President Eisenhower was a career military man . To President Eisenhower, it seemed like a fishy allegation .
 From April to June, the ""Army/ McCarthy Hearings"" were broadcast on television . The Hearings were broadcast from April until June 2013 .
 McCarthy didn't have a leg to stand on, he was exposed as a vicious fraud . McCarthy was exposed for being a vicious liar in the media . McCarthy has a long way to go, but he has a chance to win back .
 He succumbed to alcoholism and died three years later, in 1957, at the age of forty-nine .
 "I would die, and die gladly, if that would make a better life for them," she says . "And I would die ... if I would ... die gladly," she adds .
 Rosa Parks had given up her seat in the front part of the bus to white passengers, as was expected of her . On many occasions in the past, Rosa Parks gave up seat in front of white passengers . Rosa Parks was expected to give up seat on the bus as expected .
 On December 1st st , she had reached the breaking point, the point of no return . On Dec. 1st, she had . reached the . breaking point .
 She was tired from working all day, and tired of such degrading shenanigans . She said, "I'm tired from work all day. I'm tired of this kind of nonsense"
 The humiliation included not just having to sit towards the back of the bus, but also having to give up her seat to whites when seating was scarce . She had to exit the bus after paying her fare and then entering the bus from its rear door .
 Rosa decided it was time to take a stand this day, or rather not to have to stand so that a person of lighter skin tone could have her seat . Rosa decided to stand for a light-skinned person to have a seat .
 Her seemingly insignificant act of defiance led to lines being drawn in the sand . Her actions led to a series of protests against her actions .
 At first, black cab companies agreed to provide transportation to the boycotters for the same ten cents they paid when they rode the bus . The boycotters are boycotting black cabs .
 They were eventually legally prevented from continuing this practice, though . They were required to charge a minimum of forty-five cents per fare .
 In some cases, the white employers themselves picked up their employees . White employers often pick up their workers .
 Three white men from a nearby Air Force base shuttled blacks to and from work in their automobiles . The men were part of the shuttling the blacks to work in cars . Three other men from the base shut down the blacks in their cars .
 They were forcibly removed from the buses when they insisted on equal treatment . They were even beaten when they expressed their preference to walk or carpool with friends .
 After a long and bitter struggle , the African-American community won the right to be treated fairly . After a bitter struggle, the black community finally won the rights to be fairly treated .
 Justice can not be legislated; people must want to change before a genuine change of heart can take place . Justice is not legislated. People must want change before they change themselves, says Simon Tisdall .
 Martin Luther King, Jr., Medgar Evers, and James Meredith were considered the leaders in the push for equal treatment . Animosity towards the ""agitators,"" would manifest itself in the years to come .
 Disneyland opened in an erstwhile orange grove in Anaheim, California, this year . Disneyland opened this year in a grove that was once known as the Orange Grove .
 Today it's smack dab in the middle of that great gray monstrosity, which has spread outward to engulf everything within miles . Today it is smack dab at the center of that . The United States. Today it’s smack dab .
 Rock Around the Clock is considered the harbinger of rock 'n' roll . The song delighted most kids and outraged many parents this year .
 The erstwhile jazz band upended the world right onto its ears . Full of youthful exuberance and an aggressive beat, the errific jazz band .
 The rollicking rave-up's meteoric rise up the charts provoked much hand-wringing among older generation . Featured in Blackboard Jungle, a movie about teenage delinquents starring Sidney Poitier and Glenn Ford .
 Starting from this year it can be said that rock 'n' roll was here to stay . From Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry, and Sam Cooke to the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and the Who down to the various derivations of rock extant today .
 There you can know your man inside and out— in a city you but know his crust; and his crust is usually a lie . In the U.S. you can also know your partner's crust, not his .
 Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee (known as Alice Rosalie) Kollenborn honeymooned in Yosemite . Shannon and Lee were married in Yosemite on their honeymoon . Shannon was married to Lee, who was also known as Alice .
 The twenty-two year old groom wasn't the only Theodore Shannon to get married in the family this year, though, though .
 Shannon Shannon visited a Shannon in Trinity County at his ranch out near Ruth . Shannon was a member of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service . Shannon's ranch is located near Ruth, Texas .
 His wife was a wonderful cook as we stayed at their ranch while working in that remote part of California .
 What her secret was, whether in preparation or ingredients or both, I don't know, but they were most certainly in a class by themselves . The recipe is a classic recipe for a classic meal .
 Elvis Presley really hit the big time the day after the Shannon/ Kollenborn nuptials . Presley was married to Shannon Shannon and his wife Elisabetha Kollmann . Elvis died the day before the wedding .
 Elvis was already all over the radio, but on September 9 th , he made his television debut . Elvis made his TV debut .
 He became the talk and shock of the nation when he made his famous shown-only-from-the-waist up (due to his supposedly sexually suggestive dance gyrations) appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show . The Beatles also would make a historic appearance eight years later, when
 In 1954, the United States Supreme Court had made it clear that segregation of schools was illegal . The Cat in the Hat is the story of the Little Rock Nine and The Little Rock 9 .
 Some hard-boiled racists were willing to die or kill rather than let that happen, though . Some of the dead are still alive and well, but some of them were not .
 In Arkansas, nine black students enrolled in an up-until-then-then allwhite high school in Little Rock . In Little Rock, Arkansas, 9 black students enroll in an allwhite school .
 Imagine the intestinal fortitude required to be one of those nine youngsters, forging ahead to pioneer an easier path for your younger siblings and the next generations . Imagine the courage required to forge ahead .
 Imagine, too, the cold-heartedness and arrogance of those who wanted to prevent these courageous youths from integrating the school . Imagine the coldheartedness of those trying to prevent the integration of the school.
 Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus ordered troops there to prevent students from entering the school . In contempt of the Supreme Court and disregarding all sense of decency and morality, he ordered the troops there .
 The nine students protected the nine students, remaining in the school for the entire school year . They protected themselves from harm, staying in school for an entire year .
 Little by little, one battle at a time, the idiotic and pathetic bigots were being forced to do what was right . The idiotic bigots are being forced into doing what is right .
 "What conscience should have dictated from within had to be imposed on them from without," the British government says .
 The Frisbee would be a mainstay in American culture for decades to come . Some people even use it to play fetch with their dogs .
 Dr. Seuss published perhaps his most famous book this year, The Cat in the Hat . Seuss' book is based on Dr. Dr. Martin Martin's book, "The Cat in The Hat," published in 1964 .
 After recovering, he and Gertie moved onto their son George's place in Tulare, California .
 In or about March of 1 958, on a chilly and blustery morning, Dad came into the house and I knew that he was very sick . Dad came in to the house that morning and he was sick .
 "One of our neighbors came by and insisted he take Dad to the doctor. Then one of our neighbor came by to take him to the hospital," she said .
 Dad used his Black Angus in terms of cost, instead of Dollars and cents, to describe his hospital experience . The Doctor put him into the hospital as he had suffered a heart attack .
 As soon as Dad was well enough, we took it to Tulare, parking it on George's place . George and Gary took care of selling the live stock and property and we purchased a trailer house . Dad's trailer house was parked at George's property .
 Dad seemed to get better in Tulare, soon finding enough ground around our trailer for him to farm a small garden . Dad seems to have found enough ground to farm around his trailer to farm .
 This was the type of man he was, he had to be farming land, and now he did, even though it was a small piece of land . "This was the kind of man, he was," he said .
 Berry's guitar playing would heavily influence rock guitarists for decades to come . Berry was a pioneer of guitar playing in the 1960s and '70s . Berry is credited with inspiring guitarists such as John Defterios .
 The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim were formerly known as both the California Angels and the Anaheim Angels . The San Diego Padres, the Oakland Athletics and Oakland Athletics are also in the big league .
 Albert's auto shop in Fort Bragg had failed, not because he accepted work on credit and his creditors did not always feel it was necessary to pay him . Albert was not a skilled and dedicated mechanic, but because he was not skilled and a personable businessman . Albert's car shop
 The Kollenborn family moved to Coos Bay, Oregon, in the 1930s . This prompted another move north up the Pacific coast to Cooos Bay . The family eventually moved to the Oregon coast in the 1960s .
 Coos Bay had originally been named Marshfield, possibly for Marshfield in Massachusetts, where some of the Gorhams had lived in the 1600s . The area was originally called Marshfield .
 Albert would retire from Weyerhauser, for whom he plied his mechanic trade without having to worry about the bill-collecting side of matters . Albert would go to Coos County, Oregon, to raise money .
 Perhaps the chief difference between northern California and southern Oregon are to be found in the intent and purpose of the EuroAmerican inhabitants who came to these states in the 1800s .
 Many of those who came to California were gold prospectors and for the most part were single men who didn't intend to stay . Making a fortune and going back home was their dream, making a fortune was the dream of many .
 The Oregon Trail was primarily peopled by families intending to stay and make a new home in Oregon . Families intended to stay in Oregon, intending to move to Oregon, Oregon .
 At the time the Kollenborns moved to southwestern Oregon, it was timber country . The family's first home was in southwestern Oregon .
 By the mid-1970s (when the Kollenborns would move for the last time), mill closures and layoffs in and around Coos Bay made life hard and wreaked havoc with the local economy . By the 1980s, mill closures, layoffs and mill closures in Coos
 In Coos and other logging counties, the last quarter of the 20 th century brought a series of economic disasters . Coos County logging counties have been hit hard by the economic downturns .
 The oldest boys, David and Lyle, were out of the house by this time . The eldest daughter Rosie Lee was married and already had two children of her own .
 Albert and Alice Kollenborn's youngest son Benny, Benny, and their other two daughters, Sharon and Patsy, were born in Germany . Albert's wife and Albert's eldest son Benny were also born in the family .
 For the purposes of this book, John Patton is considered a full-fledged member of the Kollenborn family . John Patton was born in Germany in 1963 .
 In fact, the destruction of the original culture has been so fractured that centuries long traditions of ""family"" have been broken down . The destruction of "family" has broken down centuries-long traditions of family .
 DNA testing is now being used to 'exclude' some people from 'tribal entities', even though the family members have been/ always were recognized as tribal members . It is now at a point where DNA testing can be used to exclude some people . DNA testing has been used
 In the pre-invasion times, and for decades after the invasion, family' meant anyone who lived in the household or the 'clan' unit . Even if that person had been 'adopted' in, it meant 'family'
 Today, greed and modern technology have come together to further the destruction of the old culture . Today's culture has been destroyed by greed and technology, the author says .
 People who had always lived with the ""tribe, "" are now excluded by DNA testing . DNA testing is now being used to exclude people who have lived with a tribe .
 Our ancestors would be mortified if they thought that a family member could be 'thrown out' for reasons other than a breech of a grievous moral taboo .
 The result is that, what the white culture was not able to finish' in regard to destruction of the Indian Way, is being taken care of through modern practices and by the descendants of our forebears .
 In Coos Bay, Albert built in his shop an extensive model railroad ""town"" replete with houses, businesses, water towers, a roundhouse, trees, bushes, hills, and a variety of train locomotives and cars . Albert had built a model airplane as a young
 Perhaps, nearing the end of his working life, the old engineer was indulging in sentimental reminiscing of what had been, or what could have been . Perhaps he was reminiscing about the days he had been working in his career .
 She was buried next to Jim Branstuder, her husband of forty-five years and father of her three daughters . She is buried in a cemetery near Gravette and Hiwasse in Pleasant Valley .
 Lizzie was seventy; Jim, who was buried next to her, would live to be ninety, until 1970 . Jim would also live until 1970, until he would be ninety . Lizie was buried at the age of seventy .
 On January 3 rd , Texas lost bragging rights as the largest state in the Union .
 When acquired, Alaska was a waste of money— a frozen, worthless, wasteland, wasteland . Many thought Alaska was an expensive, useless wasteland . Alaska is now a state of its own .
 Secretary of State William H Seward paid a whopping $7.6 million for it in 1867 . Seward's "folly" was called ""Seward's Folly" because he paid $7 million for the house .
 In hindsight, this largest and northernmost state was quite a bargain, even if considered strictly from a financial standpoint . The largest state in the United States was purchased for $1.5 billion .
 The television show ""Bonanza"" debuted this year and remained on the air until 1973 . The show was first aired in the early 1950s .
 The Cartwrights had their hands on their 600,000-acre spread, but always found a way to survive with integrity and family intact . The Cartwights had an extensive family history, but also had a reputation for integrity .
 Most people who grew up in the 1960s (the show ran from 1960 to 1968) remember the widower Sheriff Andy Taylor . Barney Fife, Floyd the fix-it man, Emmett the barber, Howard the scrivener, Goober the gas station attendant
 Like the Cartwrights of ""Bonanza,"" the Taylors of North Carolina took care of one another . The Taylsors of N.C. took care for one another— and their friends .
 Four African-American college students staged a sit-in at Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina . They were following in Rosa Parks' footsteps, and following in the footsteps of Rosa Parks .
 The idea spread; more than fifty Woolworth's lunch counters throughout the south were targeted for such courageous action . Woolworths lunch counters were targeted by the idea .
 Woolworth's lunch counters were declared open to all races on July 25 . Less than six months from the first sit-in in Greensboro, the first Woolworth lunch counter was declared open . Woolworths lunch counters opened to all racial Americans .
 The first oral contraceptive, Enovid — popularly known simply as ""the pill,"" was introduced this year . The first pill was introduced in 1996 .
 It is necessary for the marriage to be a union of good forgivers, says author . Each one will have reason to feel hurt from time to time and also have occasion for offense, too, she says .
 "We had quite a celebration with most of our family and friends present," says mother-in-law .
 I was so happy to be here with William and to have had our life together, with all the happiness, sorrows, trials, and tribulations .
 'I was thankful that we had each other, and kind of stunned to look around and see so many descendants from just two people which started their life together way back in the first year of the century, 1900, 1900 .
 There was a newspaper lady who came to interview us and she asked Dad what most contributed to their long married life, and his sudden smile along with his slow and studied answer, amused all of us . Dad's sudden smile and slow answer were the ones she asked him .
 "Give him what he 's asking for and give it to him fast, before some other factions come along and try to do it another way," Dr. Martin Luther King says .
 Only an alert citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together . Eisenhower's farewell address of January 17, 19, was from his farewell address .
 This year's Boynton Virginia case extended the federal ban on segregation to all public transportation terminals for interstate travel . The ban was extended to public transport terminals in Virginia .
 Bus stations must remove signs segregating users of rest rooms, water fountains, and snack bars . No more signs designating one facility as ""colored"" and others as being reserved for ""whites only"" would be allowed .
 For the law to become reality, though, for the theory to be put into practice, it had to be tested . For the first time, the law has been put to the test of its theory .
 People would actually have to force the issue to provoke a confrontation between the federal government and the individual southern states, which would try to ignore it .
 Freedom Riders came from groups of volunteers who came to be known as Freedom Riders . The Freedom Riders were the first Freedom Riders to come from the U.S.
 The core intent of the action was to dramatize segregation in the South . The new law did not exist solely on paper but would indeed be enforced, the action .
 This was actually not the first ride of its type, or with the same purpose . This is not the only ride, or the first with a similar purpose .
 Twelve riders were arrested in North Carolina for violating a state segregation law, for which they were sentenced to serve twenty-two days on a chain gang . That first trip planned to make a tour of the ""Upper South"" states of Virginia, Kentucky, and North Carolina .
 The federal government was not enforcing its own laws in that section of the country because of fear of political backlash from those states . Federal officials were not enforcing their own laws because of the fear of backlash .
 If in some way, it might become more politically dangerous for the federal government not to enforce those laws than to enforce them, things would begin to change, says CNN.com.com .
 If states were forced to visibly even violently defy the law, with the whole nation looking on, then the federal government would be forced to respond in ways it had not so far so far . If, for example, those states were . forced to . violently defy . law, they would
 The plan was that after three days of training, those who were selected to be a part of the momentous event would board buses in Washington, D.C. and make stops in Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana .
 They were scheduled to arrive in New Orleans on May 17 th , the seven year anniversary of the Supreme Court's Brown Board of Education decision .
 Things went even worse for many Freedom Riders than they had gone for those on the Journey of Reconciliation in 1947, who had toiled on the chain gang .
 A Greyhound bus carrying nine Freedom Riders was bombed in Anniston, Alabama . The Freedom Riders were on their way to the U.S. from New York to New Jersey .
 Those were American men who had clutched pipes and clubs and bricks as they surrounded that bus when it pulled into Anniston terminal that day . The bus pulled into the Anniston, Alabama, terminal .
 It was all the driver could do to gun the engine and hurriedly hack the vehicle out of the vehicle . The driver could only manage to hold on to his car .
 Someone slashed the rear tires before the bus managed to pull away from the bus . The bus was hit by the tires, but managed to get away safely .
 It had sped west, its back tires flattened, with an army of fifty cars and pickup trucks in hot pursuit . The car had been speeding west, with a fleet of 50 cars and trucks in pursuit .
 After six miles the bus had rolled to a stop, its tires worn down to the rims . The bus was pulled over after six miles . It was the first bus to be pulled over .
 The driver threw open the door and ran, as one witness later described it, ""like a rabbit" The driver then fled the scene like a rabbit, witnesses said .
 The passengers were sprawled on the floor of the bus, avoiding the flying glass . They screamed at the riders, who were screaming at the passengers . They were screaming as the glass shattered .
 Someone in the crowd hurled a firebomb, a Molotov cocktail, through the back window of the building . Then someone threw a firebombs through the window, police say .
 Thick smoke and flames began to fill the bus, riders rushed to the door and found they couldn't open it . The door of the bus was blocked by the flames and smoke .
 At that point a passenger in the front seat of the bus pulled a pistol and waved it at the crowd outside . The incident occurred in the early hours of Wednesday morning . The crowd was on the bus at the time .
 An Alabama state investigator was traveling undercover to keep an eye on the riders . He was an Alabama state state investigator who had been traveling undercover .
 Out the emergency exit door, led by Al Bigelow, tumbled the riders, choking and coughing . The riders were choking, coughing and coughing as they tumbled out of the room .
 One by one they fell to the grass, the last one climbing out just as the bus was rocked by a blast the fuel tank exploded . The fuel tank explodes in the middle of the road .
 The mob moved in, still cautious because of Cowling's pistol, but pecking around the edges, like birds darting at a wounded animal . Now the mob moved into the scene of the shooting, but still cautious, like a bird of prey .
 Henry Thomas, whose large size was usually a deterrent, was clubbed as he staggered away from the bus . Someone swung a baseball bat into the side of his head . Henry Thomas was killed in the shooting .
 Rocks and brick s heaved from people in the crowd too afraid to come closer . Rocks and bricks were heaved out of the crowd .
 A Trailways bus, which pulled into the terminal an hour later, was also attacked . The incident happened at the same time as the attack on the bus . The bus was attacked by a group of people in a separate incident .
 President Kennedy this year advised Americans to buy or build bomb shelters to protect themselves from the atomic fallout that would result if there were a nuclear exchange between America and the Soviet Union . President Kennedy also advised people to buy bomb shelters .
 "He knew that man 's heart, away from nature, becomes hard," he said . He knew that a lack of respect for growing, living things soon led to respect for humans too, he added .
 All the defense workers, the Rosie the Riveters and the transplants from other parts of the country, needed to eat . The defense workers needed food, and it was essential for them to survive .
 The pay was better in the factories than the fields, though, though . Some of the same people who had been clamoring to get any kind of work then turned up their noses at picking turnips and such .
 Mexicans provided the solution to the grower's need for labor— and their desire for cheap labor . The grower wanted to use Mexicans as a source of cheap labor for his food supply .
 Field hands were paid very little and given poor accommodations in which to live . In most of the cases, they were paid little or very little . The field hands were given poor conditions in which they lived .
 The origin of the workers had changed, but the situation for the employers had gotten much better . In other words, things had not improved for the workers . The situation for employers has gotten better, but things have not improved .
 The names of the migrant farmworkers had changed from Joad and Flowers to Chavez and Flores . The situation was still the same, but the situation still had to be changed .
 Workers seeking strength inherent in numbers formed the UFW union this year . Appealing to growers' sense of fairness had not succeeded, so the workers formed the union .
 Farm workers banded together to try to win concessions over wages and living conditions . Seeing no other way to improve their lot and that of those who would come after them, they banded up .
 Cesar Chavez, along with Dolores Huerta and Larry Itliong, was one of the leaders in this movement . Chavez was a leader of the movement in Mexico .
 The establishment-controlled press did their usual hatchet job on anyone who opposed the plutocracy, painting the UFW as an anarchistic bunch of scruffy, ignorant malcontents . The UFW is a union of people who oppose the government .
 "We are not saints because we are poor, but by the same measure neither are we immoral," he says . "You must understand ... that our membership and the hopes and aspirations of the hundreds of thousands of the poor and dispossessed that have been raised on our account are,
 We are men and women who have suffered and endured much, and not only because of our abject poverty but because we have been kept poor, they say . We have suffered much, not just because of poverty but also because of it, they have suffered, they've endured much .
 The colors of our skins, languages of our languages, the lack of formal education, the exclusion from the democratic process, the numbers of our slain in recent wars — all these burdens generation after generation have sought to demoralize us, to break our human spirit . The burden has sought to
 God knows that we are not beasts of burden, agricultural implements or rented slaves; we are men . We are men, not beasts or agricultural implements, but men. But God knows .
 We are locked in a death struggle against man's inhumanity to man in the industry that you represent, Barr says . And mark this well, Mr Barr, we are men locked in an end to the inhumanity of man, he says .
 "This struggle itself gives meaning to our life and ennobles our dying," says the author . "And this struggle itself gave meaning to us," she says .
 We hate the agribusiness system that seeks to keep us enslaved, and we shall overcome it not by retaliation or bloodshed but by a determined nonviolent struggle carried on by those masses of farm workers who intend to be free .
 Hendrix pretended he was gay to avoid being sent to Vietnam in the Army . He pretended to be gay to get him to Vietnam .
 While visiting the base psychiatrist at Fort Campbell, Hendrix claimed to be in love with one of his squad mates . Hendrix told the psychiatrist that he had a crush on a squad mate .
 Guitarist was found to be ill-suited for military life . Guitarist convinced the army that he was not suited for the job .
 Jimi claimed he was discharged after breaking his ankle on a parachute jump . His medical records mention no such injury . Jimi later claimed to have broken his ankle in parachute jump, but medical records show no injury .
 White Oxfordians were still apparently seething with bitter resentment over tales of the original ""War Between the States" Oxford had been burned by Union forces in 1864 .
 Many if not most residents of the city still held the same perverted views of race as had their forefathers of the previous century . Many of the residents of this century still held a perverted view of race . The city's history of race relations has been marred by the
 President John F Kennedy had to call in the paratroopers after resistance to the integration of the university by African-American James Meredith grew violent .
 Kennedy won the Presidency over Richard Nixon by less than one percent of the vote . 68% of the black vote had voted for him .
 The Ku Klux Klan had sent out a nationwide call to its faithful to gather in Oxford for a showdown . Besides a large number of rabidly racist locals, the tinderbox had been ignited by the KKK .
 As the situation escalated, feelings of loyalty to the U.S. vied with loyalty to Mississippi in the minds of many Mississippians, including members of the National Guard there .
 31,000 National Guard troops, many of them African-American, were sent to Mississippi . It was more than the United States had sent to Korea during the conflict there .
 He was killed in Vietnam in 1967, and thus is unavailable for comment . The matter was hushed up as much as possible .
 It was an embarrassing incident for the U.S. especially during the height of the cold war . The incident was embarrassing for the United States .
 When commanding officers later requested that some of their men receive medals for their actions in Oxford, these requests were denied, as the government did not want to give medals for soldiers fighting fellow American citizens .
 This makes one wonder whether MacArthur, Eisenhower, and Patton received any accolades for their violent expulsion of the Bonus Marchers from Washington in 1932 .
 Throughout U.S. History, the island of Cuba has been an object of national desire . The island has been the object of interest in the United States .
 The government has attempted to buy it, and has also attempted to acquire it by force . It has also tried to force the government to take it .
 In April of 1961, the infamous Bay of Pigs Invasion had met with resounding failure . In April 1961, President Kennedy Kennedy was assassinated by the CIA .
 President Kennedy, fearing Soviet reprisal, had at the last minute reneged on a promise to provide support from the U.S. Air Force to the operation . Adding insult to injury was the fact that President Kennedy feared Soviet reprisals .
 Eighteen months later, the Soviet Union was nearing completion of these facilities . The Soviet Union completed the facilities 18 months after the fall of communism .
 Before they could be completed, the United States found out about them . The U.S. learned about them before they were even finished .
 It may be, in fact, that Russia's actions were just as much defensive as offensive as they were offensive . Russia may be just as defensive as they are offensive, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Even after discussing evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba on October 1 6, Robert Kennedy held a mongoose meeting later that same day . He pushed for more aggressive action and pleaded for new ideas that could be taken against Cuba .
 The Cubans and Soviets were aware of much of this plotting, though certainly not all of it . The Soviets and Cubans were also aware of some of the plot, though not all, it was revealed .
 They definitely knew more than the American public, and it would certainly have influenced their behavior, the president's office says . They would have known more than anyone else, he says .
 Kennedy's hard line might have been viewed with considerably less sympathy, both in the United States and abroad . Had they known that the Cuban regime had good reason to wish to defend itself against U.S. subversion and potential aggression, Kennedy's actions would have been less sympathy .
 After a very tense standoff in which a third World War, a nuclear-punctuated one, was a real and imminent threat, the crisis was finally defused . After a tense standoff, the standoff was defused, and the war was averted .
 On Oct 28 th . Khrushchev ""blinked" and agreed to dismantle his bases in Cuba . The United States secretly agreed to reduce its own threat to the Soviet Union by removing fifteen Jupiter rockets that had been based in Turkey, as well as some in Italy .
 Carson was not the first to notice the connection between chemicals and bird mortality, though . Carson was also the first person to suggest that chemicals kill birds .
 When it rains after the poison is spread, the poison washes off and runs down to the water holes, and poisons the cattle and birds . The farmers say that when it rains, the poisoned animals and birds are poisoned by the rain .
 They say quite a few cattle have been killed, and that you hardly ever see birds anymore . They say that quite a lot of cattle have also been killed . The area has been devastated by the loss of cattle and other livestock .
 From this year on California had more people calling it home than any other state . Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, The Bronx, and Staten Island had the highest number of residents in California .
 Some say California did not become the top state population-wise until three years later, in 1965 . Some say it was California's first state population wise .
 The year that California became the most populous state coincided with the year that the last native Wiyot speaker died . Ironically, the year the last year that Californians were among the original inhabitants of the region— died .
 Will Shannon also died this year, on November 21st st in Visalia, California, at the age of 86 .
 "My son George took care of the arrangements, and he did a wonderful job," she says . "I'm very proud of my son George," she said .
 I realize that he couldn't have done what he did without the assistance and backing of his wife Estelle . She would do anything for us. She would be always good to dad and I She .
 "I'm so thankful for them and hope this short book will help all of my family come to know and understand us," she says .
 "I want them all to know and understand my William for the human being that he was," she said . She said .
 He was a man with good breeding, intelligence, and pride, something which a lot of people in today's fast moving, and grabbing world, just don't understand, let alone have . He was also a man of good breeding and intelligence .
 "I sincerely hope that all of my family will read these pages with pride and recall and pass along so many incidents I have slipped up on. I sincerely hope . All of the things I've done wrong are documented in these pages .
 William Frederick Shannon is the subject of a new book, "William Frederick Shannon" The book is dedicated to Shannon's children, grand children and grandchildren .
 In Gertie's recollections, she also relates how Will was thinking of her when he was sick and on the verge of death . Will was also thought of her as he was dying .
 1 helped make Honduras ""right"" for American fruit companies in 1903 . I brought light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar interests in 1916 . 1 helped . make Honduras "right" for American companies .
 Smedley D Butler: "I might have given Al Capone a few hints. Looking back on it, I might have ... given AlCapone a couple of hints" Butler was a Marine Corps general .
 It is one of the events in recent history that is etched in the mind of practically every American who was alive at the time . The events in the event are one of America's most significant moments in history .
 Even those who were young children at the time can usually recall where they were when they heard that their fearless leader, their Knight in Shining Armor, had been killed . The shooting of John Lennon in 1980, the Challenger Disaster in 1986, and, of course, 9/11, were
 Not who pulled the trigger on the rifle, but who was behind the plot and what their motive was . The motive was to find out what the plot was, and why it happened .
 There are almost as many speculations on who engineered the assassination of John F Kennedy as there are crackpots in Congress . There are also speculations about who was responsible for the assassination .
 The gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, was an ex-marine sharpshooter who had at one time attempted to defect to Russia . Oswald was a former Marine who had tried to defect from Russia .
 Oswald had announced from Moscow that he would never return to the U.S. In late 1959, Oswald announced that he had never returned to the United States . Oswald announced in late 1959 that he was never going to return to America .
 Oswald's dissident background would seem to lend weight to the theory that Cuba's Castro was behind the Kennedy assassination . The U.S. allegedly attempted to have Castro assassinated .
 A reason for drawing them into the circle of suspects is that Kennedy, had he lived, may have gotten America out of Vietnam . Kennedy may have helped get the U.S. out of the Vietnam War .
 There is little that some people will not stoop to when their ""livelihoods"" (read ""fortunes") are involved .
 LBJ did not agree with a policy of ""appeasement"" regarding the Vietnam issue . LBJ, as was surely known beforehand by many, did not .
 It was in Texas, Johnson's home state, where Kennedy was assassinated . It is an odd coincidence that it was in Johnson's Texas state .
 Oswald was killed by Dallas nightclub owner and reputed underworld figure Jack Ruby two days later . Oswald was himself killed by nightclub owner Jack Ruby in Dallas .
 Lincoln was assassinated in 1865, Garfield in 1881, McKinley in 1901, and Kennedy this year . Kennedy is the first president to be assassinated in office in 18 years .
 The phone hot line between the White House in Washington, D.C. and the Kremlin in Moscow became operational this year . The line is a hot line of sorts between Washington and Moscow .
 Zip codes help route mail to a growing population of millions . Zip codes were introduced to expedite the flow of mail to the world's growing population .
 A March on Washington coordinated by various African-American groups took place August 28 th of this year .
 Its purpose was to ""pass the Bill,"" to push through the Civil Rights legislation John F Kennedy had promised during his Presidential campaign . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Thirty special trains and two thousand chartered buses brought many of the participants to the scene of the march .
 The government bans sales of liquor for the first time since prohibition . Nervous about what might happen with a crowd of such magnitude attending the March, the government banned sales of alcohol .
 The Washington Senators canceled two home games . Washington Senators (an erstwhile baseball team) canceled two of their games .
 John Patton was probably one of these ready to respond to the scene at a moment's notice . Patton was likely one of the first responders at the scene of the shooting .
 Jackie Robinson, Paul Newman, Marlon Brando, Sidney Poitier and others were at the event . Others present included Paul Newman and Paul Newman . Other musical personages provided entertainment .
 Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Peter, Paul & Mary were among those who played in the 1960s . Bob Dylan was the last to play in the same way .
 The massive demonstration culminated with one of the best known speeches in American history, delivered by Martin Luther King, Jr. The speech is one of America's most famous moments of civil disobedience .
 "I have a dream that my four children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character," she says .
 This nation is still a place of cheap political leaders who build their careers on immoral compromises and ally themselves with open forms of political, economic and social exploitation . This nation still is a place where cheap politicians build their career on immoral compromise .
 The speech as actually delivered by Lewis was only slightly less confrontational in tone in tone . Lewis' speech was actually delivered in a more confrontational tone .
 Lewis struck the word ""cheap"" from the above draft of the speech . Lewis is currently a Congressman from Georgia .
 Du Bois died of natural causes in his adopted home of Ghana . He was author of ""The Soul of Black Folks"" and other seminal African-American works .
 The peaceful demonstration called for the passing of civil rights legislation, including banning discrimination in public accommodations . The demonstration was held in support of the bill .
 King would win the Nobel Peace Prize, see the sweeping Civil Rights Act signed into law the next year . King would be assassinated four years later, four years after he was assassinated .
 Four little girls were killed in Birmingham, Alabama, when a black church full of children was bombed . Just a few days after the March on Washington, four little girls died in Birmingham . The March on D.C. march was held in Washington, DC, on March 18, March
 Martin Luther King Jr. gave the eulogy for the girls in Birmingham, Alabama . The speech was three weeks after he delivered his ""I Have a Dream" speech .
 Alabama Governor George Wallace learned nothing from his fellow white supremacist Orval Faubus' come-uppance in Arkansas in 1957 . Wallace was one of the most prominent white supremacists in the country .
 Alabamans had been given tacit approval for their acts of terrorism, by the attitude that Wallace had displayed this year as he blocked the integration of Tuskegee High School .
 The prime perpetrator in the bombing was not brought to justice until 14 years later, in 1977 . Robert Chambliss was the prime perpetrator of the bombing . The prime suspect was never found guilty of the crime .
 Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson, followed through by shepherding the bill himself . Johnson said that was the best way to honor Kennedy's memory .
 Many in the Civil Rights movement thought their goals had been achieved and their work was done . At this point, many in the movement thought that their work had been done .
 The various Civil Rights Groups, such as SNCC (Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee), SCLC (Southern Christian Leadership Conference), CORE (CORE) and SDS (SDS) never seemed able to coalesce and cooperate .
 Rather than being synergetic, they dissipated much of their potential combined energy and power by fragmenting into fractious factions . Thus, rather than being .synergetic , they dissipate much of . their potential . energy and . power .
 Infighting, egos, and ambitions sunk a lot of popular musical groups, sports teams, and the halls of government . Infighting also happens in popular music groups and sports teams . It's not the first time a group has been in trouble .
 Fighting for integration in society at large, they — for the most part — failed to integrate within their own like-purposed groups . They failed to do so in their own groups, they said .
 SNCC members rejected the ""N" (Nonviolent) part of their name . SNCC was founded in the 1960s and '60s, but many members rejected it .
 They now espoused segregation themselves, wanting nothing to do with a biracial society . Whereas integration had formerly been their goal, integration was their goal .
 They self-destructed and were, in effect, ""conquered"" by white racists by becoming just like them . Thus, they self destructed and became just like white racists . They selfdestructed .
 Unofficial presence of military 'advisers' had been in the country up until this alleged provocative act by the communists in the north . This contrasted sharply with the unofficial presence of unofficial military advisers .
 Even superhawk Robert McNamara admitted in 1995 that there had been no attack in Tonkin Gulf on the 4 th of August, 1964 .
 In 1 965, Theodore Theodore's home caught on fire and was completely destroyed, taking Theodore's . Theodore was staying with his granddaughter and her family in the north, and staying with her family . Theodore's house was destroyed by the fire . Theodore and Laura's home was destroyed in
 Robert and Belle, Theodore and Dollie were settled in the old school, and the Gibney s had purchased a trailer to live in . Robert stayed with Belle and Belle and Theodore, and Theodore lived in the school's old school . The Gibney family lived in a trailer .
 Previously, an outhouse and separate shower house had served the calls of nature and hygiene . Previously, a separate shower and outhouse were also used to serve the calls .
 They still got their electricity by means of a large generator housed in a separate building . They still used a generator to get their electricity .
 Communication with neighbors was via CB radio, as telephone service had not yet reached as far as them . Communications with neighbors had to be made via CB radios .
 Other outbuildings at The Ranch included bunk houses for occasional hired hands, tool sheds, and barns . The Ranch was built in the 1930s .
 Malcolm X rejected the surname ""Little"" as that was not a name passed down by his earliest ancestors, but rather a name assigned to his slave ancestors . Little actually being the name of the slave-owning family .
 Malcolm X was killed on February 2 1 st this year, apparently by a rival faction of Muslims led by Louis Farrakhan . Malcolm X's death was apparently an assassination attempt by a Muslim faction led by the Muslim leader .
 Malcolm X was also known by the Muslin name El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz . He was a highly-intelligent ""self-made man" and a powerful motivator .
 After accepting Muslim teachings, this man who had previously been a notorious womanizer exercised self-control by thereafter refraining from sex until he married . The man refrained from having sex until marriage .
 Regardless of what you think of Malcolm's beliefs or approach, you must admit that he was sincere . Malcolm was sincere, even if you disagree with his views, he was genuine .
 He broke away from the Muslim movement led by Louis Farrakhan when he discovered that he was not living a morally upright life, as required by Muslim teachings . He said he broke up from the movement when he found that he believed Farrakhhan was not a Muslim .
 He once said that the only white person he might possibly accept was the violent abolitionist John Brown . He said that he might accept John Brown — and maybe not even him .
 Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. did not see eye-to-eye on civil rights for their race . King and X were both prominent figures in the civil rights movement in the U.S.
 Towards the end of his life, though, Malcolm began to moderate his stance . Malcolm was known for his controversial views .
 He was beginning to see humankind as a united whole, rather than in terms of black and white, he said . He was starting to see humanity as a whole, not just black or white .
 Just at that point, when he was perhaps on the verge of an epiphany, Malcolm was executed, he was executed . "Malcolm was executed," he said .
 Malcolm seemed to have metamorphosed into a different person from pre-Mecca Malcolm, or was at least in the process of morphing . Malcolm was at the center of the story in the early years of his career .
 As the marchers approached the far side of the bridge, Major John Cloud ordered them to turn back . The marchers were ordered to return to the bridge .
 Fifty policemen moved forward, knocking the first ten to twenty demonstrators off their feet . Fifty policemen knocked the first 10 to 20 demonstrators off the feet .
 People screamed and struggled to break free as their packs and bags were scattered across the pavement . The incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Tear gas was fired, and then lawmen of horseback charged into the stumbling protesters . Police fired tear gas at protesters, but tear gas was not fired, police said .
 Segregationists actually hurt their cause and hastened on legal redress . Segregationist actually hurt his cause, hastened the legal redress.
 In a sense it represented a high point in modern American, probably the nation's finest hour in terms of civil rights . "In a sense, this was probably the best hour in the civil rights era," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It was a high-point
 One writer called it the ""nova of the civil rights movement" One writer said it brought to a close the nonviolent struggle that had reshaped the South .
 Hatred, prejudice, and violence cannot be gaveled out of cold, unreasoning hearts . Hatred and prejudice cannot be genteered out, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Hatred is not an excuse for violence, it's an opportunity to
 We could order that hamburger now. . . . if we had the dollar to pay for it. We could . order it now.
 Now that we had secured our bedrock, fundamental rights the rights of access and accommodation and the right to vote the movement was moving into a new phase of gaining equal footing in this society . The movement is moving to a more complex and more complex stage, with a more stickier and more
 The problem we faced now was not something so visible or easily identifiable as a Bull Connor blocking our way. It was not so visible that it was not easily identifiable . The problem now is not that the Bull Connor blocked our way, it was that the problem was not that .
 Now we need to deal with the subtler and more complex issues of attaining economic and political power, of dealing with attitudes and actions held deep inside people and institutions .
 1965 is considered to be the end of the modern Civil Rights era . Dealing with racism is another. 1965 was considered the beginning of the Civil Rights movement .
 Supreme Court victory in 1954 (Brown Board of Education) culminated with the Voting Rights Act just delineated . What began with Brown Board of education in 1954 is now delineated in terms of voting rights act .
 Congress had passed the Civil Rights Act in 1964, but some states moved to circumvent it . Some states circumvented some aspects of the act, including the use of racial segregation .
 California responded with Proposition 14, which moved to block the fair housing components of the Civil Rights Act . California, for instance, responded with Prop. 14 .
 This, and other acts, created a feeling of injustice and despair in the inner cities, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is not the first time I've seen this kind of violence in the U.S. history, but it's not the last time
 A seemingly routine traffic stop in south-central Los Angeles provided the spark that provoked the six-days of unrest . The incident occurred in the city of Los Angeles .
 The final tally was thirty-four dead, more than one thousand injured, and almost four thousand arrested . Almost four thousand people were arrested in the attack .
 The high jobless rate in the inner city, along with sub-par housing and schools, is a problem . The inner city is home to the highest unemployment rate in Australia's history .
 This conclusion was apparently not given much credence, as no real efforts were subsequently made to remedy this situation . No real efforts have been made to correct this situation, according to the BBC .
 Or perhaps those in power didn't really care enough to try to do anything about it . Or perhaps the conclusion was accepted, but perhaps the end of the story was accepted .
 America's involvement in the Vietnam war (called ""The American War"" by those in Vietnam) continued to escalate . Meanwhile, America continued to engage in the war .
 If you take the game of life seriously, if you take your nervous system seriously, you must turn on, tune in, and drop out . The energy process is the most important part of your life .
 Carroll Dale would have to be carried from the field on a stretcher due to an injury to Boyd Dowler . Carroll Dale was elevated to the Packers' primary receiver threat after Dowler's injury .
 Advertorial hype and hoopla surrounding the game is all over and over . As evidence of that, witness the hype surrounding the advertisements interspersed between the actual playing of the game .
 Some people without much or any interest in football watch the half-day extravaganza due to their curiosity regarding the heights of creativity and depths of inanity to which the marketers will respectively ascend and descend .
 The war in Vietnam, where men were not only being carried from the field on stretchers, but were also dying horrible deaths by the thousands, put the relative importance of a mere football contest in perspective . It should have .
 John Perry Patton was born February 28, 1941 in Woodland, California . He was born in 1941 . Patton was a member of the Patton family .
 John began spending less and less time at his foster home and more and more time at the home of his schoolmate Benjamin ""Benny" Kollenborn .
 Patton children had lived with a succession of foster families before . Patton had lived in a series of foster homes before being adopted by the family .
 Before long, the Albert and Alice Kollenborn family unofficially adopted John . He was accepted as their son and brother by the entire family . John was accepted by the family as their child and brother .
 There was no official change of custody, but for all practical purposes John became a Kollenborn .
 The Kollenborns never sought, nor got, any such stipend . Presumably the foster family with whom he had been living continued to receive government money for his support .
 He used this term of endearment, not because she was especially old or acted in any way antiquated, but because for him the designations ""mom"" and ""mother"" bore a negative connotation .
 In 1959, the Kollenborns relocated to Coos Bay, Oregon, and John made the move up the coast with them . John moved with them in 1959 .
 Sharon Kollenborn 's future husband Larry Noland was with him at the time of his death . With him were his buddy Benny and his future wife Sharon . Noland also attended the funeral .
 Larry staunched the bleeding by holding John's face together with his hands until medical personnel arrived . Larry held the bleeding together until he could be saved .
 John's scar can be seen in one of the photographs in particular near the end of this chapter . The scar is visible in a photograph taken by John's family .
 John Patton enlisted in the army in June 1959 after graduating from high school . Patton was a major force in World War II .
 John's older brother Barrett had already been in the military for seven years and was a paratrooper . John's brother Barrett also served in the Army and served in Iraq .
 John had been stationed in Germany at the time he volunteered for combat duty . He was stationed in the country when he volunteered to go to war .
 Nothing on the streets of Fort Bragg, California, or Coos Bay, Oregon, nor in peacetime Germany, could have prepared John for Vietnam .
 Nothing in Fort Bragg, North Carolina or Fort Benning could have prepared him for all that he would face, either . John attended three weeks of intensive jump training .
 Hours of routine drudgery and boredom punctuated by moments of sheer terror . The film is set to be released on Friday at 8pm ET .
 The mistakes which can cost you your life are not always of your own making . And the mistakes that can cost your life can not always be the ones you make, say experts .
 Combat is sometimes portrayed as adventurous and glorious fun, not unlike children playing Cowboys and Indians with their neighborhood friends, or ""weekend warriors" engaging in paintball contests with their buddies . Combat is often portrayed as adventure and fun, with children playing with their friends .
 For those in the infantry in Vietnam, combat was anything but glamorous, or fun . For those who served in the U.S. during the Vietnam War, it was anything less glamorous or fun.
 They couldn't call ""time out"" and come in for lunch when their mother called them, nor could they look forward to downing a few cold ones after wiping paint splotches off their clothing and skin . The children were forced to take a break from their jobs when they were
 Recreational backpackers today are cautioned against carrying more than 25% of their body weight . Backpackers are told not to carry 25% body weight, lest their trek become an ordeal .
 The life of an infantryman in Vietnam consisted of humping day after day in the monotonous mountains and valleys . Life of the infantryman was humping .
 Monsoon rains, two to three inches per day, soaked them to the point that their fatigues rotted off their bodies . In the rainy season, nearcontinuous monsoon rains soaked them .
 The jungle floors were a quagmire, making each step forward a major effort . The jungle floor floor was a big problem for the first time .
 In addition to the heavy weight of the ammo, food, water, and other necessities they had to carry, the infantrymen had to endure extreme heat, humidity, and trails so muddy and slippery that simply marching along resulted in many sprained and broken ankles .
 Annelid worms can attain a length of three inches and are equipped with suckers at each end . They live in water or wet earth, and can reach three inches long .
 They would even take up residence in the ears and noses of the soldiers while they slept . The soldiers would even sleep with them in their sleep .
 Rare was the man who found no leeches on his body at the end of a day's march . Rare was that he would find no leech on any of his body .
 The grunts usually operated under triple canopy jungles, which made everything around them appear dark and dreary . Adding to the negative psychological aspects of being physically uncomfortable, the grunts were often operating under triple jungle canopy .
 Officers selected to attend stateside career-enhancing courses sometimes declined them in order to remain a Sky Soldier . The Sky Soldier was selected to remain in the U.S.
 General William Westmoreland used the ""Sky Soldiers" as a fire brigade . They were sent wherever the fighting was heaviest during the Second World War II .
 General Westmoreland pursued a strategy of winning a war of attrition . In other wars the objective had normally been to control important strategic areas such as road junctions, bridges, hills, ports, and such .
 He determined to make contact with the enemy, engage them in combat, and kill more of them than the number of U.S. soldiers they were able to kill . He was determined to kill more than any other American soldier .
 Westmoreland figured that the North Vietnamese would either eventually run out of M-16 fodder or lose the will to fight . The North Vietnamese were either running out of ammunition or losing the will .
 It probably surprises nobody that this could be a very dangerous proposition for the hunters as well as the hunted . It is not surprising that this is a dangerous proposition to hunters and the hunted.
 The place is Ben Hoa I'm in the 1 73 airborne division I just got through with some jungle training . I'm just in the jungle division. I'm not afraid to go to the jungle. I just want to go for the jungle training. I've got a jungle training
 This battle took place in Kontum Province in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam . It is near the tri-border area with Laos and Cambodia . The battle was fought in the region's Central Highlands .
 The natives no doubt use a different name for the hill, but on the contour maps the military used, hill masses were designated by a number that corresponded to the most conspicuous hill's elevation above mean sea level, in meters . The number corresponded with the height of the most
 Its north face presented itself to the American base camp at Dak To, about three miles distant . The north face was found by the Americans three miles from Dak To .
 Alpha Company was helicoptered into an LZ north of Hill 1338 on June 18 th , 1967 . Alpha Company helicoptered in to the LZ .
 The Dak To base camp had been attacked by mortar and rocket fire the day before . They knew that members of the NVA were in the area, as they knew that they were .
 Alpha Company humped across the north side of the huge hill searching for the enemy . For the next two days, Alpha Company searched the north of the hill . Alpha Company was on patrol for two days .
 They did find a well-developed trail on the hillside and set up ambushes along it, but no NVA moved down the trail . The NVA did find the trail, but to no avail .
 Up until the 21 st of June, things had been relatively quiet - although Alpha and Charlie had been the targets of sniper fire . No enemy forces had been confronted head-on, and Alpha suffered no casualties .
 At 5m. on June 21st , Alpha received orders to return overland to the base camp at Dak To . At 5:30pm, Alpha was ordered to return to Dak To. At 5.30pm on June 22st, Alpha returned overland .
 It was considered gospel among the grunts that they should avoid repeat use of trails . The grunts were told to avoid repeat trails .
 This rule was a precaution against the possibility that the enemy could have set booby traps or might be lying in ambush along the trail . This rule is a precautionary measure against the enemy, which could have been set in ambush .
 Captain Milton didn't have much other choice . Due to the topography, he was forced to abandon the ship .
 To deviate from the existing trail would have meant cutting a new trail on the steep slopes, which was covered with the typical dense jungle growth . The new trail was built in a bid to avoid cutting it through dense jungle .
 Doing so would have meant spending several days on the return trip, as opposed to a few hours if they used the existing ridge trail . Using the existing trail would have taken several days to complete the trip .
 Alpha Company rose early the next morning, June 22 nd , to continue their trek towards the base . Alpha Company camped for the night before continuing their trek to the base base .
 Alpha's Point Squad began the hump towards base camp, moving down the hill . Alpha Point Squad was on their way to base camp .
 At 6:58 am, they came upon ten to fifteen NVA soldiers crossing the trail, who opened fire on them . Before going far, at 6:57 am, the men were attacked by the NVA . The incident occurred at 6.58 am on the trail .
 The relative quiet of Alpha Company's early-morning march abruptly changed into a chorus of automatic weapon fire . Alpha Company is based in Fort Lauderdale, Florida .
 Some of his men had been hit; he had placed the remainder in a defensive position . The rest of his troops were placed in defensive positions . Some of the men were hit; some of them were hit .
 Milton then radioed the TOC , and reported Alpha's contact with the enemy . Milton then reported the situation to TOC . Milton reported the contact with enemy .
 The officers at the TOC command were not, at first, overly concerned with Alpha's predicament . They were not overly concerned .
 They apparently didn't perceive the gravity of the situation, not realizing the strength of the entrenched NVA unit . The NVA is an entrenched unit in the South Korean capital .
 General Deane concluded that Alpha had stumbled across a moving number of NVA, rather than that they had walked into an ambush . Deane: Alpha stumbled across moving NVA rather than walked into ambush .
 As they were on their way to do that, though, they too were attacked — from the front and from both flanks . As they are on the way to doing that, they also were attacked .
 Milton ordered the 2 nd platoon to withdraw . Milton requested heavy artillery fire to cover their movement back up the hill . Milton ordered heavy artillery to cover the movement . Milton was killed in the battle .
 The NVA were at this point so close to the Sky Soldiers, ""hugging them,"" that the artillery fire was ineffective . The artillery fire would have also meant endangering the 2 nd platoon .
 They were ordered to link up with the 2 nd platoon and help them move to a more defensible area . The 2nd platoon was ordered to help the 2nd and 3rd platoon move to the area .
 Captain Milton reported to the TOC that his men were under heavy fire . After half an hour of heavy fighting, Captain Milton said his men had been attacked by the enemy .
 This by necessity made the supporting artillery fire temporarily unavailable . The support of the U.S. forces was temporarily unavailable for the first time .
 As airstrikes are less accurate than artillery bombardment, they need to provide a bigger cushion between the area they attack and where their own men are located . Airstrikes need to be able to avoid being hit by artillery bombardment in Syria .
 The airstrikes actually afforded the enemy an opportunity to close the gap with the GIs . The safest place for them to be, as far as avoiding the aerial attack, was to move as close to the Americans as possible .
 Major Watson, realizing the airstrikes would be a mistake, initially refused to move the artillery when ordered to do so . Major Watson initially refused the move of the artillery .
 General Deane broke in on the radio and overrode Watson's refusal, confirming the order to shift the artillery . Watson refused to move the artillery, but Deane overruled the decision .
 For five minutes, from 8:20 to 8:25m., the fast movers dropped bombs along the east side of the ridge . The fast-moved bombs were dropped from 8.20 to 9.25m.
 American soldiers in Vietnam used two types of grenades: Smoke grenades, and fragmentation grenades . Smoke grenades were used by American soldiers during the Vietnam War . Fragment grenades were also known as smoke grenades .
 Frag grenades are the type that are destructive, and are used against the enemy . Frag grenades can be destructive and can be used to inflict damage on the enemies .
 To mark wind direction for aircraft, and to mark the location of the American soldiers, so gunships would not strafe that area . It was used to mark wind directions for aircraft and to . mark the locations of American soldiers .
 The dense jungle dispersed so widely that it was impossible for the gunships to get an accurate fix on the Paratroopers' position . This did not aid the American air support in identifying the position of their countrymen, because the dense jungle dissipated and dispersed the smoke .
 From the ground, their location was plain enough to see, and the NVA used that to the disadvantage and regret of the Americans . However!— from the . ground, the . NVA . used that against the Americans. However! — from the air, their . location was
 NVA now had a fairly precise bead on the American Companies' position . The NVA had a relatively accurate bead on American companies' positions .
 Within seconds, NVA mortar rounds began crashing into the area occupied by Alpha Company . The mortar rounds were fired at Alpha Company, which was attacked by the NVA .
 The damage had been done, though, though — the NVA had them trapped, like fish in a barrel . The damage was done, but the damage had already been done .
 At 9m., Captain Milton committed his first platoon to try to save his besieged 2 nd and 3 rd platoons . At 9:30 p.m. the first platoon was committed .
 1 st Platoon had to plow right through their lines to get to their embattled buddies . The NVA had the 2 nd and 3 rd platoons surrounded by the 2 st and 3 st platooms .
 Bravo Company, which had been providing security at the base camp, had by this time been ordered to move out in assistance of Alpha . Bravo Company was ordered out of the camp by the end of the day . Bravo was ordered to leave the camp in support of Alpha.
 They were carrying two of their number who had been KIA and others WIA because of heavy enemy presence in front of them and to their flanks . Heavy enemy presence and due to having to cut their way through the jungle as they went; .
 Charlie Company's commander, Captain Ron Leonard, believed that the NVA had set a trap and were waiting to ambush his Company as they went to Alpha's defense . Captain Leonard believed that his Company would be ambushed by the enemy .
 Leonard sent out point squads in cloverleaf reconnaissance patrols, both in front and behind his main body of soldiers .
 Charlie Company was being berated by the officers at the TOC for their slow progress, but Leonard would not put his men at risk needlessly . Charlie Company would not be risking their lives .
 Unlike Alpha Company, Charlie Company was blazing a new trail rather than re-using their old trail . This, too, was significantly slowing down their progress . Charlie Company is blazing new trails rather than using their old trails .
 Radio contact with Alpha's forward elements was lost shortly after 1 1m. Shortly after 1.1m., radio contact with the Alpha team was lost .
 Bravo Company had arrived on the scene, joining the fight . Bravo Company also arrived at the scene before the fight began .
 Half of Charlie's men were on their knees, retching and crying, and with running noses . Soon half of Charlie’s men were retching, crying and running noses, and soon had running noses. Soon they were on the knees, crying, running noses and retching
 Charlie Company's gas masks had become wet in the earlier downpours . The masks were not effective in filtering out the noxious fumes . Charlie Company Company's masks were also wet .
 Bravo Company was sent to meet Charlie Company and lead them to the site of the furious battle in which Alpha was engaged . Some members of Bravo Company were sent there to meet the Charlie Company . Bravo Company members were sent to lead Charlie Company to the battle site .
 Lieutenant Judd hoped to have Alpha Company back at Dak To base camp by 3:00m. Originally, Lieutenant Judd had hoped to be back at 3:30m. Lieutenant Judd said he hoped to return to base camp within hours .
 Most of his men would arrive at the scene much later than that, and many would never make it alive . Many would never be alive, not alive, at any rate . Most of them would arrive later that day .
 Charlie Company managed to get many of the WIA and what was left of Alpha Company to the CP by 6:50 m. m. Although they were met with heavy sniper fire from the trees and surrounding area, Charlie Company pressed on . Charlie Company pushed on .
 One platoon was placed in ambush by the NVA . The soldiers camped there for the night, artillery directed against potential NVA withdrawal routes .
 Bravo and Charlie Companies worked together clearing the battlefield and looking for remaining WIAs and KIAs . Bravo, Charlie and Charlie companies cleared the battlefield . Bravo worked together to clear the battlefield of remaining WIA and KIAAs .
 Of the seventy-six KIAs from Alpha Company, fortythree of them had been executed . Of the sixty-six that were executed, 23 of them were executed .
 This was surmised by the exit wounds the forty-three had in their heads . This was the reason for their exit wounds in the head .
 Although his head was split open, the coup de grace had only stunned him . It was only the split of his skull that left him with a broken skull .
 General Westmoreland flew in to address the survivors and praise them for their courage . The survivors were taken to the hospital and treated for their injuries .
 He congratulated them on their victory, saying that they had ""whipped"" the enemy . Standing on the hood of a jeep, he said that he had 'whipped' the enemy.
 John Patton was among the seventy-six killed, but he was apparently not one of the forty-three executed . Patton was killed in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 The June 29 th , 1967, issue of the Oakland Tribune carried a story about John's death as well as that of a ""Private Valdez"" who, rather oddly, is not mentioned at all in the story .
 Two families each knew they had lost a loved member among the 75 dead in Oakland and Antioch today . Two families knew they'd lost loved ones among those killed .
 Sgt. Linn A Patton's parents were waiting for the body of their son, Sgt. Patton, in their home at 1821 Sixth Avenue here . Patton was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head in the head .
 "We had a call again in the morning, and we believe our boy is on his way home," police say .
 Barrett with 13 years of service and John with just short of eight . Both were career Army men . Barrett and John were both career Army officers .
 Patton heard of his son's death when officers contacted him at the Oakland Naval Supply Center . Patton is a warehouseman at the warehouse where he works . Patton's son was found dead at the center .
 Patton and Valdez were attached to an airfield out of Saigon . They were part of a special airborne battalion in the 1 73 rd Airborne Brigade . Patton and Private Valdez died in the Vietnam War .
 Sergeant Patton, 26, went to grammar school in Oakland, and high school in Fort Bragg . Sgt. Patton went to high school, grammar school, and grammar school .
 Following the ambush, three men spent the next two days positively identifying the dead American soldiers . Three men spent that day positively identifying Americans killed in ambush .
 The NVA were known to sometimes switch dog tags on the corpses of their victims . This painstaking duty was necessary because of the NVA's use of dog tags . The dog tags were used to identify the victims of NVA soldiers .
 The Americans had — by the own count, anyway — killed more of the NVA than they had lost themselves . The U.S. had killed more than they'd lost themselves, the U.N. said .
 The severity of Alpha's losses did cause figurative ""heads to roll"" — one head, anyway .
 A fiasco of that magnitude had to be somebody's fault; scapegoat was needed . A scapegoat is needed to be needed for the fiasco of this type of fiasco .
 The blame was pinned on Charlie Company's Captain Leonard, who had supposedly moved too slowly in coming to Alpha's assistance . This even though it was realized after the battle that Leonard's situation was much more difficult than those at the TOC realized .
 MACV issued a press release trumpeting the great victory . The MACV (Military Assistance Command, Vietnam) issued a statement trumping the victory .
 Americans had driven the NVA from the region, but they realized that situation was only temporary . The surviving participants knew better, though, though .
 For the moment, the Americans controlled some strategic hilltops, but they would soon leave, returning those hardwon hills to the jungle and the enemy . The U.S. would soon return the hills, returning them to the jungles and enemy .
 Sky Soldiers held a poignant tribute to those from their ranks who had fallen in the battle . A pair of jump boots placed in rank to represent each fallen paratrooper .
 The sight of dozens and dozens of boots arranged in neat rows packed an emotional wallop . The ceremony was a ceremony the participants would never forget .
 America's largest anti-war protests took place four months later, in October, as tens of thousands marched on Washington DC . America's biggest anti war protest took place in October of 2003 .
 CNN's John Defterios says the news of the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam did not seem to reach those engaged in combat in the jungles of Asia .
 On a single day in a single battle, in a solitary company of soldiers, in the midst of that peaceful-sounding, sunny season, seventy-six young men lost their lives .
 John Patton's name is located on the Vietnam Memorial Wall in Washington, D.C., at section 22E 047 . Patton was a member of the Army National Guard .
 Individuals may see the moral light and voluntarily give up their unjust posture . But as Reinhold Niebuhr has reminded us, groups are more immoral than individuals . Groups are more moral than individuals.
 From the song ""Abraham, Martin and John"" by Dion Dion ""When the Kennedys and King were assassinated people wailed and moaned over the ""sick"" society. I just looked around and he 's gone. — from the song.""
 Most people took the assassinations as a symptom of a deep inner rot that had suddenly set in . Most people thought it was a sign of inner rot . The assassinations took place in the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated April 4 th in Birmingham, Alabama by James Earl Ray . An Indian Manifesto""
 Whether Ray Ray was acting alone or had accomplices is not known; not by anyone who's saying . Ray is believed to have been acting alone . Ray's actions are not known whether he was alone .
 The letter allegedly had as its intent embarrassing King into resigning from the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . King allegedly resigned from the conference after receiving the letter .
 King had planned to galvanize blacks and whites alike at a massive camp-in scheduled to take place in Washington, D.C. later in the month . King planned to mobilize blacks and white alike at the massive camp in Washington .
 Conspiracy theorists say the CIA hypnotically brainwashed Sirhan Khan . The most common allegation among conspiracy theorists is that he was brainwashed by the CIA .
 Sirhan had written about his desire to kill Kennedy for his support of Israel in the Six Day War fought in the Middle East, which had begun a year earlier . Although he claims he acted unconsciously, Sirhan said he had acted unconsciously .
 Anti-Vietnam war demonstrations took place at the Democratic Convention in Chicago this year . Chicago police were involved in a violent confrontation with anti-war demonstrators .
 A federal commission investigated the matter and labeled it ""police riots" The commission claimed Mayor Richard Daley had incited his police force to use excessive force against demonstrators .
 Hubert Humphrey was nominated as the Democratic candidate over Eugene McCarthy . Eugene McCarthy was nominated for the presidency in 1964 .
 Woodstock, billed as ""three days of peace and music,"" is a touchstone of Hippie culture . Woodstock was billed as three days of "peace and music" and billed as "peace, music"
 The ""Happening"" ended up being four days of mainly music, drugs, and mud .
 Charlton Heston plays the apparent sole survivor of San Francisco in the post-apocalyptic movie "The Omega Man" Heston played the character in the film .
 He is depicted entering a movie theater and projecting for himself the movie that chronicled this event . He is shown in the film projected for himself in the movie .
 His character had seen the movie so many times that he is able to ""sing"" along with Country Joe and the Fish during their performance . His character was able to sing along with the Fish .
 Country Joe McDonald was the leader of a jug band turned folk-rock ensemble (""The Fish"") that was very outspoken in its political views . McDonald was a San Francisco native himself, and a former soldier .
 The mission was called Apollo 11, the command ship was named Columbia, and the lunar vehicle the Eagle . Apollo 11 was the first mission to fly to the moon in 1969 .
 Armstrong and Aldrin spent almost a full day on the moon, setting up scientific experiments, collecting rock samples, and marking their territory with a flag and a plaque . The two men set up experiments, collected rock samples and marked their territory .
 It is one of those events that virtually every American alive at the time clearly recalls . Along with the assassination of John F Kennedy and 9/11, it was one of the most significant events in American history . It is also one of many events that have been remembered in the U.
 "Sayin ' it 's your job don't make it right, Hoss. Four dead in Ohio. — from the song ""Four Dead in Ohio"" by Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young . Crosby, N.Y. and Young are credited with the song "
 The Ohio National Guard was sent in to prevent such interference from continuing . The Ohio State Guard was deployed to prevent further interference from protesters .
 At Ole Miss in Oxford, Mississippi, tensions escalated over the question of who should be allowed on campus . The situation was similar to the situation eight years earlier at Ole Miss .
 It is quite possible that many of the Guardsmen did not want to be there and felt no animosity toward the students . It's quite possible many Guardsmen didn't want to see the students at the school .
 Guardsmen were called in to quell the disturbance at Ole Miss in 1962 . Guardsmen didn't necessarily agree with their orders, but followed them nonetheless .
 Guardsmen opened fire on students protesting the Vietnam War . Guardsmen may have felt sympathy for the students or their cause, but some of them opened fire .
 The most widely known photo of the event depicts a visibly distraught young woman bending over an apparently dead young man . The photo was taken at the scene of the apparent shooting .
 Most assume, no doubt, that the young woman was a student at Kent State . Most assume she was a Kent State student .
 The despair and disbelief her posture seemed to evoke represented the way most people reacted to the situation . Her posture was similar to that of many people in the U.S.
 Albert Kollenborn's stepfather Jim Branstuder died in Hiwasse, Arkansas, on February 5 th of this year at the age of ninety .
 James is buried with his wife of forty-five years and mother of his three daughters . Ruie Lee Elizabeth Elizabeth ""Lizzie"" Kollenborn Davidson Branstuder at Mt. Mt. James . He was buried with wife of 40 years and . mother of three daughters,
 Pleasant Cemetery is located near Hiwasse and Gravette, not far from Bentville, Bella Vista, and Dug Hill .
 All three of Lizzie and James Branstuder's children were girls whose surnames changed when they married . Jim's stirp passed away with him . All three children of the Branstuders were girls who changed their surnames .
 Albert and Myrtle Kollenborn did not know each other, but they did have something significant in common . Albert's estranged father was Harry, the estranged father of Myrtle's ex-husband . Myrtle was Albert's wife, Albert's father, and Albert's mother .
 Myrtle J Kollenborn, 85, of 2712 North Inyo, died Sept. 27, in a Bakersfield hospital . Services will be held at Hillcrest Mortuary Chapel Wednesday at 3m.
 Kollenborn was born in La Harpe, Kan., and had resided in Bakersfield for the past 51 years . He was born .
 Kollenborn is survived by two sons, two daughters, two sons and two daughters . Mrs. Bakersfield is also survived by her husband and two sons .
 Anna Barnett of Tulsa, Okla.; 1 5 grandchildren, and 29 great-grandchildren . Anna Barnett is survived by her husband and five children .
 Pallbearers will be Jack Roberts, Gary Wheeler, Charlie Wheeler, Leonard Koll, Donald Koll and Leroy Koll . The funeral home will be held in New York City, New York .
 Honorary bearers will be Larry Neal, Ed Norris, Trayfo Eagle, Charles Martin and Johnny Travao . The ceremony will be held in New York City .
 The surname ""Koll"" among the pallbearers is suspiciously similar to Kollenborn . The surname "Koll" was suspiciously close to Koll's name .
 Cecil LaRue Kollenborn (who was himself a son of Richard Lee Kollenbirth) had a son named Donald . Cecil LaLaRue and Richard Lee had Donald . Donald was Cecil's first son, Cecil's son Donald .
 Cecil's Donald was thus a 1 st cousin once removed of Henry Harrison ""Harry ""Harry"" Kollenborn, Myrtle's erstwhile husband .
 Donald was probably born around 1930, as his father Cecil LaRue had been born 1906 . Donald's father Cecil was also born in 1906, as Donald was born in 1930 .
 Perhaps Roy's feelings toward his father were bitter enough that he effected a change in name for his son . Leroy could have made that change himself, or Roy could have changed his name .
 Leroy was likely born in the 1930s, as his father Roy had been born 1910 . Leroy's father Roy was also born in 1910, as he was born in 1911 .
 This Donald and this Leroy were, then, probably about forty years old at this time, and so this possibility is certainly feasible . This Donald was probably about 40 years old when he died, so this could be possible, he says .
 These ""papers"" revealed how the government had systematically deceived the public about what was really going on in Vietnam . The government's "papers" revealed how it was systematically deceived by the public .
 The documents reveal how the CIA conspired to overthrow and assassinate South Vietnamese President Diem . The Tonkin Gulf Resolution had been drafted months before the supposed attack on U.S. vessels by North Vietnamese forces there .
 Daniel Ellsberg, an MIT professor and government consultant, leaked the papers to the press after becoming disgusted and disillusioned with the government's actions . The papers were one of the authors of the papers, which were leaked to the media .
 The two, in fact, were prosecuted for treason by the United States government . The two were convicted of treason by U.S. government .
 Ellsberg's act of courage was a necessary step to ensure that the record of government deceitfulness would become part of the national debate . The act was not only an act of great courage, but also an important step .
 "Without that step, I feel certain we would have nothing to celebrate today," says President Obama . "We are here to celebrate," says Obama .
 Faith in leaders, especially political leaders, to be honest and act in good faith was shaken as a result . Faith in political leaders is mightily shaken in the wake of the scandal .
 Not even the likes of an Evel Knievel, straddling the hottest rocket he'd dare mount, could hope to jump the credibility crevasse that yawned opened with that revelation .
 A social earthquake ripped open a fissure between the leaders and the led on a Grand Canyon-sized scale . It was a social earthquake that ripped open the fissures between the two sides on a grand canyon-size scale .
 The release of the papers broke a kind of spell in this country, a notion that the people and the government had to always be in consensus on all the major issues, says Ravi Agrawal . He says the release broke a spell in the country that the government and the people
 At the beginning of that episode, no one could really know if any newspaper would summon the courage to publish the papers . At the start of that . episode, "No one could ... know if [the papers] would be published . No one really knows if any of the papers would
 The press showed none of the skepticism that they should have learned in the years since the end of Vietnam . The press has shown no skepticism about the Vietnam war .
 It has learned much more how to circumvent the press than it ever did before . But it has learned how to do it better than ever before .
 The battle of the day was over whether to continue the Vietnam War or end it . Vietnam War is over whether the war should be ended or ended .
 Despite the groom's surname, beverages a touch stronger than grape juice were imbibed at reception .
 It was a naked attempt to use power for the perpetuation of power, and down that road dictatorship thrives and democracy cannot survive . It was an attempt to ... use power to perpetuation power, he said . "Down that road dictators thrives," he said, adding .
 It was a naked attempt to circumvent the democratic system of law that its perpetrators had sworn to uphold . It was an attempt by the perpetrators to circumvent a democratic system, it was said. It was the attempt by its perpetrators, it said .
 We live not as our ancestors had planned, but as their worst nightmare, the nation of bureaucrats of the worst kind . We live as a nation of bureaucracy, the worst of the kind kind of government bureaucrats, the author says .
 The chances of getting punished for doing a good job are higher than for a bad job . We have become so imbalanced in our world that the chances of being punished are higher . We need to be more balanced in our lives, says David Cameron .
 If each one should speak out, we could begin to trust each other once again and respect each other for having the courage to try and change .
 Reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein from The Washington Post tracked down leads to the Watergate break-in . Woodward and Bernstein found out the White House was involved in the Watergate .
 They planted bugs at Democratic headquarters, so they could listen in on strategy sessions held there . They also planted bugs in Democratic headquarters to listen to strategy sessions .
 One of the ""plumbers"" who was nabbed was carrying an address book which contained E Howard Hunt's contact info . Hunt was found to be a 'plumber' who was carrying a book containing Hunt's address book . Hunt's contact info was found in the book .
 Hunt had been a CIA agent; he had been head of the Bay of Pigs invasion . Hunt was head of CIA, CIA agent, head of Bay of Pigeon invasion .
 Hunt and G Gordon Liddy, CREEP's general counsel, were indicted on charges of burglary, conspiracy, and wiretapping . Hunt and Liddy were charged with burglary and conspiracy to wiretap .
 Vice President Spiro Agnew admitted to filing a bogus tax return and accepting bribes while he was Governor of Maryland . Agnew was governor of Maryland when he was governor . Vice President Agnew pleaded guilty to accepting bribes .
 When Nixon finally complied, and turned over the tapes to prosecutors, one of the tapes had an eighteen minute gap — whatever had been on the tape had been erased . When Nixon turned the tapes over, prosecutors found the gap had been wiped .
 Nixon defeated George McGovern and won reelection . Showing just how strong his position as incumbent was, even after the break-ins, Nixon defeated McGovern . Nixon's victory over McGovern shows how strong he was as incumbent .
 More and more of the dirty laundry, some related to Watergate, and some random other shenanigans, came to light about the Nixon administration . Soon after his second term began, though, more and more were revealed about the scandal .
 When I was a boy the Sioux owned the world, the sun rose and set on their land; they sent ten thousand men to battle. They sent 10,000 troops to battle . The Sioux are proud and proud of their land .
 In 1976, North and South Vietnam combined to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . The country is now the world's most populous country .
 In what came to be known as ""Wounded Knee II,"" a group of Indians spearheaded by the American Indian Movement occupied the reservation this year . The group occupied the Wounded . Knee reservation in 2010 .
 Their aim was to bring attention to the long litany of treaties the government had broken . Their aim is to highlight the long list of treaties broken by the government .
 AIM wanted the U.S. government to honor the 1868 Fort Laramie treaty they had made with the Sioux . The treaty gave the Sioux the Black Hills in perpetuity . AIM also wanted the United States to honor their treaty with the Lakota .
 Great mineral wealth had been discovered in the Black Hills, though, including uranium, which is needed for the production of nuclear power and weaponry .
 There was no way the government would give back land — valuable land — that it had taken over a century earlier . The government would not give back valuable land, it said .
 Besides government-sponsored Indian lackeys and local white ranchers, the reservation was besieged by the military . The reservation was also besieged by military .
 Tensions between AIM and the U.S. government, particularly the FBI and BIA, would boil over in 1975 . Tensions would continue to simmer over the years .
 Arab nations attacked Israel this year in retaliation for land Israel had taken during a war with Egypt in 1967 . Arab nations had taken the land Israel took during the war . Israel's land was taken during the 1967 war between Egypt and Israel .
 OPEC stopped shipping oil to the U.S., Israel's top ally, in December . Israel is Israel's most important ally in the Middle East . OPEC has been a major source of oil to Israel .
 By 1981, the price of oil had gushed from about $4 a barrel in the early 1970s to $35 in 1981 . Oil prices rose from $4 in the 1970s and 1980s to about $35 .
 At the time of writing in 2005, a barrel of oil commands more than $60 . The price of an oil barrel in 2005 was $60 per barrel .
 The U.S. uses one third of all energy produced, much of it in the form of petroleum . The country is comprised of just six percent of the world's population, but uses one in a third of its energy .
 The embargo caused the price of gasoline in the United States to rise from 38 cents per gallon in late 1973 to 55. 1 cents by the middle of 1974 . The price of gas in the U.S. rose from 38.5 cents to 55 . 1 cents a gallon .
 This sounds like an amazing bargain now, but it represented an increase of almost 50% in just eight months . It represented a price rise from £1.99 to £2.99 for the same amount .
 In the summer, tempers often flared against those who ""took cuts"" in line or pumped more than their allotted share of gas . Rationing and long lines led to much frustration .
 Some members of OPEC refused to continue limiting their production, and this, coupled with the effects of the conservation measures, caused some price rollbacks by the early 1980s . Eventually, some members of the organization refused to limit their production .
 Time will tell whether the draft has been permanently eliminated, or just temporarily suspended .
 Proand anti-abortion factions still wage battle with one another, some times all too literally . Pro-and-anti-abortion groups still wage war with each other .
 This despite the fact that abortion was made legal in the United States this year by the ruling of the Supreme Court in the Roe Wade case . This is provided such abortion take place in the first trimester, that is to say within the first three months of pregnancy .
 The ruling applies throughout the United States. During that time period, the ruling applies to the U.S. during that time .
 What is allowed, or not, regarding abortion during the remaining two-thirds of the pregnancy, is left up to each state to decide .
 What things you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops . Wherefore what things you whisper will be seen in the the light .
 Abuse of his presidential powers . Obstruction of justice, and Disobeying subpoenas . Abuse of the president's powers . Use of the presidential powers is abuse of his powers .
 Vice President Gerald Ford served out the remaining two and a half years of "" Nixon's"" presidency . Ford was President Richard Nixon's first president . Ford served as Vice President Nixon's successor .
 Nixon's misdeeds fell most neatly into the first and last of those three . Nixon was president of the United States from 1968 to 1972 . Nixon's administration has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Among the infractions incorporated within the latter broad category are abuse of power and serious misconduct in office . The infractions are included in the latter category .
 Richard M Nixon has acted in a manner contrary to his trust as president and subversive of constitutional government, says the president . Nixon's actions are contrary to the will of the people of the U.S., says the judge .
 One of Gerald Ford's first official acts as President was to pardon Nixon . Gerald Ford pardoned Nixon in 1973 . Nixon pardoned the former President of the White House .
 His excuse for this injustice was that by doing so the American people could put this dark period behind them, he said . His excuse was that he wanted to do so to put it behind them. He said that by . doing so, the American . people could . put this . behind
 Following that ""logic,"" the guilty party should be set free every time a heinous crime is committed, for the well-being and peace of mind of the victims . Following that, "logic" should be followed by the guilty person should be freed every time it's committed
 The Watergate affair left an impact on the American psyche . Whatever the case, the Watergate affair certainly left a lasting legacy .
 Any account of government corruption brings the watershed events of this year to mind . This year's events include the rise of corruption in the United States and the fall of the Great Depression .
 The Watergate affair left a strong imprint on the language of the 1 970s . The Watergate scandal left a huge imprint on how the 1. 970s spoke .
 The word spawned various coinages and the combining form -gate, used to denote scandal or corruption . The word was originally used to refer to scandal, corruption or scandal .
 Interim President Gerald Ford was not elected to a term of his own when he ran for President in 1976 . Ford was elected to President of the United States in 1976 but did not win a term himself .
 Albert Kollenborn family moved to Mokelumne Hill, California, this year . Albert and his wife moved to California in 1930 . The family is now back down to the original two with which it had started .
 Mokelumne Hill, California, is located in the gold rush country of Calaveras County . This is the furthest south in the state the Kollenborns ever lived . It is much further south than Eureka and Fort Bragg .
 In the eastern portion of the county, there are areas— such as Bear Valley— that get a lot of snowfallfall .
 Famous people have passed through the county, such as ""Black Bart" who was tried, convicted, and sentenced in the county seat of San Andreas for his stagecoach robberies throughout the area . Mark Twain, Bret Harte, who wrote ""The Outcasts of Poker Flat" and
 There are conflicting opinions on whether Joaquin Murieta actually existed, that is, if the myths about him are true, or whether the stories are a glamorization/ exaggeration of a combination of men named Joaquin .
 At least one of these Joaquins (or perhaps perhaps the Joaquin) doubtless also spent time in Calaveras County . Whatever the truth may be, it's likely that one of them spent time there .
 According to the tale of his beginnings in outlawry, his wife was raped in neighboring Tuolumne County . The story goes back to his outlaw days in California .
 It is said that Joaquin, after recovering from the wounds he suffered while trying to ward off that attack, eventually tracked down and killed all of the perpetrators .
 The river was given its name because of the many Indian skulls found on its banks by an early explorer . The river is named after the many skulls found by an explorer .
 The cause of the demise of the former owners of the skulls is unknown . The skulls were found in the hands of the owner of a skull .
 Calaveras County became known for collections of skulls again in the 1990s . Human bones were discovered on the West Point property of Leonard Lake and Charles Ng .
 It turns out that these two bachelors had kidnapped and killed many women over the preceding several years . The two men were found guilty of kidnapping and killing many women .
 Lake committed suicide at the time of their capture by ingesting poison . Lake committed himself to suicide after his capture .
 Ng escaped into Canada, was arrested there for another crime, was eventually extradited to California, and finally convicted after long court delays . Ng was eventually convicted after a series of lengthy delays .
 Ng's real or feigned illnesses, and the replacing of one lawyer with another, resulted in the starting of the legal process anew . These interruptions in justice were brought about partly by Ng's fake illnesses, which led to the replacement of a lawyer .
 Mokelumne Hill, population 560, was once in the running to become California's state capitol . Shannons (and two of the married Kollenborn daughters) still live today . The town is now home to two married daughters .
 These soldiers had been organized in mid1846 under the command of Colonel Jonathan Stevenson .
 The soldiers were to do this by provoking hostilities against these ""foreigners"" whenever and wherever they could . They were to provoke hostilities against them whenever they could be provoked .
 Stevenson Regiment encountered neither hostile forces nor ""foreign influences" Other than some peaceful indigenous tribes, the regiment encountered no hostile forces .
 Gold fever had been raging since James Marshall's discovery of the shiny metal in Coloma in January of 1848 . Much more threatening to the regiment was the gold fever .
 News of the discovery sent many of the troops scrambling into the outlying creeks and canyons of the countryside in search of nuggets . News of this discovery has sent many soldiers scrambling into outlying areas .
 Many members of the early regiment have lent their names to towns which still exist in the area . Many of that early regiment's names have been given the name of towns which are still exist .
 George and Henry Angel gave Angels Camp its name . James H Carson gave his name to Carson Hill . Carson Hill became the location of the largest nugget ever found in California . John and Daniel Murphy gave their name to Murphy's Diggings .
 I was soon in the street in search of the necessary outfits, piles of gold rose up before me at every step . Thousands of slaves bowing to my beck and call; myriads of fair virgins contending with each other for my love .
 He encountered such characters as ""Dutch John,"" a Yiddish-cussing barkeeper who brought his own twist to the custom of dipping thumb and forefinger into a miner's pouch to extract the price of a shot of whiskey .
 Instead of reaching straight into the pouch, John would first slide his hand into his mouth . John would reach for the pouch instead of reaching for it straight from the pouch .
 $4 to $8 worth of gold flakes collected on his moistened fingers . Rather than gathering the customary $1 pinch of dry dust, he collected the gold flakes .
 Another memorable gent was a strapping Oregonian who swung his pickax night and day . Another memorable man swung a pickax day and night .
 Each time the earth disgorged another nugget, he would cry for joy over the material comfort he had just secured for his parents back home . He would cry over his parents' material comfort .
 Despite repudiation of his old lifestyle and the disreputableness of his new one, he was called upon to officiate at the funeral of a certain miner named George .
 He motioned the mourners to kneel beside the freshly dug grave, and he commenced praying . The mourners kneeled beside the newly dug grave .
 The preacher, who kept his eyes closed, thought the ruckus was simply ""the spirit of Jesus"" that was infecting the boys . The preacher thought the spirit was simply simply the spirit of God .
 Thinking he was moving them to great depths of religious emotion, he ""warmed up"" to his task . Thinking he would move them, he said: "I'm going to do it. I'm not going to lie."
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day to CNN iReport .
 Sam Pearsall discovered gold at what is today called Mokelumne Hill . It was another member of Stevenson's regiment who discovered gold there .
 The gold discovery there led to the erection of what quickly became a busy and prosperous community . The town was built after the discovery .
 Mokelumne Hill was soon recognized as one of the state's more important trade and financial centers, and as such was even in the running at one time for the permanent location of California's capitol . The Hill was later recognized as an important financial center .
 It is difficult to imagine sleepy little Mokelumne Hill, "The Miami of the Sierras,"" as one imaginative real estate agent branded it, as the chief population center of this great state . The state is so "lousy" with people that it's hard
 Everybody in ""Mok"" Hill has heard of Sacramento , sixty miles to the northeast, but the reverse cannot be stated with any degree of certainty .
 Shannon and the Kollenborn families down through the ages— almost to a person— would have it . But that is as well as the Shannon and Kollen born families, down though the ages, would have had it .
 A small, slow-paced town nestled in the hills is just what they want — not the hustle and bustle, noise and confusion of a ""big city"" like Sacramento . The town is known for its slow pace and quietness .
 "More and more of our land has been stolen from us by the Canadian and U.S. governments," says the author . "But continually over the years more and more" has been taken from us, he says .
 In the 19 th century our land was stolen from us for economic reasons because the land was lush and fertile and abounded with food . The land in the 19th century was taken from us because of economic reasons .
 What was once called worthless land suddenly becomes valuable as technology of white society advances . Today, what was once considered worthless land becomes valuable .
 White society would now like to push us off our reservations because beneath the barren land lie valuable mineral and oil resources . White society wants to push them off reservation because beneath barren land lies valuable minerals and oil .
 It is not a new development for white society to steal from nonwhite peoples. It's not a first time white society has taken advantage of non-white peoples, it says .
 When white society 's efforts to colonize people are met with resistance it 's called war . When white . society .s . efforts to . colonize . people, it is called war. It 'says war. When . white society . is met with . resistance it
 When the colonized Indians of North America meet to stand and resist we are called criminals . But when we stand, resist, we're called criminals. But when they meet, they are called 'criminals'
 The lives of two FBI agents, Jack Coler and Ron Williams, were lost, and the lives of many of the Indians have also been adversely altered ever since . Leonard Peltier's life has also been affected by the loss of the FBI agents and the deaths of many Indians .
 The Oglala Indian reservation in South Dakota may have been a diversionary tactic to keep the Indians from realizing that more of their mineral-rich land was being taken from them . The harassment the inhabitants of the reservation in . South Dakota .
 On the day before the shootout, on the 99 th anniversary of ""Custer's Last Stand"" at the Little Bighorn, tribal chairman Dick Wilson ceded l/8 th of the Pine Ridge Reservation to the U.S. government .
 This was in conflict with the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty, whereby any land transferred by the tribe had to be agreed to by 3/4 th of the adult males . The 1868 treaty stipulated that the land transferred to the tribe must be agreed by 3 /4 th
 The Oglala Nation accepted and even embraced that terminology, using at as an acronym for Guardians Of the Oglalala Nation .
 FBI agents were purportedly on the trail of a teenager named Jimmy Eagle, who allegedly stole a pair of cowboy boots . The teen allegedly stole the boots .
 They tried to locate him at the Jumping Bull ranch on the reservation . The ranch is a known gathering spot of AIM members . It is known for its gathering spot, a gathering spot for members .
 A shootout ensued between FBI agents and some at the compound . The exact sequence of events is difficult to know, as accounts of the eyewitnesses differ .
 At the end of the shootout, two FBI agents were dead . The shootout was a shootout between the Indians and the FBI .
 No evidence exists that Leonard Peltier was guilty of killing either of the agents . He was found guilty and sentenced to two consecutive life terms in federal prison .
 Two other men who were originally charged with murder along with Peltier have long since been acquitted . The two other men have long been acquitted of the murder charge .
 In 2005 Peltier was transferred to the federal penitentiary at Terre Haute, Indiana . He spent decades in Leavenworth, Kansas, before being transferred in 2005 . After decades in Kansas, he is now serving a life sentence in federal prison .
 Legend has it that Albert Kollenborn was a guard at Leavenworth for a time . No evidence has been found for it, but family legend has it .
 Albert once beat a man so badly that the man was crippled for life . Another family story is that Albert once beaten so badly he crippled a man's life . Albert once hit a man with such force that he crippled him for life, Albert says .
 Albert was defended in court by the government, according to the handed-down account . Albert was killed by a bomb blast at the hands of the government . Albert died of a heart attack at the end of his life .
 If the story is in fact factual, it would make sense that it happened during the time he was working as a guard — as a government employee, it is logical that they would defend him in court .
 Many people fail to remember that an Indian, Joe Stuntz, was also killed during the Wounded Knee shootout . Many people don't remember that he also died during the shootout .
 Following the shootout his body was thrown in a ditch by FBI agents who had by then arrived on the scene . Reminiscent of scenes from a century and more earlier, the shootout was reminiscent of a century-old shootout .
 Agents also shot up the house of an elderly couple on the property, including shooting pictures of relatives that they had hanging on their walls . Stuntz's body was also otherwise disgraced by these agents .
 Testifying against Peltier at his trial was an Indian woman named Myrtle Poor Bear . She apparently had been intimidated by the FBI to claim that Leonard Peltiers was her boyfriend . She said she had seen him kill two agents .
 Even the prosecution eventually declined to put her on the witness stand, aware that the defense attorneys would rip her testimony to shreds . The poor woman was later found to be delusional .
 In spite of the lack of evidence, Peltier somehow was somehow convicted . He was convicted of murder in 1996 .
 A man known as ""Mr X"" came forward years later to admit he was the guilty party . He made his confession on videotape while wearing a mask and disguising his voice .
 Peltier is considered by Amnesty International as well as Desmond Tutu and many others to be a political prisoner . He is in poor health, suffering from diabetes, high blood pressure, and heart troubles .
 Peltier has been kept from his children and grandchildren for three decades now . Adding insult to injury, he has not been able to see his children or grandchildren for decades .
 The FBI was apparently satisfied to get a man rather than the man in this case . This is yet another disgraceful episode in the history of the U.S. government's treatment of America's indigenous population .
 "Under your system, you are taught greed, racism, and corruption," the author says . "Most serious of all, the destruction of Mother Earth," she writes .
 Under Native American system, we are taught all men are Brothers and Sisters; to share the wealth with the poor and needy . Under the Native American .
 The most important of all is respect and preserve the Earth, who we consider to be our Mother . The white American establishment has consistently said, In God We Trust, ' while they went about the business of murdering my people and attempting to destroy our culture .
 Time is a cannibal that devours the flesh of your years day by day, bite by bite. Time devours your years by day . Time devour the flesh by day and by day by bite .
 The day she died was the sixty-sixth anniversary of the day her first daughter Debra ""Girlie"" had been fatally bitten by a rattlesnake . Debra died on the day of her death .
 A dozen children were born over a span of twenty-seven years, eight of whom survived to adulthood, and dozens of grandchildren, were born to adulthood . The document, the ""story of her life,"" provides much of the information .
 What were initially called ""Personal"" computers (as opposed to ""Business"" computers) became so popular that they were soon used more in business settings than by hobbyists for personal use at home .
 Forward-thinking owners of small businesses that would never have purchased ""big iron"" did purchase these ""minicomputers,"" which have long since become almost ubiquitous in both home and office settings .
 The book of the same name had won a special Pulitzer prize the previous year . The book won the Pulitzer prize for the same title .
 They have run over our country, they have destroyed the growing wood and the green grass, they say . They have set fire to our lands. They have destroyed our wood and green grass . We are proud of our lands, our people are proud and proud of their land .
 Fathers, your young men have devastated the country and killed my animals, the elk, the deer, the antelope, my buffalo. Fathers. Fathers, Your young men . Fathers . Fathers. My animals have been killed, your fathers have been devastated, your father says .
 They do not kill them to eat them; they leave them to rot where they fall . They leave them in the ground, not to be eaten .
 They raise the standards of living for themselves by lowering quality of life for everybody else . They do it by evading the discipline of the free market, says David Cameron . They raise standards for themselves, he says .
 The love of possessions is a disease with them. Strangely enough they have a mind to till the soil and the love of possession is a sickness .
 These people have made many rules that the rich may break, but the poor may not . The rich may not break the rules that they have made, they may not, they say .
 They claim this mother of ours, the earth, for their own and fence their neighbors away; they deface her with their buildings and refuse . They claim the earth for themselves and fence neighbors away, they fence away, she writes .
 That nations is like a spring freshet that overruns its banks and destroys all who are inn its path. That nations are like spring fresheets that overrun the banks and destroy all those who are in its path .
 He wanted to alter nature by joining two rivers and erecting a city on the banks of these conjoined streams . The city would be built by the rivers, he wanted to create a city .
 Some of the rocks at the dump at Love Canal would make a bright flash when thrown against concrete . Some rocks would make bright flashes when thrown at concrete .
 Even more menacing was the way the dirt would change colors, going from pink to red to purple to orange to green to blue . The dirt would go from red to blue to green .
 Choking odors and black mold seeped through walls were also part of life at the home . The home was also covered in mold and choking odors .
 Most obvious of all signals was the way people got sick more often and more seriously than normal . Most obvious signs were that people were getting sick more frequently than usual .
 On August 2 nd , 1978, the United States Commissioner of Health declared the situation at Love Canal a health emergency . The situation was declared an emergency by the U.S. Department of Health .
 The government offered to buy the houses from the residents, but the price offered was not enough to pay off their mortgages . Ultimately, the government decided to buy them from their homes . The price offered did not pay off the mortgages .
 Family needed to get their family out of the danger zone, but couldn't afford to do so . They were forced to move their family to a safe place, but were unable to afford it .
 TCP itself is not something you'd want to pour on your breakfast cereal . Even worse, a common by-product of it is dioxin . TCP is not only dangerous to eat, but it's also dangerous to drink .
 Hooker Chemical sold the land to the Board of Education of Niagara Falls for one dollar . After covering over the witches brew of chemicals with dirt, allowing the toxins to mix and ""cook" The land was sold for $1 .
 This was not the brightest thing to do, even though it had been years since the last dumping of chemicals had taken place . This is not the best thing to dump chemicals in the city, says the mayor of London . It was years before the last dump of chemicals was taken place,
 Love Canal was not the only pestiferous location in the United States, by any means . Love Canal wasn't the only one of the U.S. locations .
 There are still tens of thousands of chemical dump sites in the United States. In fact, there are still thousands of such sites .
 Not all the barrels contain leaking, rotting barrels of toxic chemicals, but many — thousands — thousands of them, in fact— do . Not all of them contain leaking and rotting barrels, but they do . Many of the barrels of these barrels contain toxic chemicals .
 No journeys, save those which memory can take, will bring you to it now . No journeys can take longer journeys than those which have been made .
 Garrison presented to Theodore Russell Shannon at Garrison Garrison . Garrison: "Ted has given well beyond what we have a right to expect"
 Officer Shannon is "a credit to his community, to the California Highway Patrol, and to humanity," police say . Officer Shannon was a credit to community, police say, and humanity .
 Seen as an inexpensive and safe way to produce energy by some, others questioned its safety . Seen as inexpensive and . safe way of producing energy, some questioned the safety of it .
 A movie depicting a nuclear plant accident, The China Syndrome, had been filmed just prior to the accident . A bizarre coincidence was the fact that a movie depicting the accident was filmed just before the accident in China .
 Pennsylvania governor Dick Thornburgh warned all residents to remain indoors . Pregnant women were told to evacuate the area entirely .
 Backup safety features in the plant did prevent an even more major disaster, on the scale of the one that would strike Chernobyl, Ukraine, in 1986 .
 Radioactivity was released into the atmosphere over the next several days . No one was directly hurt at the time of the accident .
 Some scientists estimated that the radioactivity would ultimately cause thousands of cancer deaths . Some scientists said it would lead to thousands of deaths .
 Theodore Roosevelt ""Pop" Shannon died on June 20 th at The Ranch in Trinity County, California, outliving his mother by a little less than two years . Shannon died at age 85 .
 The Ranch would never be the same again . Pop would have never been quite the same without him .
 Pop left his companion of the last twenty-three years, Dollena ""Dollie"" Shannon, as well as his first wife Esther, who had remarried a man named Welch . Pop left behind his companion and first wife .
 Other survivors included Pop and Esther's five children, all of whom survive to this day, and a dozen grandchildren . Pop's wife, Esther, was also survived by her husband and five children .
 Pop is buried in the Hoaglin Valley Cemetery near The Ranch and his sister Debra May ""Girlie,"" who had died sixty-eight years earlier . Pop was buried with his sister Debra May "Girlie" and her sister .
 At the funeral service, Pop's favorite horse, Pal, carried his owner's ashes in his saddlebag . The funeral service was performed under a tree in the front yard at The Ranch .
 Pal, subdued and dignified in his demeanor, seemed to be well aware of just what sort of ceremony was being conducted . Pal seemed to have been very aware of the ceremony .
 The obituary, which appeared in the Fort Bragg Advocate, reported names and places . It was published in the Advocate, which reported names, places .
 He was a retired Mendocino Coast logger and cattleman . Born in Carlotta in 1 902, he was born in 1-902 . He was also a cattleman and logger .
 On December 15 th , 1979, 1979, a horrific traffic accident took place in rural Calaveras County, California . The accident was one of the worst in American history .
 Pop's second son Theodore Russell Shannon, a California Highway Patrol officer, was patrolling in the area where the accident occurred . He was killed in the accident . Pop's son was a police officer .
 The next people would have no doubt come upon the macabre sight of two completely burned out vehicles containing five charred occupants . Had he not been in the immediate vicinity, the next people to come upon this macabre scene would have come upon two vehicles .
 A head-on collision occurred between a pickup and a car full of three teenagers . A thirty-year old man in a pickup was driving under the influence of alcohol .
 The adult, Timothy Michael Pullen, had driven off the road on his right, and then over-corrected, crossed the center line, and smashed full force into the Vega traveling in the opposite direction . Pullen was driving on the wrong side of the road when he over-
 Both drivers, as well as passengers in the Vega, were knocked unconscious in the crash . Both drivers and passengers are believed to have been knocked unconscious . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Officer Shannon had just begun tailing the Vega, which had passed his parked vehicle at what seemed to be an excessive rate of speed, when the accident occurred . Officer Shannon says he was chasing the Vega when it crashed into his vehicle .
 A fire was already raging in the cab of a pickup pickup . The driver was unconscious when he was pulled from the vehicle . The truck driver was killed in the fire .
 Pullen was lying on his back with his head on the passenger side floorboard . Pullen had been lying on the back of the car when he was hit by the crash .
 His legs were wedged in the wreckage, and Shannon — although pulling with all his might — was unable to extricate him . Shannon was able to pull him from the wreckage .
 Ted Shannon returned to his patrol car to retrieve his fire extinguisher . As the fire increased in intensity, he returned to the car to get his extinguisher in place .
 Former fireman attempted to remove Mr Pullen from his burning pickup . Pullen was rescued from the burning pickup truck by firefighters .
 In the crash, the pickup's gas tank had been pulled away from its normal location, and gas was gushing onto the ground, downhill and under the Vega . In the accident, the driver's pickup's fuel tank was pulled from its usual location .
 A small rivulet of burning gasoline had spread from the pickup down the slope to the Vega . The small fire truck had been traveling from a pickup to a Vega .
 Ted proceeded to the right front door of the twodoor Vega and pulled out the unconscious passenger seated there, Elliott Bissell, and dragged him away from the car . Ted then proceeded to pull him away, dragging him from the vehicle .
 He pulled Cynthia Mann from the back seat, also dragging her away from the burning vehicle . He then immediately returned to the car and pulled her from the car .
 Officer Shannon attempted to extricate Mark Thein from the burning car . Officer Shannon crossed over to the driver's side of the Vega, and attempted to rescue him . Thein died in the car crash .
 Thein's lower body was trapped in the twisted metal of the car's wrecked front end . Timothy Pullen was killed in the pickup pickup crash . Pullen's body was found in the wreckage .
 The fire was so intense that it singed off his eyebrows and melted the lens of his flashlight . He finally had to abandon the recovery effort when the fire became so intense it burned his eyebrows . The fire is believed to have started in the early hours .
 Within minutes both pinned drivers of the vehicles were burned beyond recognition . Within minutes the drivers of each vehicle were burned to death .
 Passengers Bissell and Mann suffered massive injuries to the chest and head, respectively . Bissell, Mann and Mann were both passengers on board the doomed plane .
 Bissell survived the crash, but died several hours later at the hospital . Bissell was the first person to die in the crash .
 For his role in the rescue attempt, Ted Shannon received the state's state's highest honor, the Medal of Valor . Shannon was the first man to be awarded the medal of valor in Alaska .
 Appendices IX through XII contain supplementary documentation on this accident and the awarding of the medal . Shannon's own accounts of the incident, including his own accounts, are published in his book .
 United States -Iran relations had been deteriorating since Muhammad Reza Shah Pahlevi had been replaced by a fundamentalist Islamic government, led by Ayotollah Khomeini .
 After Pahlevi was admitted to the United States for medical treatment, anti-U.S. feelings escalated and the siege of embassy and hostage-taking took place .
 President Carter tried everything he could think of to secure the release of the hostages . Some of the Iranian captors claimed they were spies, but all efforts were for naught .
 Carter stopped buying oil from Iran, and froze Iranian assets held in the U.S. The next year, a dramatic rescue attempt would be undertaken .
 "The moon looks like a golf course compared to what 's up there," says St. Helens . "It's a miracle that the moon looks as bright as it does," says the author .
 You might think I'm wastin 'time But I 'mjust a good ol ' boy who 's learned to wait' from the movie ""The Princess Bride"
 American Gothic II Mt. Helens Erupts at Mount Helens . Aborted Hostage Rescue Attempt and Hostage Rescued Rescue Attempt .
 Wildlife apparently already knew what was going to happen . People soon found out what wildlife already knew about the incident .
 The mountain erupted in a stupendous cataclysm five hundred times more powerful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima . It was a cataclysm that was five hundred hundred times the size of the Hiroshima bomb .
 Fifty-seven people who had not heeded the mountain's clear warnings died . The mountain's warning: "Do not ignore this mountain's warnings'
 The giant mass of dirt, rock, vegetation, and lava had actually already erupted several times in the days and weeks leading up to May 18 th . This was ""the big one"— the deadliest eruption in United States history .
 The cloud of ash the eruption unleashed completely darkened the skies as much as eighty-five miles away . The eruption was the largest eruption of the last century .
 At least a dozen fires were ignited as a result of the superheated gas and ash and hot mud . At least 12 fires are ignited in the area .
 The mountain belched forth massive amounts of hot gas in addition to the cubic tons of ash, which turned the mountainsides into rivers of hot mud . The mountainsides of the mountain were covered in hot mud and hot gas .
 Portland Harbor was jammed with mud, and the Columbia River was blocked for twenty miles with trees that had been flattened and then carried into the river . Portland Harbor, Portland Harbor and Columbia River were blocked for 20 miles . Portland, Oregon, was jammed by mud .
 Almost six thousand miles of roads were covered with ash which had the consistency of wet cement . Across the entire northwest, almost six thousand . miles of . roads . were covered by ash .
 Those who perished in the ensuing blast included Harry Truman . Harry Truman died in the blast .
 Harry Truman had himself given the go-ahead for conflagrations of a different type to rain down on Japan in 1945 . No, not that Harry Truman .
 Harry Truman was an eighty-four-year old gent who lived with his seventeen cats on Mount Saint Helens five miles from the volcano . This Harry Truman lived with 17 cats and lived with them on Mount St Helens .
 Harry said he would never leave, regardless of the danger or the consequences of his obstinacy . Harry said: "Regardless of the ... danger or consequences, he would not leave"
 He is entombed deep beneath an accumulation of solidified mud that completely covers his former home, himself, and — presumably — his seventeen cats . The mud is so thick that it completely covers the former home and himself, including his 17 cats .
 These paid the ultimate price for their pursuit of glory, cash, art, art or historical artifacts, or whatever it was they were so intent on accumulating .
 Besides the human lives lost, fifteen hundred elk, five thousand deer, and an estimated eleven million fish died . An estimated 11 million fish also died .
 St. Helens literally blew its top, its height was reduced from 9,677 to 8,364 feet . The height of the Mountessessessian was reduced by less than a mile .
 Ash that had been belched out of the mountain's depths spread upwards and outwards . Ash drifted for hundreds of miles, darkening the sky, dropping temperatures and creating a muddy mess in areas where it was simultaneously raining .
 The sky was hazy and cars were covered with up to several inches of the gray ash . The gray ash cloud cloud clouded the sky and smothered the ground .
 A disaster to a relatively small number of people, it was a nuisance to manifold more . The disaster was a disaster to some but more than a few people .
 The nutrient-rich ash proved to be a boon to farmers in the coming growing seasons, though . The nutrient rich ash was a boon for farmers in coming seasons .
 The natural disaster was another reminder to mankind that he can only rein in ""Nature"" to a very limited degree . When it wants to release pressure, it will, and you had best just get out of the way .
 President Jimmy Carter attempted to rescue the American hostages held in Iran by sending in a group of helicopters to storm the embassy in Teheran .
 A desert storm proved fatal to this attempt, though — three of the eight helicopters sent were disabled as a result of the sandstorm . The mission had to be aborted after the mission was aborted .
 Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who had opposed the action, resigned in the aftermath . Secretary of state Cyrus Vance also resigned after the vote .
 The failure also played a role in Jimmy Carter not being re-elected at the end of this year . Jimmy Carter was forced to step down from the White House .
 Albert and Alice celebrated the 50 year anniversary of that painting as well as their marriage this year . Alice and Albert were married in 1968 .
 I was labeled a troublemaker, and my mom an unfit mother, and I was not welcome anywhere. "I was labeled by my mom and my dad," she says .
 "People would get up and leave, so they would not have to sit anywhere near me," she said . People would get out of seats so they wouldn't sit near her, she said. "I'm not going to sit near me. I'm not sitting near me."
 Iran was more receptive to bringing the matter to some sort of resolution . As they now had their hands full with a war they were waging with their neighbor Iraq, they were more receptive .
 Iran now had other, if not bigger, fish to fry, and needed the money to prosecute their war with Iraq, which many Iranians came to call ""the American War"" (as the Vietnamese called the war there) due to the assistance America gave to Iraq . Iran now has other
 AIDS, or HIV, is not a disease in and of itself but is weakening of the body's natural defense capabilities, making the carrier susceptible to life threatening diseases . AIDS is not an illness in and out of itself, but a weakening of body's defense capabilities makes carrier susceptible .
 AIDS attacks the human immune system — the body's mechanism for warding off disease . AIDS attacks a person's body's immune system . AIDS is the most serious form of disease .
 It renders its victims defenseless against rare cancers and other fatal illnesses . It also renders them vulnerable against rare cancer and other illnesses .
 People who are now young adults have heard of AIDS all their lives, and may think it an old disease . Young adults may think of AIDS as a disease they've heard of all their life .
 Sub-Saharan Africa has more than two-thirds of the world's cases of HIV-AIDS . It is ten times the number of North Africa and the Middle East combined . The world's hardest hit area is Sub-Africa .
 In Zimbabwe, the impact has been so great that life expectancy has dropped from 70 to 38 in recent years . Life expectancy in Zimbabwe has dropped between 70 and 38 years .
 Many people contract AIDS from a spouse or, in the case of babies, from their mother . Regardless of the quotes above, many people contract it from their spouse or mother .
 As one would probably expect, women who contract AIDS via sexual contact are typically in their child-bearing years .
 Many babies are born infected with HIV, and thus die before reaching adulthood . Without any say in the matter, without deliberately engaging in risky activity, many babies die before becoming adults .
 By the turn of the millennium , there were over 13 million AIDS orphans . By the time of the century, there were 13 million orphans .
 To fall into this category, a child has had to lose its mother before reaching the age of 15 . To be eligible for custody, the child must be at least 15 .
 In some countries of Africa, health workers fear that the disease will eventually kill two thirds of all the young men and women . Health workers fear it will kill two-thirds of all young people in Africa .
 Around 22 million people worldwide have died from from this pandemic . All told, upwards of 22 million have died .
 Even in the U.S., more than half a million had died from AIDS by the close of 2001 . More than 50,000 people had died in the United States from AIDS in 2001 .
 Information on AIDS and how it could be transmitted was sketchy at the time, and Ryan was ostracized . Ryan's quote above makes clear that AIDS was a relatively unknown topic .
 He died in 1990, a year before he would have graduated from high school . He died a year after he was born .
 Unless there are slaves to do the ugly, horrible, uninteresting work, culture and contemplation becomes almost impossible . Unless there is a slave, culture is almost impossible, it's almost impossible to contemplate .
 "On mechanical slavery, on the slavery of the machine, the future of the world depends," says the author of the book .
 Another brother, Robert Taft Shannon, born 1916, survived a plane crash in 1949 in which Calvin Coolidge Shannon perished . Another brother had survived the plane crash that killed Coolidge .
 Time Magazine's "Man of the Year" has proven controversial in the past . Time Magazine often chooses controversial people to be named its man of the year . This year Time Magazine chose a controversial candidate for the title of its annual magazine .
 It's staying with her now because she needs you; it's knowing you and she will still care about each other when sex and daydreams, fights and futures — when all that's on the shelf and done with .
 I am walking in their alleys, standing in their rooms and sheds and workshops, looking in and out of their windows . I'm walking in the alleys and standing in the rooms of their rooms, sheds, workshops and workshops . I am . walking in alleys .
 Albert and Alice were married for fifty-four years and one week at the time of Albert's death . Albert died at the age of his death . Alice and Albert had been married for more than fifty years .
 Will and Gertie's sixtytwo years together, it was quite a run . Although not matching Will's, they had a run of sixtytwo .
 Albert was also survived by his children David A, Lyle Clem, Rosie Lee Shannon, Sharon Dee Noland, Benjamin Lee, and Patsy Jane Lima Roberts . Albert died at the age of 92 .
 Pop Shannon and Albert Kollenborn were married for 100 years . One hundred fifty-five years were spent in the married state of California .
 Albert died in George Orwell's dystopian year, for which Orwell had ""foreseen"" dire social conditions . Albert died during the year Orwell had planned for .
 The Exxon Valdez oil spill would take place three years after the Challenger Disaster . The Challenger Disaster killed seven astronauts in 1986 .
 Millions of people watching the event live knew that the seven on board had certainly been instantly killed . Millions of those who watched the event knew the seven were certainly killed .
 A faulty seal on one of the rocket's boosters was at fault . After a three-year cessation of space flights, it was ultimately determined that a faulty seal was to blame .
 Investigators concluded that fatigue on the managerial level, caused by ""several days of irregular working hours and insufficient sleep," was a significant factor in the shuttle getting the ill-advised go-ahead to launch .
 Pop's second wife Dolly would eventually beat them all, though, and live ninety-five years and ten months . Dolly died at the age of ninety-seven years .
 Albert's half-sisters, Thora Louise Wheeler, born 1920, and Lula Mae Dixon, born 1922, are getting within striking distance . They are two of the siblings, born in 1920 and 1922, respectively .
 Even supposing a young man of appreciable mental powers to be lured upon the stage, as philosophers are occasionally lured into bordellos, his mind would be inevitably and almost immediately destroyed by the gaudy nonsense issuing from his mouth every night .
 On October 19 th , the Dow Jones Industrial Average took the deepest, fastest plunge in its history . Dow Jones dropped the most in four years .
 The 22.6% mass sell-off represented a much steeper drop than the Great Depression of 1929 . This 22.4% mass sale-off was a much larger drop than in 1929 . The Great Depression was the biggest drop in the world's history .
 This was when the two men were running against each other during the Republican primaries . This is when they were competing in the Republican presidential primaries .
 Bush later became Reagan's running mate, and served as Vice President . Bush later entered the oval office himself following Reagan's departure from public life .
 Reagan annulled many of the social programs that FDR had instituted during the Great Depression . Presenting his economic theory as the justification for doing so, Reagan said it was FDR's economic theory .
 Making matters worse was the optimism, the ""irrational exuberance,"" that had preceded the fall . And making matters worse is the optimism that had been made worse .
 The number of Americans who personally invested in the stock market had doubled between 1975 and 1985 . Americans invested in stocks more than doubled in 1975 to 1985 .
 Many others had indirect connections to the stock market via pensions tied to stock performance . Besides these direct investors, many others had direct connections to stock market .
 In comparison, ""Black Monday"" in 1987 saw a drop, as mentioned, of 22. per cent . In 1987, "Black Monday" was a drop of 22 per cent in the market .
 The world recovered rather quickly from this financial battering . As it turned out, the world recovered quickly .
 The stock market had been growing so robustly that even after the crash its level was just four per cent less than it had been a year before . By the end of the year, it even managed to be a little ahead of where it'd been prior to the crash . This is
 Some view the precipitous decline as a harbinger of possible future calamities . Nevertheless, some view the decline as an ominous harbinger . Some say the decline could be harbinger for possible future disasters .
 One reason was their feeling of impotence after not even being able to get through to their harried brokers to sell their shares of stock before the value of these dropped even lower . One reason is that they were unable to sell the shares before they were even more expensive .
 Once the price reached such-and-such-levels, they should sell, so advised these electronic assistants . The price of these assistants should be such a price of such a certain amount .
 The broker often was not allowed enough time to evaluate whether he should act on the suggestion or not . The problem was, the broker often did not know if he would act on a suggestion .
 As brokers were using the same software, and thus all received the same selling suggestions, this led to gigantic dumping of certain stocks almost simultaneously . The race to the bottom was on as brokers used the same sales suggestions . Then triggered other selling binges, and the race was on .
 The computer programs used by brokers were re factored after this event . The computer program was re-factored .
 Their bullish ways pushed up the price of stocks far higher than their intrinsic value . Stocks were pushed up by their bullish ways pushing up the value of their value .
 Reagan: "The cold war is over. Mr Gorbachev, tear down this wall!" - Ronald Reagan . Reagan: The cold war was over .
 Peace seems to be breaking out in many parts of the world . The cold war appears all but over . Peace is breaking out across the globe .
 Jacques Cousteau: "We are destroying everything we inherited. We are destroying all we inherited"
 Experts say experts do not always know what they think they know when asked about their knowledge . CNN.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery .
 In any case, the Wiedervereinigung was not half a century or more away — it was practically knocking at the door when he penned those words .
 Although the Berlin Wall fell in Europe, we cover it here in this book about United States History because it was a crumbling felt 'round the world, even if there was a time lapse, a delayed reaction, before its full impact was felt here .
 Unlike the walls of Jericho, the trumpets blew after the November 9 th fall of the wall . The trumpets bled after the fall of Jericho .
 The easing of tensions between the super powers has helped ease tensions in the world . Foremost, perhaps, was the ease of tensions .
 The world may have grown even less stable than it was during the Cold War . While good news when viewed from one angle, on the other hand there are now several countries which own nuclear weapons .
 The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists' doomsday clock was advanced to five minutes before midnight in 1998 . In 1998 the Bulletin of The Atomic Scientists advanced the Doomsday Clock to 5 minutes before New Year's Eve . The Doomsday Clock was advanced in 1998, when it was five minutes from midnight .
 Some believe that it is inevitable that terrorists will be able to obtain an atomic weapon . Some believe it will be inevitable that the time will come when terrorists are able to get an atomic bomb .
 Exactly when it will happen cannot be predicted, but they believe it to be inevitable . Exactly when will it happen can't be predicted but they say it is inevitable .
 These two nations still have 5,000 nuclear weapons on hair-trigger alert . The two countries still have thousands of nuclear weapons . The U.S. and South Korea have the world's largest nuclear arsenals .
 Russia could pass two thousand ICBMs from America somewhere over the Atlantic . In a worst-case scenario, the missiles could hit two thousand U.S. missiles from Russia . Russia has a history of missile launches .
 All this could happen within minutes — in the time it takes you to read this chapter . All this is possible within minutes of reading .
 And that is not counting another thousand warheads from submarines that could be launched soon thereafter . And that's not counting more than a thousand more warheads .
 The collapse of communism came also the collapse of its artificially controlled economy . With the collapse, the economy was artificially controlled by the Communist Party .
 It is no longer possible, or at least no longer appealing to most countries, to remain an economic island . It is not longer possible to remain a 'economic island' in many countries .
 In other words, globalization was, if not born, at least popularized with the wall's fall . globalization was born with the fall of the wall .
 Everybody competes with everybody else, worldwide, today, today . Instead of just competing with their neighbors for jobs and for business, everybody competes for jobs . Everyone is competing for jobs, business, and jobs .
 The wall's fall reverberated throughout the earth . Understanding Globalization"""The wall's Fall reverberated through the earth,"" the Wall's fall .
 It was a social tsunami that led to globalization via what he calls the three democratizations of money, technology, and information, he says . The social tsunami was the result of the democratization of money and technology .
 He is certainly not unique in viewing a country's GDP as indicative of how livable the place is . He is not the only person in the world who thinks GDP is indicative of the place's quality .
 Stiglitz views globalization as having great potential for benefiting all peoples . He sees it in actual practice too often bringing about just the opposite, he says .
 I believe that globalization — the removal of barriers to free trade and the closer integration of national economies — can be a force for good . I believe it has the potential to enrich everyone in the world, particularly the poor, especially the poor .
 International trade agreements that have played a large role in removing barriers and policies that have been imposed on developing countries in the process of globalization, need to be radically rethought . But I also believe that if this is to be the case, the way globalization has been managed, needs to be
 Globalization may appear a dry topic, but it has lit a fire under many people who oppose it . Globalization is one of the most divisive issues in the world, according to experts .
 Globalization in general and why many oppose it will be discussed in greater detail in the 1999 chapter, in the ""The Battle of Seattle"" section . Globalization is discussed in a more detailed discussion of globalization .
 Alaska Pipeline carries oil from Prudhoe Bay fields down south to Valdez on the Gulf of Alaska . Valdez is the northernmost year-round ice-free port in Alaska .
 Valdez, eight-hundred miles south of Prudhoe Bay, is a busy port of call for supertankers . Supertankers fill up with crude and carry it on to other ports of call .
 Crew reductions, made in order to reduce operating costs, led to mariners working longer hours and performing additional duties . Crew reductions were made to reduce costs .
 The third mate may not have been fully qualified to serve as commander . The ship's third mate was not fully qualified for duty .
 In any case, he had been up since early the previous day when the accident occurred shortly after midnight .
 Deep-sea divers sent out to inspect the damage reported that the ship was teetering on the edge of Bligh Reef . The ship is believed to be at risk of collapse .
 If it broke apart on hitting the bottom, the other 42 million galls of oil could have also been released into the biosphere . The oil could also have been released from the bottom of the ocean .
 Only 10 to 14 percent of that oil is properly disposed of, it is estimated . Only 10-14 percent of the oil is disposed of properly, experts say .
 Millions of gallons of waste oil end up in the ground, in streams, or in sewers each year . Millions more gallons of oil are spilled into the ground or streams each year.
 It would take at least 25 Exxon Valdez-sized spills annually to equal that amount of despoliation . The spill would be equivalent to a 25-year-old oil spill .
 ""If you're not the solution, you're part of the problem. How can people be so cruel? — from the song ""Easy to be Hard"" by Three Dog Night .
 A citizen near the scene recorded the actions of the officers . Unbeknownst to the officers of the law, their actions were being recorded by a citizen .
 The officers dragged King, a parttime Dodger stadium groundskeeper, from his car and beat him with nightsticks and kicked him with their feet . King was to start a full-time construction job the next day . The officers shot him in the chest with a stun gun .
 The fifty-six blows with their metal batons and six kicks with their jackbooted feet caused King to suffer eleven skull fractures, brain injury, and kidney damage . King suffered 11 skull fractures and brain injury .
 The 25-year-old victim's eye socket was shattered, a cheek bone was fractured, a leg was broken, and he suffered a concussion as well as facial nerve damage . In addition to the injuries, the victim suffered a fractured eye socket, a fractured cheek bone, and a
 The brutal attack was broadcast throughout the nation, to the consternation of those who had previously assumed policemen were fair and civil in their dealings with the public . It was broadcast to the public who had assumed police were fair .
 Tom Sullivan, an LAPD officer, said ""This isn't just a case of excessive force," he said . The LAPD officer said the incident was not just excessive force .
 Four days after the assault, he went on record that the four officers should be charged with felony assault . Four days later, he said he wanted to file felony assault charges against the officers . The four officers were charged with assault .
 Four officers were called to account and required to answer for their actions in a court of law . The four officers were not found guilty of any wrongdoing in the incident .
 The results of that court case are discussed in the next chapter of this book . As to whether justice resulted, let the facts speak for themselves .
 L.A. police officers continue to use excessive force in Los Angeles . The LAPD has been criticized for excessive force by some of its officers .
 For instance, on August 3 rd , a man was shot dead by a sheriffs deputy . The sheriff's deputies have been involved in shootings in the past .
 The official version of the account was that the man had grabbed another deputy's flashlight and had knocked him unconscious with it . The official account of the incident was that a deputy had knocked another deputy unconscious with the flashlight .
 Residents of the housing project where the incident took place, though, claim the dead man had only engaged in a verbal altercation with the officers . Residents say the incident was an altercation between police and residents .
 As bad as King's beating was, what he experienced was actually mild compared to what many blacks had experienced in the South, even just a few decades earlier . The beating was actually relatively mild, even though it was a relatively mild .
 Some had been beaten to death for refusing to sit in the back of buses, for saying something ""saucy"" to a white person, or just for being there, so to speak . Some had refused to sit down in the front of buses . Others had been killed for refusing
 On August 13 th , a mentally disturbed man was shot eight times in the back and once in the shoulder . He was shot 8 times in back and one in shoulder . A mentally disturbed mentally ill man was killed in the shooting .
 On the 28 th of that same month, a fifteen-year-old boy was killed by law enforcement officers . On that day, police officers killed a boy, 15, in custody .
 Babylon and Medo-Persia have been fighting each other for thousands of years . These two countries roughly correspond to ancient Babylon . They have, in effect, been fighting against each other .
 Although both modern nations are Islamic, Iraqis are Arabic . Iranians, for the most part, are not ethnically Arabs .
 Saddam Hussein believed that Iranian Arabs would welcome his troops as liberators when they entered Iran . Because of their shared ethnicity, Saddam Hussein, leader of Iraq, believed that they would welcome him to the country . Saddam Hussein's troops entered Iran in 2003 .
 This mistake was repeated by the United States a generation later, in 2003, when they invaded Iraq . This mistake — expecting to be welcomed as a liberator – was repeated in Iraq . The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003 .
 Manpower, materiel, ""moral"" support, and money — in fact, to the tune of $18 billion dollars — are needed .
 America was not the only foreign power interested in the outcome of this war, though — the Soviet Union was, too . U.S. was not only interested in this war but also interested in outcome of it .
 Both of these arch-enemies in this cold war, pre-Berlin Wall Fall period backed Iraq . Oddly enough, both sides backed Iraq in the Cold War era .
 By 1990, the United States was sending signals to Iraq that it would not interfere with other conflicts in the region . The U.S. sent signals that it wouldn't interfere with Iraq's involvement in other conflicts .
 In July, United States Ambassador to Iraq April Glaspie told Hussein that the U.S. didn't want to get involved in regional conflicts and border disputes .
 Hussein read this, whether it was meant that way or not, as a go-ahead to expand his empire . Hussein apparently read this as a sign of expansion of his empire in Iraq .
 Hussein apparently had no qualms about imperialism if it was Iraq in the role of the hammer rather than the nail . Hussein had risen to power in Iraq as a result of his anti-imperialist stance .
 On August 2 nd , 1990, Iraqi troops moved into Kuwait, conquering it within twelve hours . Iraqi troops captured the country within 12 hours .
 The United States went to the U.N. to secure sanctions against Iraq for this action . The U.S. also secured sanctions against the Iraqi government . Iraq has been accused of using the use of chemical weapons to launch a chemical weapons attack .
 A U.N. Security Council resolution gave Iraq until January 15 th to pull out of Kuwait . Ultimately, the resolution was reached by the United Nations . Iraq has been accused of committing atrocities in the country since 2003 .
 Iraq President Saddam Hussein instead thumbed his nose at the ultimatum . Saddam Hussein was president of Iraq in the early 1980s . Iraq President George W. Bush was assassinated in 1998 .
 The United States responded with a show of force designed to keep Iraq from furthering its conquest . The U.S. responded to the invasion of Iraq with a military response .
 A second phase followed, a second phase of an aerial attack which sported the sobriquet Desert Storm . Desert Storm was the first phase of a two-stage air strike in the desert .
 President Bush kept Israel out of the fray in Iraq . He also kept the U.S. out of conflict with Iraq .
 The coalition deployed more than a half million troops, one thousand eight hundred aircraft, and one hundred ships . In a deafening roar of sabr-rattling turned saber-slashing, more than half a million troops were deployed .
 The front and rear portions of the Iraqi convoy was attacked by United States forces, trapping them in their tracks . U.S. forces trapped the convoy in the rear of the convoy .
 Fewer than three hundred Americans were killed, about half of these as a result of accidents during training exercises . About half of the deaths were caused by training accidents .
 It stopped short of invading and deposing Iraqi President Saddam Hussein . The U.S. stopped short short of deposing Hussein .
 Many politicians and commentators in the West and the Middle East have repeatedly asked why the coalition forces did not overthrow Saddam Hussein . In the Eye of the Storm"": Many politicians, commentators have asked why coalition forces failed to overthrow Saddam .
 Britain contributed the second largest Western force to the Coalition . Sir Peter de La Billiere commanded the troops of Britain, which contributed to coalition .
 The Arabs themselves had no intention of invading another Arab country, the Arab leader says . The Arab nation was not invaded by the Arab Spring .
 The Islamic forces [i.e.e., forces of the 13 Muslim members of the coalition] were happy to enter Kuwait for the purpose of restoring the legal government, but that was the limit of their ambition . Islamic forces entered Kuwait in the hope of restoring a legal government .
 We would have split the coalition physically physically, since the Islamic forces would not have come with us, and risked splitting it morally and psychologically as well, as well . "We would have risked undoing all the goodwill which we had taken so much trouble to achieve," he says .
 The American, British, and French would have been presented as the foreign invaders of Iraq . The British, French, French and British would have undermined the prestige which we had earned around the world for helping the Arabs resolve a major threat to the Middle East .
 Desert Storm would have been seen purely as an operation to further Western interests in the Middle East . Desert Storm was seen as a Western attempt to further the Mideast interests of the region .
 Either we would have to set up a puppet government or withdraw ignominiously without a proper regime in power, leaving the way open for Saddam to return, he says . Either would leave the country open for the return of Saddam Hussein .
 To have gone on to Baghdad would have achieved nothing except to create wider problems, he says . "To go on to Iraq would have ... created even wider problems," he adds .
 Like Germany in World War II, Iraq had been attempting to produce a nuclear bomb, which they had hoped would be deployable by mid1991 . Iraq had hoped to produce the bomb by the end of 1991 .
 They were unable to attain the necessary triggering device . Fortunately, they had been unable to find the necessary trigger device .
 It appears as though the feds are attempting to draw fire from the house as an excuse to finish us all off . It appears that they are drawing fire from a house firefight .
 Ticket holders of color were not surprised by her fall, only hurt and weary after having had to be taken in again . "I'm not surprised," she said, "I was hurt and tired after having to have to take in again"
 Gregory Alan-Williams' memoir, "A Memoir of the Los Angeles Riots" was published in 2009 .
 Twain wrote: "Every effort I make to save the country 'misses fire' Twain: "I go into the streets, into the neighborhoods, into projects"
 "I see the homeless, the helpless, the anger and the violence, the drugs and the despondency. I see ... the homeless and the helpless," she says . "The anger, the violence and the drugs are the things I see," she adds .
 Some people were shocked by the explosion of rioting in Los Angeles in 1992 . Rioting in 1992 was the first of its kind in the United States since 1968 .
 The stew of poverty and despair simmers and cooks in the grimmest parts of our cities, and it will not go away . It will never go away, but it will be a stew of despair and despair, says the author .
 We who do not live in these places might close our eyes or our hearts, we might pretend it does not exist or that it has nothing to do with us, but it will not simply go away . We might close eyes or hearts, but we will not ignore it. We might
 We can look and listen and respond in constructive ways to our places of poverty, or we can be forced to respond to outbursts of violence such as these riots . We need to look at our places and listen, rather than respond to them, says David Cameron .
 This year, their case had become a high priority for federal law enforcement . This year's case has become a focus for federal authorities .
 Also culpable are many of the members of the . aforementioned officers of the law, the . law . Also . also culpable .
 The Weavers had become extremely paranoid about the government . They considered the government to be completely corrupt and backed by Jews, one of their least favorite races .
 The Weavers moved to remote northern Idaho from mid-America Iowa to home-school their daughters . One of the reasons they moved was that they wanted to home school their daughters, a process which was illegal in Iowa .
 Weaver family's fears of government conspiracies seem to come true in their case . Weaver family and friend Kevin Harris say they believe the government is involved in the case .
 Vicki Weaver would die believing ZOG was out to kill her entire family . Weaver believed ZOG would kill her family before she died . Weaver died at the hands of ZOG .
 The Weaver's extremes of behavior actually brought upon them unwanted attention from the government that they so feared . The Weaver was forced to live with the government in order to avoid unwanted attention .
 Their debilitating paranoia turned their nightmare into a self-fulfilling prophecy . Their paranoia turned them into a reality TV show .
 Had the government agents not over-estimated the danger the Weavers posed, the whole tragedy need not have happened . The Weavers were killed by the government, but not by their actions .
 Prior to the deadly day, the feds thought Randy was a member of the Aryan Nations . Randy was arrested on suspicion of being an Aryan Nation member .
 He had attended a few gatherings and was friendly with some of the members of the group . He was not, although he had attended some of their gatherings, he said .
 Feds believe Weaver was hording a massive cache of illegal weapons . Weaver is believed to be hiding illegal weapons in the U.S.
 It was feared, too, that the mountain on which the Weavers lived was booby trapped . The Weavers' mountain was believed to be a booby trap .
 Three children and several animals were running around the place . That thought made little sense, though, though .
 It certainly would have been good for all if the two sides somehow managed to get a grip on their frenzyinducing fear .
 At the time of the events related here, Sara was 16, Samuel was 13, Rachel was 10 — and Elisheba, of course, was yet a babe . Sara and Samuel were both 16 and 13 years old .
 The Weavers' troubles began in earnest when Randy was under surveillance by the ATF due to his connections with the Aryan Nations . Randy was a rabidly racist and anti-government pack of wackos . Randy's troubles began when he was discovered to be under surveillance .
 ATF has come to focus more intently on the ""Firearms"" portion of their acronym as their chief duty . ATF was once focused mainly on raiding stills in the south . ATF is now focused on the firearms portion of its acronym .
 An informant working for the ATF lured the cash-strapped Weaver into selling him an illegal weapon . Randy Weaver agreed to provide the informant with a sawed-off shotgun . The informant worked for the FBI .
 Weaver hoped to avoid being taken into custody by keeping a low profile and staying on his land as much as possible . Weaver was caught in the act by staying on the land .
 A couple pretended their truck was broken down on the road near the Weavers' mountain cabin . Randy and Vicki were on their way down the mountain into town when the incident happened . Randy said the couple pretended the truck had broken down .
 The Weavers were stopped to help stranded strangers . They were arrested by undercover agents . They stopped to see if they could help them .
 Randy was given false information about the gravity and potential consequences of his situation, being told he could lose his property to amend for matters . Randy was apprehended after he was apprehended by police . Randy says he was told he may have to amend his property after being arrested .
 Weaver missed his scheduled day in court for missing his scheduled court appearance . Weaver was charged with failing to appear in court . Weaver has been charged with two counts of misdemeanor drug possession .
 This intractability of some of the mountain folk was just the thing to jangle the nerves of the officers of the law .
 Such cases, once they started going badly, could pick up their own momentum, like a stone rolling downhill . Such cases can pick up momentum, such as this, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the case of the Weaver family, the foregoing would prove to be an understatement . The Weaver family is known for their hard work in the construction industry .
 Randy being set up in the gun deal; begin tricked by the ATF on his arrest; being given false information as to his court date at his arraignment; and then being spied on by hidden cameras . Randy was given false court date as to which he was arraigned; and
 Before the shootout, one of the surveillance cameras the FBI had set up in the woods above their cabin was discovered and destroyed by the Weavers . The Weavers destroyed the FBI's surveillance camera .
 On the day of the killings, the Weaver's golden Labrador Retriever, Striker, picked up on the presence of the strangers and raced into the woods after them . Striker was the first dog to run after the strangers in the woods .
 Randy Weaver hoped that the scent Striker was tracking was that of an elk or a deer, as the family lived hand-to-mouth and could have used the meat . Randy Weaver hopes that Striker's scent is that of a deer .
 The United States Marshals retreated, not wanting to get involved in a firefight with Randy, his 13-year-old son Sammy, and Kevin Harris, all of whom were, like almost always, armed . Randy, Sammy, Kevin Harris and Randy Harris were armed .
 Even Vicki and the girls, not only 16-year-old Sara but also 10, went around with weapons strapped around their bodies . Vicki, Sara and Rachel were among the girls who had weapons strapped to them .
 A United States Marshal named Arthur Roderick shot Striker dead, hoping he could ""take out"" the dog before it led its owners to him and his partners . Striker was shot dead by Roderick, a U.S. marshal .
 Young Sammy quickly came on the scene, saw his dog had been shot dead, and reacted — as many armed boys would do in such a predicament— by shooting at Roderick . Roderick was shot dead by Sammy, who was shot at by Sammy .
 He didn't make it far, though — he was felled by a bullet through the back, which killed him instantly .
 Harris, in order to protect his young friend, fired on the agents, mortally wounded Degan with a shot to the chest . Harris, who was trying to protect Degan, shot the agents in self-defence .
 Harris was moaning and shaking so violently on coming out of the woods and into the clearing near the cabin, though, Randy at first thought he was someone else . Randy thought Harris was shaking so much that he thought he had been someone else.
 The FBI had changed their normal rules of engagement due to misunderstanding the situation . The FBI said the situation was a misunderstanding .
 Weaver had mostly driven heavy equipment during his stint in the military . He had never been to Vietnam . Weaver was in the service during the Vietnam War .
 The FBI was also nervous that anti-government sentiment in northern Idaho was strong enough that they would be facing more foes than just the Weaver family . The FBI also was nervous that the government might be facing even more foes .
 Do not shoot at anyone unless you intend to kill them, and do not have that intention unless your life, or someone else's, is in imminent danger .
 Agents are expected to be as familiar with the rules as they are with their own phone numbers . Agents will have to be familiar with rules as well as their own numbers .
 These rules are framed and hang on a wall at FBI headquarters in Quantico, Virginia . The rules hang on the wall of FBI headquarters .
 Agents are not to use deadly force against any person except as necessary in self-defense or the defense of another when they have reason to believe they or another are in danger of death or grievous bodily harm . Agents are also not to be armed with deadly force unless they believe they are
 Whenever feasible, verbal warning should be given before deadly force is applied, police say . Police should always give verbal warning before using deadly force .
 FBI officials did not even consult with the United States Marshals who had been in the firefight . Those in the FBI who made that decision didn't even consult the Marshals .
 After three days of being surrounded in their house, and no shots coming from inside, the rules of engagement were finally changed back to standard . No shots were fired from inside the house .
 Randy Weaver, the man they considered so dangerous, never even fired at any of the interlopers . Weaver was considered dangerous, but he was never shot at anyone else .
 Lon Horiuchi opened the door of an outbuilding to take one last look at his dead son Sammy, whose body had washed and wrapped in a sheet and stored there . He himself had been hit by an FBI sniper, as he opened his son's door to take a last look
 Horiuchi instead struck Weaver in the upper arm instead of killing him . Weaver was reaching for the door as the sniper pulled the trigger . Weaver had moved to the door just before the sniper was pulling the gun on him .
 At that point Weaver, his older daughter Sara, and Harris made a run for the cabin . Weaver's daughter Sara was also in the cabin at the time of the incident .
 As Randy and Sara ducked into their dwelling, and Kevin Harris was preparing to do so, Kevin Horiuchi tried to kill Kevin Harris . Kevin Harris died of his injuries .
 Vicki Weaver, who was holding baby Elisheba in her right arm, was standing in the doorway, hurling obscenities at the men who had killed her son . Weaver was holding the baby in her arm when she was killed .
 Vicki died instantly, and collapsed in a heap just inside the doorway, still clutching her baby tightly . Vicki was rushed to hospital by paramedics but died instantly . She collapsed in the doorway still clutching the baby tightly and died in hospital .
 The sniper claimed he was aiming for Harris, and yet hit Vicki, who the authorities felt was the ""strength"" of the family . The authorities felt Vicki was the "strength" of her family .
 Shooting into a house with three children present does not seem the most ethical, nor the brightest, thing to do— to say the least . In any case, shooting into a home with three kids present is not the best thing to say .
 Randy Weaver fled when he realized Striker was stalking, not an elk or a deer, but gun-toting lawmen, abandoning his son . Weaver fled the woods with his friend Kevin Harris and his young son, Randy Weaver .
 Weaver's practice of having his daughters serve as ""shields"" for him is also incomprehensible . Weaver's daughters are his daughters . Weaver has been married for more than 20 years .
 Any time Randy went outside, his girls stood between him and the enemy . Randy says his girls were always with him when he left the house .
 It would be suspect enough to do that if you felt your enemy would refrain from firing on young ones, it would have been suspect enough . It's suspect enough for you to shoot at young ones .
 Weaver claimed the government was completely vicious, evil and untrustworthy . Weaver, though, said the government is completely vicious and evil . Weaver said the U.S. government is the most powerful in the world .
 After Vicki had been shot dead, there was no reason for any of the surviving members of the family to have much faith in fair play from the FBI and their cohorts . Vicki was shot dead .
 An hour after shooting at various and sundry family members and friend of the family Kevin Harris, the FBI finally gave those in the house a chance to surrender . The FBI gave those inside the house an opportunity to surrender — which would normally be an option proffered at the outset .
 The remaining Weavers, and Harris, refused to negotiate with the federal agents at first . Harris and Weavers refused negotiations with federal agents .
 They thought it was pointless, that the whole thing had been a setup, that they were doomed no matter what they said or did . They thought they thought that the entire thing was a setup . They were doomed, they said .
 News reports claimed that Kevin Harris had fired the first volley . The news reports fueled their suspicions about what they thought of as a thoroughly corrupt and conspiratorial government .
 The wounding of Randy Weaver and Kevin Harris, and the killing of the family dog Striker were also omitted from the early newscasts . The wounding and killing of Kevin Harris and Randy Weaver are also omitted .
 The lawmen even claimed that they didn't know one of their number had killed young Samuel Weaver .
 Sammy's body was found in the shed . Randy's friends surmise that perhaps Randy had started killing his own children .
 Vicki Weaver's faceless body lay in the cabin for several days before the remaining members of the household gave up . The faceless corpse was used by the shooter to expand on impact .
 The bullet that blew up Vicki Weaver's skull and tore away the bottom half of her face continued its erratic, bee-dance flight path and ended up lodged in Kevin Harris' upper arm . Kevin Harris: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die. I'm not
 He was the first of those holed up in the house to surrender . He did so in order to receive the medical attention he so desperately needed .
 At first, the rest of the household thought that Kevin was dead after being hit with the bullet that had passed through Vicki's body . Vicki died after her husband was hit by the bullet .
 The Weavers thought that their friend would not make it through the night . Subsequently, based on how he looked, sounded, and smelled, the Weavers feared that he would not survive the night.
 Randy Weaver's investigation revolved around trafficking in illegal weapons . Federal agents had expected to find a cache of these in Weaver's possession .
 There were no illegal weapons whatsoever — no sawed-off shotguns, no automatic weapons . No automatic weapons were illegal weapons, police say .
 The feds found armor-piercing bullets among the ammunition the Weavers had at their disposal . However, the feds did find armor-resistant bullets in the home .
 The Weavers showed either great restraint, fear, or resignation in not using these . The Weaver showed either restraint or fear, but not resignation .
 Or perhaps it was simply the prudent course to refrain from giving the law an excuse to really let loose . Perhaps it was just a prudent course, or perhaps the law was simply to let loose.
 The armor-piercing bullets could have been effectively used against the APC the FBI had driven up to the house to negotiate with Weaver . Weaver was shot by the FBI at Weaver's home in Washington .
 Randy spotted the robot the FBI was using to approach his house . Randy may have been willing to consider a negotiated surrender . The robot was used to approach Randy's home .
 The automaton was to punch a hole through one of the windows and drop a telephone inside . It was designed to punch through a hole in the window and drop the phone inside .
 In the end, the FBI got their woman, and the United States Marshals got their little boy . The FBI and the Marshals were able to track down the suspect .
 As mentioned previously, both agencies at first denied knowing they had killed their targets . Both agencies initially denied knowledge of the killings .
 The shooter claimed that neither he nor the slain William Degan had fired their weapons in the initial clash . Whether he was simply lying, or he had a mental blackout about the situation afterward, the shooter of Sammy claimed to have fired his weapon .
 Sammy attempted to retaliate by shooting at Arthur Roderick, but missed . Sammy turned around and fled back toward the house . United States Marshal William Degan shot Sammy in the arm, at which point the boy fled back . Sammy shot and killed Striker; United States Marshals shot Sammy
 FBI sniper Lon Horiuchi attempted to kill Randy Weaver, but only injured him . Vicki Weaver's bullet passed through her head and embedded itself in Kevin Harris' arm, seriously wounding him . Later on the same day, the FBI sniper attempted to shoot Randy Weaver and killed Vicki
 One of the slugs from Cooper's gun that was found at the scene of the first gun battle still contained trace material from Sammy's clothing . Larry Cooper denied shooting Sammy, and asserted that neither he nor his partner William Degan had fired their weapons .
 Both sides had gone to extreme measures out of grotesquely exaggerated fear of one another . Both sides were found liable for their actions by the judge and jury . The trial was adjourned on Monday .
 Randy Weaver was sentenced to eighteen months in jail for failing to appear in court . Weaver was found guilty of failing to show up in court and sentenced to 18 months jail .
 At the time of sentencing, he had already served 14 months of his sentence . He had already been serving 14 months .
 Weaver was found not guilty of the murder and assault charges the government tried to hang on him . Weaver was acquitted of the charges he was charged with murder . Weaver has been sentenced to life in prison .
 Judge Edward Lodge found the FBI in contempt of court, and fined them $1,920 for its delays and obstructions . Judge Lodge also fined the FBI for obstructing and delaying the investigation .
 Lodge said the actions of the government, acting through the FBI, evidence a callous disregard for the rights of the defendants and the interests of justice . Lodge said that the government's actions were a 'callous disregard' for the defendants' rights .
 Michael Kahoe served time for obstruction of justice . He is the only person on the government side of the issue who served time . Kahoe is a former White House aide .
 Kahoe shredded the FBI's internal internal post-confrontation critique . Kahoe had shredded the bureau's internal response to the incident .
 None of those involved were fired from their jobs, although some were reassigned from one assignment to another and/ or ""censured"" and given some time off . Other government employees were disciplined to various degrees, but for the most part these were ""slaps on the wrist""
 In the O. Simpson murder trial, the gap between criminal and civic court cases is often quite wide . O.C. court cases are often quite quite wide, including the Simpson case .
 The Weavers were awarded $3.3 million dollars in a civil trial in 1995 . The case was brought by the Weaver family against the government . Both sides were found guilty in the criminal trial .
 Kevin Harris accepted a $380,000 settlement from the government in 2000 . It wasn't until late in the year 2000 that closure came to Kevin Harris, when he accepted the settlement . Kevin Harris was awarded a total of $370,000 .
 The cabin where the Weavers had gone to await a government-bred Armageddon was gone in 1997 . It collapsed in the spring of 1997 under a heavy load of snow .
 The Ruby Ridge debacle did not end on the remote north Idaho outpost . As symbolic as that may seem, it may not end with the Ruby Ridge fiasco .
 The mayhem there, along with another raid involving the ATF, would serve as a catalyst to other tragedies to follow . The mayhem in the ATF raid would be a catalyst for other tragedies .
 The standoff between the ATF and the Branch Davidians outside Waco, Texas, would take place during the trial of Randy Weaver and Kevin Harris .
 FBI sniper Lon Horiuchi was also at Waco, and would end up in the middle of the controversy surrounding that deadly conflagration . FBI sniper was also involved in the firefight that left Waco dead .
 All four officers (Stacey Koon, Theodore Briseno, Timothy Wind, and Lawrence Powell) captured on videotape beating Rodney King were acquitted by an all-white jury in arch-""conservative"" Simi Valley .
 Plaintiffs yelled ""guilty"" as the plaintiffs came out of the courthouse and chased the officers to their cars with rocks . Police officers yelled "guilty" as they chased the plaintiffs to their vehicles . The plaintiffs yelled 'guilty' as the officers were chased by rocks .
 Many observers were completely dumbfounded by the outcome of the trial . The trial is expected to last for a year .
 He said that he, his wife, and his children were stunned by the verdict .
 Rodney King retreated to the solitude of his bedroom, shaking and speechless . As for Rodney King himself, he retreated to his bedside, shaking .
 It suddenly was like he had no idea who he was or what time it was or where he was . It suddenly felt like he didn't know what he was doing or how he was going .
 He would start to make sense, but then 10 seconds later he couldn't even tell you what room he was in, he said . "He would start making sense, and then ... he would start out of it," he said. "Then 10 seconds after that, he wouldn't
 On the screen, the officers who had beaten King were hugging and smiling, free men . The officers who beat him were hugged and smiling free men, the screen showed . King was freed from jail .
 Justice is another concept altogether, and any who would really try to uphold it would be sticking their neck out . Justice is a concept altogether .
 Once again, the ubiquitous and multipurpose acronym CYA stamps itself on events . CYA stands for California Youth Authority, a state youth agency .
 The jury's decision triggered three days of rioting over a fiftysquare -mile swath of Los Angeles . Three days of riots were sparked by the jury's verdict .
 Hundreds of fires were set and millions of dollars worth of goods was looted . Millions of dollars of goods were looted in the looting spree .
 Fifty-four people were killed, over two thousand wounded, $700 million of property was damaged, and more than thirteen thousand arrests were made . More than 13,000 people were arrested .
 Parking lot attendant Adey Behre said: "It's horrible what they've done. It's horrible" Parking lot attendants said the incident was 'horrible'
 The outrage of many from the African-American Community in Los Angeles manifested itself on April 29 th with a chaotic cacophony of mayhem directed against any non-black person .
 In some cases, even light-skinned blacks who appeared Caucasian by mobs were targeted . Light-skinned black people were targeted in some cases .
 In some cases, they came to the aid of those the crowds were pummeling . Crowds came to aid those pummeled by the crowds .
 Alan-Williams asked Takao his name and thought he was a recent immigrant . After wrenching him away from the clutches of the murderous mob, Alan- Williams asked him his name . He thought Takao was a man who had been killed by the mob .
 In actuality, the Japanese man was born in America-in a government internment camp during World War II . His family had been placed in the camp due to their ethnicity .
 Members of the crowd had not only smashed him in the face with their fists, but had viciously broken bottles against his face . The crowd smashed bottles against him with fists and smashed them with broken fists .
 A middle-aged man was also on the scene, protecting Hirata by holding back some of the attackers . Hirata was attacked by a group of men who attacked her .
 Alan-Williams escorted Hirata away from the worst area of the trouble spot . Another black man came to the rescue and drove Hirata to the hospital . Hirata was taken to a hospital .
 Pummeled white truck driver Reginald Denny was taken to the hospital by five black men . Five black men were also involved in the attack .
 Denny had been dragged from his truck, beaten, kicked, and had his own fire extinguisher bashed against his skull . Denny was dragged from the truck and beaten and kicked, but survived .
 Denny's beating was broadcast live, as it was happening — the police unable to come to his assistance . Similar to the Rodney King beating, the beating was seen by millions on television .
 Denny's face was covered in blood and his eyes were swollen shut . He somehow managed to climb back into his truck and drive slowly away from the scene .
 Good Samaritans pulled his truck into the hospital in the nick of time - he suffered a seizure on arrival at the hospital . Doctors said had he arrived any later he would have died . He was helped by some good Samaritans who at first hung on alongside his truck .
 Times reporter John Mitchell saved a Vietnamese refugee from the wrath of an angry mob . Mitchell was the reporter who saved the refugee from a Vietnamese mob .
 What started as a riot in response to the injustice in the Rodney King case seemed to morph into a combination poverty riot (many stores were looted) and a race riot, wreaking revenge not only on whites, but also on Asians .
 As the four policeman in the Rodney King case had been, Soon Ja Du was inexplicably acquitted . The four police officers involved in the case were also acquitted .
 She jumped out of her car without rolling up the windows, leaving her screaming infant unattended . She left the screaming infant alone in her car .
 The well-dressed, professional-looking woman sprinted into the store for her share . Then, she sprinted in for her own .
 As far as monetary damage to businesses went, Koreans and African-Americans suffered the most, according to the survey . African-American and Koreans were the most likely to have suffered from vandalism and looting .
 During the Watts Riots/ Rebellion of 1965, black businesspeople had tried to ward off destruction of their own shops by posting ""Soul Brother" signs in their store windows .
 One person compared it to a person becoming so angry that he strikes out in uncontrolled rage and frustration and punches a wall — hurting his own hand in the process . One person said it was like a person punching a wall in anger and hurting himself .
 Another, perhaps more convoluted, psychological hypothesis asserts that such self-destructive behavior is a result of self-loathing brought on by an internalizing of the message behind the verdicts . That message is that they are a lesser people, unworthy of justice .
 Rodney King was not reveling in the rabid rabble's reckless abandon . Regardless of the psychology behind it all, Rodney King did not revel in the rabble . Rodney King said, "I don't think it's OK"
 He emerged from his lawyer's office in Beverly Hills to be engulfed by a throng of 1 00 reporters .
 Nervous and barely audible, his voice lost at times to the blast of helicopter rotors overhead . King delivered a halting plea for peace that, in its rambling, elliptical, tragic quality, became one of the more memorable moments in the Los Angeles riots .
 "We've got enough smog here in Los Angeles, let alone to deal with the setting of these fires and things," says L.A. resident .
 Security guard shot on the ground is 'just not right' for a security guard to be shot in the head . "I can understand the first upset in for the first two hours after the verdict," he says .
 "It's just not right because those people will never go home to their families again. It's just right," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A federal grand jury has already issued subpoenas as part of an accelerated Justice Department investigation into whether the beating of Rodney King violated federal civil rights laws . President Bush also announced that a grand jury had already issued subpoena .
 White House aides described the unusual disclosure as an attempt by Bush to soothe the destructive anger sparked by the not-guilty verdicts . Bush aides described it as a move by Bush by trying to calm down the anger .
 The next year, two of the officers were found guilty on federal civil rights charges . Two of them were convicted of civil rights violations .
 Ramzi Yousef filled a rented van with twelve hundred pounds of high explosives . He parked it next to a concrete wall in the bowels of the World Trade Center . Ramzi had filled the van with 12 hundred pounds .
 Yousefs intent was to blow up and take down the entire World Trade Center complex . Yousef intended to blow-up and take-down the entire complex .
 The monsters behind the attack had wanted to knock one tower into the other and kill everyone in both buildings . The attack had been planned to knock the towers into each other .
 In fact, Yousef admitted after being captured in the Philippines two years later that he had hoped to kill 250,000 civilians in the attack . He admitted to being captured two years after the attack that he wanted to kill more than half a million people .
 Yousef and his accomplices failed in that grotesque and grandiose endeavor, but nevertheless killed six and wounded more than a thousand . More than 1,000 people were wounded in the attack, including six .
 The missive demanded changes in U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East . The letter was sent to the president of the United States .
 If the demands were ignored, more terrorist attacks would take place against American targets, U.S. officials say . The demands would be ignored, according to the U.N. State Department .
 The World Trade Center will continue to be one of our targets in the U.S., unless our demands are met, we say . However, we promise you that next time it will be very precise, and we promise to be more precise .
 "Yousef is now completely impotent, no longer in a situation to harm anyone," Yousef says . "And yousef ... is now impotent," he adds .
 Among Youselfs ""neighbors"" are Unabomber Ted Kaczynksi, Oklahoma City bomber Terry Nichols, and Terry Nichols' co-conspirator, Timothy McVeigh . He is now caged in a Supermax prison near the small town
 BATF and FBI agents raided the seventy-seven acre compound outside Waco, Texas in the spring of this year, investigating reports of a stockpile of illegal arms, as well as childabuse allegations .
 ATF unit moved in on February 28 th . Branch Davidian members resisted by using some of their stockpile of weaponry . ATF unit used some of the weapons .
 ATF agents and Branch Davidian community members were killed in the exchange . ATF agents were also killed . Six members of the Branch Davidians were killed .
 Koresh is the Hebrew name for ""Cyrus,"" the Persian King who had destroyed Babylon twenty five hundred years earlier . Koresh means "Cyrus" and "Koros" in Hebrew .
 Howell apparently viewed modern society as a new ""Babylon" Howell saw himself as the future conqueror of such such a society . Howell apparently thought modern society was a new Babylonian . Howell was the author of a novel, "The Man of the Day"
 The "Branch Davidians" had been living at their compound outside Waco, Texas, for almost sixty years at the time of the raid . The Branch Davidians had actually broken off from the Seventh Day Adventists in 1934 . The "Davidians,"" as they were called
 It is believed residents of the compound were producing machine guns and grenades . It was believed that the residents were making machine guns . The compound is believed to have been set up by residents in the compound .
 The initial raid was made in order to search for evidence of illegal activity and to arrest David Koresh . Koresh was arrested after the initial raid . The raid was intended to search and arrest Koresh, Koresh's wife and children .
 Rather than accept the invitation, the government forced their way in, upon which the gun battle ensued . The government was forced to force their way into the country .
 During 1992 alone, the group had received hundreds of weapons and thousands of rounds of ammunition, including parts for M-16s and AK-47s, grenades, a grenade launcher, and explosives .
 Armed guards were told by Koresh to ""shoot to kill"" in the event that intruders were to infiltrate Mt. Mt. Koresh . Armed guards posted armed guards at their compound .
 Former leader of the group, George Roden, had threatened Koresh, who had taken over leadership after a gunfight between the two factions . One possible reason for the group's fearful attitude toward outsiders was that Roden had threatened the Koresh .
 The legal basis behind the pursuit was that the gun activity in which the group was involved was deemed illegal . The pursuit was the result of a gun activity deemed illegal in the group's possession .
 In order to own a machine gun, one must pay a $200 tax and fill out requisite paperwork . The machine gun owner must fill out the paperwork .
 A former member of the group, a Registered Nurse, claimed Koresh had fathered at least fifteen children from various women and girls in the compound . Some of the children were as young as twelve years old, she said . Koresh is accused of having fathered children from women and
 Koresh annulled marriages of members of his church and then gained sole sexual access to all the women, nurse says . This nurse says she delivered seven of Koresh's babies herself . Koresh is believed to be the father of seven children .
 Some observers say the raid was timed to coincide with a Congressional decision on BATF funding . Others say it was timed so closely ahead of an upcoming BATF decision on funding .
 The BATF, as well as their partners in crime-fighting, the FBI, were still smarting from the PR bruising they had received after the debacle in Ruby Ridge . After all, the BATF and the FBI were smarting after the Ruby Ridge debacle .
 It was only ten days away from appropriations hearings in the House of Representatives . It was reeling from a 60 Minutes series on sexual harassment of female agents, stinging from a racial discrimination class-action lawsuit .
 Internally, agents were referring to the Waco raid as ""ZBO,"" slang for ""Zee Big One" The stunt was meant to ensure the agency went into the hearings with headlines and national media coverage behind it .
 After the initial raid, additional BATF and FBI forces arrived on the scene, bottling up the members inside their compound . The raid was the first raid on the compound .
 Various forms of ""persuasion"" were used to undermine Koresh's influence on the residents of Mt. Mt. Shomom .
 FBI played statements of former members over loudspeakers . They sent into the compound videotapes and pictures of members' children, as well as messages from family members .
 Koresh apparently allowed any who chose to depart to do so at any time they wished . Their intent was to increase the flow of the exodus from the compound from a trickle to a flood, Koresh said .
 During the nights, floodlights were used as a weapon of psychological warfare . Floodlights served to disrupt the sleep of those involuntarily basking in their eerie glow .
 The Carmelites were too comfortably ensconced in their collection of buildings, the feds shut off electrical power to the compound, and surrounded their quarters with ""concertina wire"" (spiral barbed wire) fencing .
 If the authorities had really wanted the group to surrender, as they claimed they did, one would have wanted the people inside to be thinking straight and clearly, but this strategy was not conducive to such a state of mind . One would think they would have hoped the group inside would be thinking
 In addition to the previously mentioned tactics, they increasingly tightened the perimeter around Mt. Mt. Olympus . The area has been under siege by the Taliban for years .
 Armored vehicles of various types of vehicles, as well as a massive display of weapons and personnel . Armored vehicles and personnel were also on display .
 Stone also complained about the CS gas used by the FBI, which is known to be harmful to children, especially to those inside the compound . Stone: CS gas is dangerous to children .
 Many of the deaths were from smoke inhalation, but some may have been a result of the CS gas . Many of these deaths were smoke inhalations . Some of these were likely caused by CS gas, but others were caused by the fire .
 The cause of the fire is also disputed, both sides blaming the other for the ignition of the conflagration . Both sides blame the fire on each other .
 Helicopters were also used to observe the goings-on in the compound, or — if you believe the other side — fire on the residents of the compound from above . Helicopter was also used in the attack .
 Some say these shooters were government law enforcement agents . Others claim they were members of the military's secret Delta Force Unit .
 It is illegal for the government to use the military in police matters . The government is prohibited from using the military to conduct police operations in the country .
 The final one, fifty-one days later, on April 19 th th , was much more chaotic and catastrophic . The last one was a more chaotic, and catastrophic.
 The FBI feared their team would lose its edge if they had to wait any longer . The FBI decided it was time to act. The FBI was forced to take action .
 President Clinton conferred with Attorney General Janet Reno, but told her it was ultimately her decision . Clinton told Reno it would ultimately be her decision to make the decision .
 Clinton's delegation of this decision was not due to any ambiguity in his mind about the bent of the Branch Davidians and their leader, Clinton says . Clinton: "Clinton's delegation in this case was not because of any ambiguity"
 David Thibodeau, one of the few survivors of the raid, claims Koresh's gun operations were a legal money-making venture . Koresh invited the BATF to examine the weapons weeks prior to the initial raid, Thibodeaux says .
 Thibodeau also asserts Koresh was going to surrender to the authorities once he completed the writing of his interpretation of the Seven Seals of Revelation . Koresh also asserts that Koresh would surrender once he had completed his interpretation .
 Two commentaries written by Koresh were discovered in the ashes of Mount Carmel in the inferno's aftermath . Koresh's commentaries were found in the remains of the mountain in the aftermath of the fire .
 Nobody knows whether Koresh would have really ""come out with his hands up" after completing the full complement of manuscripts . Koresh's manuscripts are still available to the public .
 He also denies the child abuse charges . Differing with the nurse who had been a member, he denies the charges against him .
 There is no prohibition against the use of such a weapon in the U.S. But apparently there's no prohibition on it being used against American citizens .
 It could be that many who may have wanted to escape found it impossible to do so . They might have been prevented from doing so due to being trapped by the fire and building damage, or possibly even lost consciousness as a result of the massive amount of gas .
 When the tear gas was "inserted" (in the euphemistic terminology of the government), the Davidians fired back . The Davidians responded to the government's decision to use tear gas .
 It seems unlikely they anticipated the authorities would shut off their electricity . The outrage they displayed when it occurred makes it at least appear they were not expecting it .
 "It remains hard for me to clearly remember what happened after the tanks made their move," says the author .
 Inside Mount Carmel, the notion of leaving seemed insane . "With tanks smashing through your walls and rockets smashing through the windows, our very human reaction was not to walk out," he says .
 I thought first of the women and children, whom I had been separated from, when I was separated from . I thought of the children and women I had separated from. He said: 'I thought of them as children. They were separated from me'
 "I dropped to my knees to pray, and the wall next to me erupted inflame. I dropped to . knees to prayer, and I dropped . to pray," she said . "I was praying for God, and it was like a moment of time," she says .
 Community member Derek Lovelock ran through a hole in the wall and I followed him . Derek ran through the hole to find Derek, who had ended up in the same place as me, .
 As millions watched the shootout and inferno on live television, upwards of seventy people died inside the compound . Over 70 people were killed in the inferno .
 Thibodeau was one of only nine survivors of the inferno . Of the eightythree members trapped inside the fire, he was only one of nine who survived .
 During the siege, Davidians told FBI negotiators that the double doors were the best evidence of who fired first . The bullet holes through the left one were all pointing inward .
 The left door was made of sheet metal, not wood . After the fire, the left door simply vanished from the scene . It's not the only door that disappeared after the fire .
 The left door somehow went missing and remains so to this day . The scene was divided into squares and searched as if it were an archaeological site . It was sealed off to all but ATF and the FBI .
 Attorney for some of the Davidian survivors located a home video made by one of the fire department personnel as the fire died down . Second, Jim Brannon, attorney for survivors, located the video . The video was made by a Davidian survivor .
 The door-sized object, wrapped in black plastic, was loaded into a rented moving truck . Agents then loaded it into the truck and loaded it with a door-size object .
 The evidence strongly suggests that the government knew the door's bullet holes would incriminate the ATF as the initiator of the gunfight in front, and accordingly made its disappearance a high priority . The evidence, in short, strongly suggests, suggests that .
 Getting rid of the incriminating front door appears to have been a high priority for the FBI .
 It would have been the most solid piece of evidence that the ATF began the gunfight, and coming after 51 days of government spokesmen blaming the Davidians, would be stunning evidence that they were victims rather than cop-killers .
 The Davidians had been insisting that the door would prove them right and that the building bore bullet holes from above, as a record of the helicopters' gunfire, as well . The building bore bullets from above as well as bullet holes .
 A fire provided the only convenient way to make the door and all the bullet holes in the walls vanish . A fire was the only way of making the hole in the wall vanish .
 A disastrous fire wold, in short, be uncommonly convenient to the federal agencies . The federal agencies have a history of dealing with the problem .
 The Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, was bombed two years later . Precisely two years after the bombing, the Federal Building was bombed .
 The perpetrators claimed they had carried out their carnage in retaliation for the government's acts in Ruby Ridge and Waco . They claimed they carried out the killings in retaliation .
 The original intent of the decentralized architecture the Internet used was to maintain communications in the event of a catastrophic attack on the United States. Spurred on by the cold war, the original intent was to keep communications in an event of war .
 In the event that one computer center was destroyed, other computers in the country would automatically detect this, and use an alternate routing plan to relay messages . Other computers would also use an alternative routing plan .
 The Internet could theoretically stay operational even if a large percentage of the country had been destroyed . In this way the Internet could potentially stay operational .
 The Internet came about indirectly as a result of Sputnik, a little machine just a smidgen larger than a basketball, launched October 4 th , 1957 by the Soviets . The Internet was created indirectly by the launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite .
 Sputnik set in motion the space age, and, tangentially, the information/ cyberspace age . The space age was set in the 1950s .
 President Dwight Eisenhower embarked on a ""crash"" program to catch up with the Russians . President Eisenhower embarked upon a 'crash' program . Eisenhower embarked on a "crash" program to get ahead of Russia .
 ARPA was the Pentagon's arm for computer science research and information processing . ARPA is a computer science arm for the U.S. government .
 It is impossible to say exactly what year the Internet became mainstream . The Internet is now considered the world's most popular form of online communication .
 Work began on the Internet in the 1960s, but it wasn't until the 1990s that it achieved mainstream fame and became household terminology . The Internet is now considered the most popular way to communicate with the Internet .
 The work that government computer scientists were doing was originally unveiled in 1969, and was called ARPAnet . The work was originally designed by the government in 1969 .
 In its initial incarnation, the Internet was only available to certain government workers and university personnel . As already alluded to, in the initial incarnation of the Internet, only government workers were allowed access to the Internet .
 Even if it had been open to public use, the average person would not have been able to make heads or tails out of how to utilize it . The investment of time necessary to learn how to use it a worthwhile endeavor is worthwhile .
 browsers placed a graphical overlay on top of the previously-used command-line prompts that generated plain text only . That changed with the advent of browsers, which placed an overlay on the commands that generate plain text .
 The 1990 creation of the World Wide Web set the stage for the Internet becoming user-friendly and useful for the common person . The Internet is now more accessible than ever before .
 According to recent figures, each week the Internet gains 300,000 new users . Each week each week, the Internet adds 300,00 new users to the Internet .
 Even isolated villages in third-world countries are, or soon will be, wired . Even many isolated villages are connected to the Internet, but not literally wired .
 Renault in the movie ""Casablanca"" ""The only good nigger is a dead nigger. Renault in Casablanca" Renault said: "Only good niggles are dead nigglings"
 "It 's sad She doesn't love me now. She doesn 't love me," she says of her daughter . The song is from the song "Mrs. Brown," which she sings about .
 Simpson was the prime suspect when his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman, a male guest at her home, were found brutally murdered on June 12 th of this year . Simpson was a prime suspect in the deaths .
 Goldman, a martial arts devotee, defended himself valiantly, but eventually succumbed to the vicious onslaught of a knife-wielding assailant . Goldman was the victim of a vicious attack on Goldman .
 Nicole's head was practically severed from her body, her throat cut ear to ear . Nicole's throat was also cut in the attack . Nicole was killed by a car crash on the side of the road .
 O.J. had even on occasion told people that he was going to kill Nicole, according to reports . The couple was married for more than 20 years .
 There are reasons for questioning whether O.J. really was the murderer . Yet, there are still reasons to question whether he was the real killer . "O.J.'s murder trial is over, but there's still plenty of evidence to support his innocence," says author .
 On that occasion, he simply berated the two for their lack of discretion and left . He left .
 Goldman had bruises on his hands, indicating he had made violent contact with the murderer prior to his bloody demise . Goldman was found with bruises on the hands of the killer .
 O.J. and house guest Kato Kaelin had done the same thing an hour before the murder . That is exactly what they had done an hour earlier . Kato had been a guest at the home of O.K. J. and Kato .
 Had O.J. been the knife-wieldinger, so assert many authorities, he would have been covered in blood . Had he had been the killer, he'd been drenched in blood, authorities would have covered him .
 Only minuscule amounts of blood were found in O.J.'s vehicle, on his clothing, and in his house . It was barely enough to fit under a man's fingernail under his fingernails .
 There were only traces of blood found in O.J.'s vehicle, house, and on his clothing . Blood was found in his vehicle, home and clothing .
 The police tore apart the plumbing in Rockingham, O.J.’s estate, to see if he had washed himself clean . Police tore apart plumbing in the home of the disgraced actor .
 Prosecutors claimed the bloody glove found at the scene of the murders fell off O.J. during the attack . The glove was found in a bloody glove at the site of the killings . Prosecutors claimed it fell off during the murder trial .
 Prosecutors bone-headedly had O.J. try on the gloves in the courtoom . They were so small, he couldn't even put them on . Prosecutors should not have instigated something unless they knew it would strengthen their case .
 Private detective William C Dear spent six years investigating O.J.'s murder . Most likely suspect is his son Jason, according to book .
 Dear's book is written rather amateurishly (many of the conversations he records seem stilted) Despite the fact that the dialog he reports does not ring true, it is perhaps worth considering .
 The police investigators at the scene of the crime had done a very sloppy job of collecting evidence, examining the crime scene, and maintaining the integrity of the forensic evidence . The police had not done a good job at collecting evidence .
 Photographs show them at the scene without rubber gloves or protective booties over their shoes .
 They walked from one body to the other, thus carrying evidence from one location to another . They walked between one body and the other . The pair carried evidence from both bodies to the one .
 'They covered Nicole's body with a blanket from another location in the house' 'The blanket was doubtless contaminated with hair, etc. which could have then been transferred from the blanket onto her clothing and body'
 Jason was a chef, and owned a collection of chef's knives which he carried with him to and from work . Jason was also a chef and owned chef's knife collection .
 Nicole had promised to bring her family to the restaurant where he worked after her daughter's dance recital but then changed her mind . He had worked as a chef that night, and may have been upset with Nicole for promising to bring the family to his restaurant .
 Jason had reserved a table for them and ordered special food for them . Jason reserved a special table for the couple and ordered a special meal . Jason had prepared for their appearance by reserving a table and ordering special food .
 Jason Jason had been arrested for assault with a deadly weapon . Jason was still on probation at the time of the murders . He was on probation for assaulting with a weapon .
 He had on at least one occasion deliberately stabbed himself in a suicide attempt . He had been known to deliberately stab himself in suicide attempts .
 Dear makes the claim in his book that Jason suffers from IRD . IRD is a condition which causes people to 'go berserk' after which they oftentimes don't remember what they did while in that state .
 On one occasion, he chopped off the hair of one of these ex-girlfriends in a fit or rage using one of his chef's knives . On another occasion, the ex-boyfriend chopped off his ex's hair with a knife .
 O.J.'s Bruno Magli shoes were found at the scene of his murder . Jason often borrowed his father's clothing, according to police .
 Jason claimed he hadn't spoken with Nicole since a couple of weeks before her murder . Jason said he didn't speak with Nicole for two weeks before she was murdered .
 He admitted to speaking with her the day before she was murdered, and the day of the murders . After more questioning, he admitted to talking with her day before and day after she was killed .
 One minute he's the sweetest nicest guy you ever met, he's all angry and upset, a Dr. Dr. Martin says . He says he's not always happy or happy, but he's angry and angry .
 There was one time — I don't even remember what for — when he dragged me into the bathroom and picked me up and held me over his head and dropped me in the empty tub .
 His fingerprints were not examined to compare them with those found at the murder scene . Nor were his fingerprints were examined to check them with the crime scene .
 Defense attorney F Lee Bailey accused police officer Mark Fuhrman of finding a second bloody glove at the crime scene and surreptitiously depositing it at Rockingham .
 Fuhrman was found to be a rank bigot, deriding minorities in the crudest terms . Yet, in excerpts from taped interviews, he also bragged about beating suspects and evading discipline .
 William Dear hired an independent crime investigation lab to appraise the job the LAPD had done . Dear hired the lab, Complete Investigations, which is run by two retired British police officers .
 Merston and Harpur had more than fifty-eight years of combined investigative experience . Merston, Harpur were both veterans of investigative journalism .
 He commits the sin of attending other connected scenes during the investigation, therefore creating the real possibility of contaminating the other scenes . He also commits the... sin .
 It is obvious from the carnage at the murder scene, the murderer would have had to have been in close contact with both of the victims . The killer would have also had to be in close touch with both the victims, police say .
 Due to the severity of the injuries and the amount of wounds resulting in the severing of both jugular veins of Nicole Simpson and one jugular vein of Ronald Goldman, there is no doubt that the perpetrator of these vicious attacks would have been soaked in blood from head to foot .
 The distinct lack of blood in the Ford Bronco would therefore exclude it from being the murderer's 'get away' vehicle . It would be unlikely to be used as a 'getaway vehicle'
 A scenario, or theory, of Dear's theory is that after Jason killed Nicole and Ron, O.J. somehow found out about it . Perhaps after receiving a call from Jason on his cell phone, he may have known about the killings .
 O.J. may have then gone to the scene to check on his younger son Justin and daughter Sydney . Nicole, Nicole and Justin are believed to have been killed in the shooting .
 Blood traces were found on his clothing, in his car, and in his estate . Thus could he have picked up the traces of blood that were found in his clothing .
 When questioned about the incident, Jason made a point of claiming he did not own a cell phone . In actuality telephone company records show that he did, according to phone records .
 Simpson was in all probability at the murder scene, at some time after the events, for some reason best known to himself . Simpson was likely to be at the scene of the murder, but not necessarily at the time .
 Many people are 100% certain O.J. is guilty; others are just as convinced of his innocence . O.C. Walker: "I don't think he's guilty. He's not guilty, he's innocent"
 It is possible that the only person alive who knows who the murderer was is the murderer himself . It is also possible that he knows who he is .
 I think you'll find the facts also work if you assume everyone is endlessly stupid . "I think you will find you can't find out the facts," he says .
 There was a vast gap among Americans as to their response to this decision . There was also a huge gap in Americans' view of the decision .
 Only a little more than one-third of whites concurred with the verdict . Twice as many as many, almost three-quarters of blacks held the jury's decision to be the right one .
 O.J. Simpson was found guilty in a subsequent wrongful death civil trial and ordered to pay $8 million in damages to the families of Ron Goldman and Nicole Brown Simpson . The Rodney King-related trial of a few years earlier was similar to the Rodney King case .
 Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols bombed the Alfred P Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19 th . April 19 is the two-year anniversary of the Waco/Branch Davidian disaster .
 Among the dead were nineteen children who had been in the building's day-care center on the first floor . The children were among those killed .
 McVeigh's accomplice Terry Nichols is serving a life sentence for involuntary manslaughter . Nichols is also convicted of conspiring to kill the Oklahoma City bomber . Nichols' accomplice was convicted of involuntary manslaughter and conspiring to commit murder .
 Even if you concur that various individuals from a few government agencies were culpable in the Waco and Ruby Ridge debacles, it is quite a challenge to puzzle out how bombing a federal office building could be considered a blow against tyranny, a strike in the cause of justice . The
 Hundreds of people were directly affected by the despicable and incomprehensible crime against humanity . Besides those killed and their family and friends, others too were seriously impacted by the attack .
 Within twenty minutes, police K-9 teams from Oklahoma City arrived on the scene . The incident occurred in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma .
 Search and rescue teams from outside the area arrived within six hours of the blast . Within six hours, the first volunteer search teams had arrived in the area .
 By midnight, the focus of the search had shifted from locating live victims to recovering bodies . The search was focused on finding live victims and recovering bodies, officials said .
 The search and rescue operation was extremely stressful for the dogs used in the effort as well as their handlers . The dogs were involved in the rescue operation . The operation was stressful for their handlers and their dogs .
 The last three bodies were recovered by two Oklahoma City Police Department patrol/ search dogs . It was not until May 29 th , a full forty days after the mass murder, that the last three were recovered .
 " Strategies of Real-Life Search 85 Rescue Missions,""" in a chapter written by Marilyn Neudeck-Dicken, Ph.
 Dogs experienced exposure to chemical toxins, asbestos, body fluids, eye irritants, and cuts . Dogs were exposed to asbestos, asbestos and body fluids . Dogs have been exposed to toxins, as well as other things .
 Could the high incidence of cancer and blindness of the dogs who were in the first responding dog teams be a result of these exposures?... long-term ramifications of the bombing not only affected the dogs, but also the handlers as well .
 Neudeck-Dicken, herself a search-and-rescue worker, relates some of the affects the disaster had on the rescue personnel who responded to the disaster . She talks about the effects of the disaster on rescue workers .
 Sixty-eight per cent of dog handlers at Oklahoma City demonstrated acute stress reactions for over two years . The dogs were at the Oklahoma City facility for more than a decade .
 25% of dog handlers dropped out of Search 85 Rescue immediately after returning home . Of the dog handlers who were not emergency personnel by occupation, 25% dropped out .
 Being from Virginia we felt that we were very familiar with the mystique of ""the genteel South"" and its hospitality . We felt that being from Virginia was very familiar .
 "Every time that we met the locals, they expressed their gratitude and concern that we should be careful. Yet every time that . we met them, we met their gratitude, concern that . should we should . be careful"
 At first we interpreted this as a method to encourage us to work harder, but as the days wore on, we realized that they knew we were truly working as hard as we could . At first it was interpreted as a way of encouraging us to do more .
 "We actually had to be careful what we requested since anything we asked for was delivered. The citizens waited on us hand-and-foot," she said . "The citizens waited for us hand and foot"
 A small support city evolved within the confines of the Myriad . Besides having our meals supplied, we were provided by a small community .
 Podiatrists, opticians, masseuses, shipment anywhere by United Parcel Service, telephone service by Southwest Bell, and a barbershop .
 These were people who just wanted to help or others who had family directly affected by the bombing . These were those who had relatives directly affected .
 Dollena ""Dollie"" Shannon died on August 13 th in Humboldt County, California . Shannon died at the age of ninety-five years and ten months .
 The world lost perhaps the greatest cinnamon roll maker/baker of all time . The world mourns the loss of the great cinnamon roll master .
 Dollie Madison couldn't hold a candle to Dollie Shannon when it came to kitchen wizardry . The former first lady's bakery is now owned by former President Barack Obama .
 Chef is not a powerful enough word to convey Dollie's mastery . Dollie may better define what she was able to accomplish with her tools and instrument of choice — range, stove, and oven .
 "There are plenty of roses, stars, sunsets, rainbows, brothers and sisters, aunts and cousins, comrades and friends but only one mother in the whole world"
 All five of her children, and a dozen grandchildren as well as many great-grandchildren, survived her . All five survived her.
 History is also a vast array of truths, hotly debated, debated . Perhaps we should start getting used to the idea that history is also an array of truth .
 In many of the early chapters of this book— those that covered the 1740s and 1750s— the exploits of Gorham's Rangers were explored . John Gorham Boulevard is the first chapter of the book .
 A quarter millennium later these came into the limelight in Nova Scotia . It was decided to name a street connecting Bedford and Sackville the ""Capt. Capt. Capt. Sackville" The street is named the "Capt. Sackville"
 The web site ""The John Gorham Controversy"" contains a collection of 45 ""clippings"" about the whole debacle, which lasted through January and February of this year .
 The Department of Transportation named the connector road between Bedford and Sackville after a man considered by the Mi'kmaq and Acadians, and by many of his peers, to be an ""uncivilized savage"
 Parker Barss Donham provided a balanced and clear summary of the matter in an article entitled ""The Road Named Gorham,"" which appeared in the Sunday Daily Times of Halifax .
 Those who want to name a local highway after a British colonial officer who committed atrocities against Micmac women and children make the following arguments: 1) Capt. Capt. Captain Capt. John Dickson was a British soldier who killed and raped Micmac children and women .
 John Gorham provided the security necessary to establish a British colony on mainland Nova Scotia . Gorham was an important historical figure whose activities, including those lately criticized, provided security necessary for the colony .
 Micmacs of the day, whose descendants object to naming a road after him, were not themselves above collecting enemy scalps . Moreover, Micmac were themselves themselves above picking off enemy enemies .
 If we don't take a stand against it here, there will be no end to the demands for sanitizing our history, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Americans often used ""Mohawk"" as a generic term for any Indian . Americans at the time often used "Mohawk" as a general term for all Native Americans .
 The name of the road has now reverted to Glendale Avenue in Lower Sackville and Duke Street in Bedford, Bedford .
 Additionally, they had succeeded in producing large quantities of Anthrax . They had also succeeded to produce large amounts of anthrax .
 When Clinton gave the word to begin the bombing, his impeachment hearings were postponed — but only for twenty-four hours . The bombing was only the first time the bombing was ordered .
 American military analyst Anthony H Cordesman held a different viewpoint regarding the effectiveness of the attacks . American military . analyst Anthony . Cordesmen held a . different viewpoint about the effectiveness . of the . attacks .
 Cordesman said, "the initial assertions of significant damage inflicted on Iraq appears to be an awkward combination of propaganda and complete rubbish" Cordesmen said, "The initial assertions of significant damage to Iraq appear to be a combination of propaganda and complete rubbish
 Hussein may have shrugged off the attacks, or even benefited by them, but the Iraqi people were the ones to be pitied . The Iraqi people are the ones who were to have pitied by Hussein .
 They had been attacked on and off for seven years by the U.S., both periodically from the skies, and daily as a result of sanctions imposed on the country . The country has been attacked repeatedly by the United States since 2001 .
 Sanctions brought about privation, deprivation, and even death by starvation . These sanctions brought about . privations, deprivation and even starvation .
 It has been estimated that 1,000,000 Iraqis, mostly children, have died as a result of the U.S. -sponsored United Nations sanctions .
 This gross injustice has certainly not gone unnoticed throughout the world, especially Muslim countries, especially in Muslim countries . The gross injustice is certainly not going unnoticed, especially by Muslim countries. This gross injustice has certainly gone unnoticed .
 Hussein and his henchmen used poison gas to kill Kurds in Northern Iraq who wanted independence from his rule . Hussein used poison-gas to kill those who wanted Kurdish independence from Iraq . Hussein's death toll from the poison gas was estimated at 1,500 .
 Lawrence had also advocated using poison gas against their enemies in the Middle East, this certainly proves Hussein's wickedness . Lawrence also had also called for poison gas to be used against enemies .
 Hussein himself continued to live in the lap of luxury, sanctions or no sanctions, no sanctions . Certainly they knew that Hussein himself . Hussein himself continues to be in luxury .
 Iraqis rallied around their leader when their country was attacked, too . Just as Americans would rally around President George Bush, Jr. in the wake of ""9/ 1 1" in 2001, Iraqis rallied behind their leader .
 It was the Americans and the British governments who are blamed most by the Iraqi populace for conditions in Iraq .
 Puerto Rico voters rejected United States statehood in a non-binding referendum . Puerto Rico rejected U.S. statehood on December 13 th .
 Thomas Friedman: The world is tired of the wealth and splendor that you have squeezed out of our blood and bone . Understanding Globalization"" by Thomas Friedman is a book by Friedman .
 In the beginning, all men were alike and they lived in peace and they shared among them what they had . In the Bible, the Bible says: "All men were like and they live in peace"
 "You put little children into your mines and work them to death in a few months," he says . You put little kids into your mine mine mine, he says. You put them there and they will die, he adds . He says .
 Others considered the danger so severe that they made dramatic life changes . Ed Yourdon, a well-known computer consultant and author, said the danger was so severe they made drastic changes .
 Yourdon and other computer professionals (those whom one would think were in the best position to ascertain the most realistic state of affairs regarding how computer programs would ""act"") were sometimes the ones most vigorously fanning the flames of fear .
 Some of them predicted a run on banks, small-business failures, and a stock market crash . Some of the predictions were made in the 1930s and '50s .
 Others stocked up on canned goods, withdrew their money from the bank, or even built underground ""airraid"" shelters . Others stocked canned goods and withdrew money from their bank .
 They were hoping to avoid the catastrophic effects of what was popularly called the Y2K bug . The bug was a popularly known as the 'Y2K' bug .
 The cause for alarm was the neglect of many programmers due to strict memory and disk size requirements to save as much memory and . disk space as possible in an era of expensive and limited computer memory . The year portion of date values is stored in the computer's year portion .
 Many programmers were stuffing the year value into just two digits . For this reason (not planning for the future, or thinking their programs would be obsolete by the turn of the millennium)
 1958 was stored as simply 58, with 1900 being added to it elsewhere in the program when the date needed to be displayed, for example . The date was added to the program to reflect the date of 1958 .
 As the pivotal date drew close, most everyone was at least curious as to what would happen . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world on Friday .
 Many of those who had dismissed the warnings as a tempest in a teacup felt vindicated . Many of the warnings were dismissed as a 'tempest in the teatup'
 Others say the only reason disaster was averted was due to the massive amount of time and effort that had been spent fixing the suspect computer code .
 The Federal Reserve Board wants to make sure that Americans will be able to buy groceries in the new millennium . The year 2000 may bring technological chaos, but the Fed wants to keep Americans buying groceries .
 The central bank has ordered an additional $50 billion of new currency to be pumped into circulation in case consumers make a run on their banks and automated teller machines . Central bank has also ordered an extra $50billion of currency to pump into circulation .
 And no one will find out until New Year's Day 2000 or a week or two afterward . No one will know what's going on when it happens .
 We are concerned about the potential disruption of power grids, telecommunications, and banking services . We 're concerned about potential disruption . We're concerned about power grids and telecommunications .
 Networks controlling power grids and air traffic control system at risk of suffering ill effects if not solved . Power grids and the nation's air traffic system also at risk from the problems .
 People in the U.S. were concerned about the possibility of a terrorist attack in the United States . And it wasn't just Americans, it was also people in the world .
 Unless these systems are identified and changed, there could be global chaos . There could be a global chaos, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As dates in the 20 th century would begin to be dealt with in computer programs even before the new century and millennium began, some of the problems should have started showing up prior to the year 2000 .
 At one state prison, a bug made computers miscalculate the sentences of several inmates who were then released . At one prison, the bug miscalculated the sentences and released inmates .
 Some credit cards have been refused at stores and restaurants when their '00' expiration dates confused computers . Credit card expiration dates have also been refused by restaurants and stores .
 In several states truckers have found their interstate licenses canceled when computers couldn't handle renewal applications with dates past the millennium . Truckers have also had their interstate license applications canceled when they can't renew their licenses .
 It was estimated that corporations worldwide would need to invest $600 billion to solve the potential problems . Corporations around the world would need an estimated $600 million to solve potential problems, according to the report .
 This required programmers to examine and fix source code written sometimes years before . The problem was solved by examining and fixing source codes written years ago .
 While re-writing the code, many other bugs and logic errors were fixed at the same time, or at least the code was updated to reflect modern needs .
 In a lighter vein, the British computer programming journal ""The Delphi Magazine"" printed the article ""Ask not for whom the clock ticks"" in its July, 1999 number .
 The only honest answer to the question, of course, is that I haven't the faintest clue . "I haven't been able to find out what I'm going to do next," he says .
 "I'm flattered that people think that because I work in the computer industry I have some kind of insider knowledge that makes me better-informed than the man on the street," says the author of the book .
 In my heart of hearts I suspect that the whole thing has been massively overblown and, apart from minor irritations, life will carry on pretty much as before on 1 st January 2000 .
 But I've got nothing to back this up, and my hunches have been spectacularly wrong before . I'm not sure if this is true, but it's a good sign that it will happen .
 Given that the questioner is usually the first person to show any interest in me all evening, my only recourse is to hide my total ignorance by making stuff up . The questioner usually shows no interest in any of the evening's activities .
 If the questioner is relatively young looking, I tell them airily that there's nothing to worry about, that it's all taken care of . The worst that can happen is that they might get some odd-looking bank statements .
 'Hopefully they'll introduce me to one of the girls who came with them,' she says . 'Then I get to look wise and 'in the know', she adds . Then I'll get to 'look wise and in the know' she says. Then she hopes to get to
 If I'm talking to an oldie, perhaps somebody's elderly aunt or uncle, I suck my cheeks in mournfully and tell them that I'm expecting the worst . Or, if you're talking to a friend, you suck your cheeks into mournful and say 'I'm expecting
 It's going to be much worse than people think, I mutter conspiratorially . It's not the first time I've heard from the White House, it seems .
 They turn white, stagger slightly, then head off unsteadily to call their stockbroker . They usually turn white and stagger slightly . Then head off, unsteadyly, to head to the nearest office to get help .
 The actuality was very mild, at least in comparison with what had been predicted and feared by many . The actualities were very mild .
 The world survived the Y2K bug better than it has many viruses spread by hackers . All in all, though, the world survived it .
 "experts" keep waiting for ""the big one"" which, many feel, is bound to hit at one time or another . And ""experts"" keep waiting .
 If terrorists are able to take down the Internet for an extended period of time, the adverse affects could be well-nigh incalculable .
 The more extensive and ubiquitous the Internet becomes, the more devastating such an attack would be. And the more we rely on it for our banking, shopping, appointment-making, and ever more things . Such an attack on the Internet would be devastating, says the author .
 The longer they postpone their attack, the more damage they can do, hacker attackers can do . In that sense, it is to the advantage of the hacker attackers to wait as long as they can .
 Ten years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, globalization had really begun to pick up steam . The Berlin Wall fell in 1989, but the Wall was still standing at the center of globalization .
 The end of the Cold War led to the end of artificially propped-up economies of the formerly communist nations . The former communist nations' economies were propped up by artificially propping-up .
 Everybody has been trying to sell things to everybody else ever since — or so it sometimes seems . Everybody has tried to sell stuff to everyone else since then .
 In a nutshell, globalization is the growing worldwide interdependence of people and countries . The United States is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 In some ways— on paper anyway— this breaking down of national barriers seems to bring benefits, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In some ways, it's a good thing for the country to break down barriers."
 Understanding Globalization, while in general being proglobalization, also details many of the negatives it brings along with the positives . Understanding Globalized is a guide to how to deal with the challenges of globalization .
 Friedman also warns about the tenuous position a world linked to the Internet as a lifeline places itself in . Friedman warns about even worse possibilities which can result from 'super-empowered' evil men .
 Friedman's opinion is that Americans in particular have the duty of ""talking up" globalization to the rest of the world . Americans have more to gain from globalization than anyone than anyone, Friedman says .
 What we commonly refer to as ""globalization"" here in the United States is often called ""Americanization"" elsewhere . It is perhaps telling that what we commonly call globalization"" in the U.S. is often known as "Americanization"
 Globalization is good for some people, and the opposite for others . Good for some countries, bad for others, good for others; boon to some companies, death knell to others . Financially speaking, globalization is a boon for some companies but not for others.
 The increased market — practically the entire earth — opens many opportunities for corporations alert enough to take advantage of them . "The increased market" opens many possibilities for corporations to exploit them .
 Successful corporations become super-successful, and ever larger . And so, the successful corporations become larger, and larger .
 It seems, at least, that a handful of corporations control the lion's share of business being conducted around the world .
 Corporations are not immoral, but they are certainly amoral— lacking morals, good or bad . Corporations not immoral but amoral, they are amoral -- lacking morals .
 They are not really people and thus have no emotions, nor can subscribe to any set of beliefs or hold any ethical values . They are 'not really people' and therefore have no emotion, nor are not people, nor hold any beliefs or values .
 Corporations are, though, by law, required to make as much profit as possible . Corporations must make as little profit possible, though .
 A corporation is obligated by law, by its charter and by its mission, to do whatever it can, ethical or not, to increase profits and thus its dividends and payouts to shareholders . Corporations are obligated to increase their profits by increasing their payouts .
 There is a difference between a salesman who believes in his product and one who is a shyster . There is certainly quite a difference in a salesman offering nonexistent goods .
 We have to understand that today's global economic system is still so new and so fast that even our best minds don't fully understand how it works . We need to understand how the global system works and what happens when you pull a level here or turn a dial there .
 U.S. Senate voted in favor of North American Free Trade Agreement on November 19 th , 1993 . The agreement allows for the freer movement of goods, services, and investments between Canada, Mexico, and the United States .
 During the meeting of the WTO this year in Seattle, Washington, large protests were held . Large protests held during the meeting .
 The police ended up using tear gas, rubber bullets, and pepper spray to restore order after the marches and demonstrations devolved into riots . The police were forced to resort to tear gas and rubber bullets after the protests turned violent .
 If you favor globalization, you probably think not . If you are against it, you are probably inclined to give credence to such a possibility .
 The critics of globalization accuse Western countries of hypocrisy, and the critics are right . The critics accuse the West of hypocrisy and hypocrisy, but they're right .
 The Western countries have pushed poor countries to eliminate trade barriers, but kept up their own barriers . The barriers prevent developing countries from exporting their agricultural products, depriving them of needed export income .
 The United States was, of course, one of the prime culprits, and this was an issue about which I felt intensely . The U.S. was, for example, a prime suspect in the Vietnam War .
 President Barack Obama was chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers . He said he fought hard against this hypocrisy . Obama has been accused of hypocrisy .
 It not only hurt the developing countries, it also cost Americans, in the higher prices they paid, and as taxpayers, to finance the huge subsidies, billions of dollars . It also cost U.S. taxpayers, both as consumers and taxpayers, as well as consumers .
 Drug companies in the developing world were making these life-saving drugs available to their citizens at a fraction of the price at which the drugs were sold by the Western drug companies . But these drug companies in developing countries were making them available to citizens .
 Advocates said this would provide them more incentive to innovate . But profits from sales in the developing world were small, since few could afford the drugs, and hence the incentive effect might be limited .
 The other side was that thousands were effectively condemned to death, because governments and individuals in developing countries could no longer pay the high prices demanded . Thousands of people in developing nations could not afford to pay high prices .
 The global protests over globalization began at the WTO meetings in Seattle, Washington . It was the most obvious symbol of the global inequities and the hypocrisy of the advanced industrial countries .
 While countries had preached — and forced — the opening of the markets in the developing countries to their industrial products, they had continued to keep their markets closed to the products of the . developing countries . Such products include textiles and agriculture, such as agriculture .
 The U.S. pushed for global cartels in steel and aluminum when its domestic industries seemed threatened by imports . While they preached the virtues of competitive markets, the United States pushed for cartels .
 One of the reasons globalization is being attacked is that it seems to undermine traditional values, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It seems that globalization is ... undermining traditional values"
 Economic growth will result in urbanization, undermining traditional rural societies . Economic growth induced by globalization will lead to urbanization in rural areas, experts say .
 Those responsible for managing globalization have shown insufficient appreciation of this adverse side, the threat to cultural identity and values . Unfortunately, so far, these people have praised the positive benefits of managing globalization .
 Europe defends its agricultural policies not just in terms of those special interests, but to preserve rural traditions . Europe's agricultural policies are designed to protect rural traditions, says the European Commission .
 People in small towns everywhere complain that large national retailers and shopping malls have killed their small businesses and their communities . Small businesses and small communities are threatened by national retailers .
 Many of the rich have become super-rich, and even more of the poor have gone from simply needy to downright desperate . The poor have become even more desperate, and more have become desperate .
 Even those countries that have experienced some limited growth have seen the benefits accrue to the well-off . But poverty has remained high, and in some cases the income of those at the bottom has fallen . Some countries have seen some growth, but poverty remains high .
 Modern high-tech warfare is designed to remove physical contact: dropping bombs from 50,000 feet ensures that one does not ""feel"" what one does . Drop bombs from . 50kms drop into the air ensures that . one doesn't "feel" what they do .
 "Vastly and disproportionately, it is funneled to the relatively few at the top," says Hillary Clinton . "It is funneling [the] vast and disproportionately," she says .
 "I think we are asking for trouble. If we continue to allow hundreds of thousands of our young people black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, white to grow up without a feeling that they have a stake in this society," says President Obama .
 We can't circle the wagons in suburban developments with armed guards at the gates and believe that we are safe. We need to be able to circle wagons around suburban developments without armed guards . We are not safe, we need to have armed guards around the gates .
 The people, the masses, will eventually arrive at those gates, angry and upset, and then it will be too late . The people will arrive at the gates of those gates . It will be 'too late' for the people to arrive at that gates .
 The average wealth of the two hundred is the equivalent of the total owned by twelve million poor people . The average of those two hundred people is thus the . average wealth is the . equivalent of that of the . twelve million people .
 Sitting Bull said white people were good at making things, but not at distributing those things . Sitting Bull: White people are good at creating things but not distributing them . Sitting Bulls said that white people should have distributed more easily .
 The affliction of acquisitiveness at the expense of others seems to cross racial and ethnic lines . It seems to also cross ethnic and racial lines, according to the author .
 Many have actually been made worse off, as they have seen their jobs destroyed and their lives become more insecure . Many of them have actually lost their jobs and lives have become insecure, they say .
 They have felt increasingly powerless against forces beyond their control . They have been in the grip of the world for years .
 If globalization continues to be conducted in the way that it has been in the past, it will continue to create poverty and instability . If we continue to fail to learn from our mistakes, globalization will not only not succeed in promoting development, but also create poverty .
 Without reform, the backlash will mount and discontent with globalization will grow . Without reform the backlash that has already started will mount, it will mount .
 Seattle was not the only locale where demonstrations against globalization took place . Demonstrators took to the streets of Seattle to demonstrate against globalization .
 Demonstrations against globalization have grown larger in size and have increased intensity . Demonstrators have been demonstrating against globalization since the Battle in Seattle .
 Some meetings of the WTO have been held in isolated locations to ward off crowds of angry protesters . For that reason, some meetings of this kind of organization are held in isolation .
 On April 20 th of this year, fifteen people were killed at Columbine High School . The Columbine massacre took place in 1999 .
 One teacher, the two student gunmen and 13 innocent classmates made up the 15 . One teacher and two students were killed in the attack .
 Columbine is by no means the only contemporary example of school violence . Columbine was not the only school violence in the country, according to CNN.com .
 The book ""Columbine High School Shooting"" by Judy L Hasday contains a chart that lists eleven other fatal incidents in American schools between early 1996 and early 2001 .
 Dylan Klebold, whose mother was a counselor at a nearby community college, had as a boy played in Little League and been a Boy Scout . As a boy, Klebold had played Little League, Boy Scout and Boy Scout, his mother said .
 A complaint was filed by the parents of one boy who was threatened by name, the police never investigated the matter . The boy's parents filed a complaint, but the case was never investigated .
 Had they been successful, the death toll could have been much higher than fifteen . Had they were successful, they could have killed 15 people .
 The day that Harris and Klebold referred to as ""Judgment Day"" began normally . The day of their deaths was known as "Judgment day"
 Harris showed up at 6:15 a.m. for his bowling class at a local bowling alley . Harris, in fact, showed up on time at 6.15 that morning .
 Harris and Klebold had been planning the attack for over a year, detailed descriptions of their plans were discovered after the attack . According to detailed descriptions, the pair had planned the attack since April 18, 1999 .
 Harris and Klebold planned to detonate the propane bombs at 11:17, during first lunch . They planned to position themselves outside the cafeteria so as to shoot the surviving victims as they exited the building . The bombs would detonate during lunchtime, then position them outside .
 The two brought shotguns and semi-automatic weapons with them with them for this purpose . The two men were armed with shotguns and weapons .
 The two youths placed the duffel bugs containing the propane tanks inside the cafeteria, went outside, strapped on their weapons, and put on trench coats . At the pre-arranged time, the two youths waited for the bombs to explode . The bombs were placed in the cafeteria
 Harris and Klebold improvised their killing spree in the wake of the Columbine massacre . Not wanting to call off their killings, Klebold and Harris decided to kill themselves . Klebold shot himself in the head with a shotgun blast to death .
 Seemingly indiscriminately, they wandered around the cafeteria and other areas in the school, shooting just about everybody they came across . They tossed pipe bombs around, tossing pipe bombs, and tossed them around .
 The school was filled with smoke from pipe bombs, noise from the fire alarms that triggered, water from the automatic overhead sprinklers . The prone bodies of the dead and wounded were found in the school .
 Harris and Klebold took their own lives at 12:05 at 12.05 . Fear, pain, chaos and death ensued for 40 minutes before they took their lives .
 Those on the outside didn't know how many gunmen there were, or exactly where inside the school they were located .
 80 detectives spent eight months interviewing 4,500 witnesses and gathering 10,000 pieces of evidence . The police did not have or make the time to investigate the complaint about Harris' threats .
 Angela's father, a teacher named Dave Sanders, had courageously come to the aid of students during the crisis . Dave Sanders is a former teacher at the school in California .
 SWAT teams took SWAT teams almost three hours to reach Mr Sanders . After he was wounded, it took them three hours before he was found .
 Officers may have been more than willing to ""move"" earlier, but had to wait on orders allowing them to do so . It should be noted that those officers may have waited for orders to move .
 Some people assert there were other attackers in addition to Klebold and Harris . For the record, some people assert that there were also attackers in the shooting .
 Many students reported seeing a third, older man, with the two youths outside the school when the mayhem began .
 He was dressed differently than Klebold and Harris . He was seen throwing something on the roof of the building .
 Whether unreliable witnesses muddied the waters, or a cover-up, I don't know. Whether this is a case of unreliable witnesses, it's not clear if it's a cover up, I'm sure .
 It is the Nation 's confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law . The Nation's confidence in judge is in the confidence of the judge .
 Mencken: "The principal difference between a cat and a lie is that the cat has only nine lives. The principal difference is that a lie has only 9 lives"
 "The System is just too powerful, it's like quicksand, and I would have been sucked in," he says . "I would have had been sucked into the system," he adds .
 About 3,500 citizens were being added each month to the United States Total . The United States total is now a total of 3,000 people .
 A century earlier, in 1900, only thirteen per cent of Americans lived in cities . By this year, the percentage of urbanites had quadrupled to fifty per cent . The percentage of Americans living in cities has quadrupled .
 Branstuders' way of life remained more like a typical 1900 existence than the average lifestyle of people alive in the year 2000 . For the most part, their way of living was more like the average life of people living in 2000 .
 Ruie is buried in Gravette, Arkansas, near the old Branstuder home which had stood in Hiwasse . Ruie's parents Lizzie and Jim are also buried in Arkansas .
 This leaves only one surviving member of the Branstuder household, Lula Mae Dixon . Dixon is one of the only surviving members of the family to survive .
 The healthy skepticism, attention to detail, and sound business fundamentals required for wise investing seemed to have flown out the window in a flurry of feathers . A free-for-all feeding frenzy ensued .
 Many companies with minor-league quality products had been bankrolled by unsavvy investors . Many companies had been wooed by hopeful companies and bankrolled . Many of these companies were wooed to by hopeful investors . The companies were mostly small-league-quality products .
 The chickens came home to roost when many companies were not able to bring their product to market or find a niche in their target market . Many of these companies were unable to find their niche market .
 Many of these companies projected for stardom only ended up in the ""bigs"" for the proverbial ""cup of coffee"" before they submerged, never to be heard from again . Many of the companies that were projected to be the "biggest" have never been successful .
 Some young CEOs of these startups fell hard and fast and were soon to be found flipping burgers in fast-food joints . Some young hotshots were soon found fliping burgers and telling tales of the halcyon days .
 The Phoenix had incinerated and returned to the ashes . In a reverse rags-to-riches tale, the Phoenix had been incinerated . The Phoenix returned to his ashes .
 Some had made millions, but many of them lost that money as fast as they had attained it . Some of the most successful people in the world lost their money very quickly .
 Neither George W Bush nor Al Gore really struck a chord with the majority of the nation's citizens . Al Gore and George W. Bush were not popular with Americans .
 Turnout at the polls was relatively low, as both candidates avoided hot-button issues as much as possible . Americans did not feel a personal stake in the election's results .
 The election was extremely close and the final results were not known for more than a month following election day . Nevertheless, the election was an extremely close one, and the results weren't known for a month .
 Gore was leading in both the popular vote and electoral votes with three states still too close to call . Oregon, New Mexico, and Florida are among the three states that remain too close .
 Of the three undecided states, the only one really mattered was Florida, with its 25 electoral votes . Florida is one of the only three states to hold the presidential election .
 The winner of Florida would get the keys to the White House door . No matter what happened with the latter two, the winner would have the keys .
 At first, it seemed that Gore had won that key state, and such was announced on television . Such a victory would have been announced on TV .
 Later, though, the news media flip-flopped and said that actually Bush had won . The news media flipped-flipped and said actually Bush actually won .
 In the first count of Florida's votes, Bush was ahead by a mere 1,800 votes . Bush is ahead by just 1,200 votes in the state .
 This triggered an automatic recount, as according to Florida law a margin of victory of less than 2,000 votes must be examined more closely . Florida law requires a margin between two and three votes to be examined .
 For thirty-six days everyone was in suspense as to the election's outcome . The election was held for 36 days . The result of the election was announced on November 11 .
 democrats wanted widespread recounts, citing voting abnormalities and irregularities . Democrats wanted widespread recount, citing irregularities in voting .
 The Florida Supreme Court most of its members had been appointed by Democratic Presidents . The Florida recount is a recount in the presidential race .
 Many blacks with names similar to the names of ex-cons were excluded from voting . Blacks with names like those with names such as ex-cones excluded from being eligible for voting .
 The excons removed all with similar names from the list . In a move to prevent the excons from voting, they had apparently 'thrown out the baby with the bathwater'
 As most people named ""Harold Washington"" are black, preventing anyone with that name from voting because one ex-con bears that name may meant the disenfranchisement of many Harold Washingtons .
 Historically, blacks tend to vote the Democratic ticket more often than Republicans . Historically, black voters tend to support Democrats more often .
 Problems were found with many of the ballots themselves . In addition to that, there were also problems with ballots .
 A ""hanging chad"" was caused when a person used a stylus to punch the perforation that corresponded to his candidate of choice . A 'hanging' was caused by a person using a stylist to punch a hole in a hole into a hole .
 These votes were not counted, as the machines used to count could not compute with certainty the intention of the voter . The machines used in the counting of the votes were unable to count the intended voter .
 The so-called ""butterfly ballot"" was a problem due to its confusing design . The so called "butterflies ballot" was also a problem .
 The hole for Bush was right next to his name, but those for Gore and Buchanan were not in the same spot relative to their name . The hole was for Bush but not for Gore or Buchanan .
 Many elderly Jewish voters realized too late that they had accidentally voted for Buchanan when they actually intended to vote for Gore . Many elderly Jews realized they had inadvertently voted for the wrong candidate .
 The belief that he is is enough to make it highly unlikely that Jewish people would deliberately vote for him . It is not known if Jewish people will deliberately vote against him .
 She was a Bush delegate to the Republican National Convention and was very active in his campaign . She was also active in the Bush campaign .
 His brother Jeb was at the time of writing, and still is, Governor of Florida . Jeb was in charge of Florida when he was governor of the state .
 We see whites live alone and die alone, and it seems that an excess of money may only bring loneliness . We see white people living alone and dying alone, says author .
 We pity the shyster businessmen, the chiseling coal developers, the rip-off land developers who have no people with them . We pity them, we pity the shamed businessmen . The shyest businessmen are the shambolic businessmen .
 People here only ask a decent life — a roof, a decent car, an education for their children, good water, and to be near their relatives, and near the mountains and the land . People only ask for a roof roof, car, education for children, and good water .
 Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light . And no wonder, for Satan himself has been transformed himself into a light angel .
 It is nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness . It is therefore nothing great for his ministers to turn themselves to ministers of righteous .
 If not, you may want to start because it 's going to be a long time before we trust you again . If you do not trust us again, it will be hard to trust again .
 Seven World Trade Center collapsed in New York City on September 1, 2001 . The collapse of the Twin Twin Towers was an afterthought, taking a back seat to even worse calamities on that day .
 The targets were buildings and icons, but the direct casualties were people going about their daily business . The targets of the attack were buildings, icons and icons . The victims were people who went about with their lives .
 On this sunny late summer morn, four commercial airliners were apparently hijacked . The hijackers are believed to have hijacked four of the world's largest airliners .
 Two of them, originating in Boston, Massachusetts, were flown into the World Trade Center, eighteen minutes apart . Two of the two planes were made in Boston .
 Pilot angled the jets wings so that the lower wing entered the tower at the 93 rd floor, the upper wing at the 98 th floor . The pilot angled the wings so . that the . lower wing . entered the . 93 th floor of the tower, the . upper wing entered
 The plane's wings were angled so that the hole created stretched from the 77 th to the 85 th floors . In this case, too, the plane's wing was angled to create the hole . The hole was created so that it stretched from 77 to 85 floors .
 The initial collision raised concerns about a terrorist attack, but the possibility remained that the plane crashed into the building was a tragic mistake .
 One woman who was on the scene thought that a terrible accident had occurred . Cynthia Tucker, a witness to the accident, thought it was an accident . Tucker says she was shocked to discover that the accident had taken place .
 The noise was so loud that it was like being underwater; I felt the sound . The noise is so loud, it was 'like being underwater', she says .
 People were taking off their shirts to cover their faces because of the dust . The dust was so much that some people took to their shirts off their faces to protect themselves .
 A man named Joshua had been in the north tower, teaching a class on the fortieth floor . Joshua was a teacher at the time of the incident .
 "I looked up at the towers and saw that both buildings had been sliced open," he says . "Both buildings were sliced open. I looked up . I looked . up at . the towers, he says, and saw both buildings .
 'I heard an eerie sound — — an eerie silence as if thousands of people were holding their breath. Then I heard an uncanny silence,' she said .
 At around 10m., less than an hour after being struck, the south tower collapsed . The south tower of the Twin Towers collapsed at 10m.
 Most people in the north tower were unaware the south tower had fallen . Most people were unaware of the collapse of the second tower in the tower .
 They heard and/or felt its collapse, though not knowing just what had happened . They heard, or felt, the collapse of the building .
 Some assumed that a third plane, which had been rumored to be on its way, had struck one of the buildings . Some assumed it was due to be struck by a plane believed to be a third .
 The plane that had been spotted, giving rise to the rumors, was not a hijacked airliner . It was a military plane on its way to intercept the hijacked planes . The plane was not hijacked airliner, but a military aircraft .
 The loss of the twin 1 10-story towers, completed in 1973, left a gaping void in downtown Manhattan . The twin towers were completed in the 1970s .
 The vacuum was not just physical; nor was the altering of the landscape, which seemed too surreal to be assimilated by many onlookers . The vacuum is not only physical, nor is the altered landscape .
 It had already been too much, more than many could bear, but the terrorists were not yet finished . It was already too much to bear, and the terrorists had not yet been finished .
 Third plane had flown into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. at 9:43m. A third plane had also flown in at 9.43m .
 President George W Bush whisked away on Air Force One on Florida trip . Bush had been visiting an elementary school in Sarasota, Florida, when he was whisked off .
 The fourth and final hijacked airliner went down in an empty field in rural Somerset County, Pennsylvania, not far from Pittsburgh . It was the last hijacked plane to go down .
 The bucolic field in rural Pennsylvania was not the intended landing spot of the terrorists . It was not a landing spot for the terrorists, but it was the intended target .
 The hijackers were apparently successful in preventing the hijackers from flying the plane to their intended destination . The plane was hijacked by a group of hijackers .
 The attack was compared to that day that lives in infamy, December 7 th , 1941, in its effect on the American people in particular, and the world in general . And indeed, indeed, the attack .
 A comparison has been made between the collapse of the Twin Towers and the sinking of the Titanic . Another comparison has also been made .
 As the Titanic was considered unsinkable, so many viewed the Twin Towers as indestructible . The Titanic was seen as an unsinksable, but the Twin Twin Towers were considered indeliable . The Twin Towers are now considered indeasterable .
 The three stairways in the World Trade Center towers were the bare minimum to meet the building code . The smaller Empire State Building has nine stairways . The staircases were all situated close to one another rather than being spread out throughout the buildings .
 Most staircases were destroyed beyond usability, as were the greater number of elevators . Most of the staircases are destroyed beyond usable, as are the elevators and staircases .
 In addition to the Americans killed, citizens of eighty countries had died in the attacks . Many of those nations joined forces to fight the terrorists .
 Osama bin Laden was living under the protection of the Islamic Taliban government in Afghanistan . According to official reports, the terrorists were sponsored chiefly by Saudi multi-millionaire Osama Bin Laden .
 Late this year, the Pentagon released a videotape of bin Laden saying September 1 th had exceeded his ""most optimistic"" expectations .
 This was by no means the first time that al Qaeda had attacked U.S. targets, but this was first time they had done so on American soil . Al Qaeda had previously attacked United States targets but this attack was the first on US soil .
 Previous targets had been hit throughout the Middle East and Africa, including the crippling of the U.S. battleship Cole off the shores of Yemen in October of 2000 .
 A message to the U.S. people: Peace be upon those who follow the right path . Peace be on those who have followed the wrong path. A message from the American people .
 "I urge you to seek the joy of life and the after life and to rid yourself of your dry, miserable, and spiritless materialistic existence," says the author of the book .
 I urge you to become Muslims, for Islam calls for the principle of ""there is no God but Allah,"" and for justice and forbids injustice and criminality . I urge Muslims to become Muslim . Islam is based on the principle that there is no god but Allah," and that justice
 We regret to tell you that you are the worst civilization in the history of mankind . We regret telling you that we are not the best civilization ever .
 The Taliban regime in Afghanistan was given the ultimatum to turn over all al Qaeda leaders living in that country . Taliban regime had been given the choice of turning over all the leaders living there .
 Similar to Saddam Hussein's response after being given the U.N. ultimatum a decade earlier to quit Kuwait, the Taliban was defiant . The Taliban's response was similar to Saddam's response to the United Nations .
 An attack by the U.S. on al Qaeda in Afghanistan was not unwelcome by bin Laden, he says . And, fact, an attack on the United States in Afghanistan wasn't unwelcome, he adds .
 Bin Laden would also be happy two years later when the U.S. invaded Iraq . Bin Laden was happy when the United States invaded Iraq.
 Al Qaeda had by then had time to disperse, melt into the surrounding villages and countryside, and dig in . In the writer's view, that was too late — al Qaeda had . The writer says al Qaeda has by now had time .
 There are many who suspect a U.S. government conspiracy behind the attacks, claiming the towers could not have blown up as they did, and come down .
 Conspiracy theorists also claim that the airliner that supposedly struck the Pentagon was bogus, due to the minimal damage it did to the building and their claim that there was no wreckage of the plane .
 Arabs with known or at least suspected ties to terrorist organizations were taking flying lessons in the U.S. Some of these novice pilots were not interested in learning how to take off and land aircraft, just how to guide them while in flight .
 These should have been clues; bells should have gone off . Suspicions should've been shared between agencies, regardless of the ""sibling rivalry"
 In July, John O'Neill quit his job as Deputy Director of the FBI in disgust because the Bush administration was not allowing him to pursue Islamic terrorists as aggressively as he wished to . Two months earlier, in July, in . July, the late John O’Neill quit .
 San Francisco mayor Willie Brown was warned at 10m. on September 10 th to be very cautious about flying . Brown was planning a trip to the east coast and was warned to be cautious .
 At the very least, the success of the 91 1 attacks reveals gross incompetence, criminal negligence, and general stupidity on the part of the government . "No Surprise,"" (from the book Everything You Know Is Wrong): At the least, "The success of . the . success of
 If there is any truth to the conspiracy theories, such wicked maneuverings would not be something that had never before been considered . If there were any truth, it would be something never before considered .
 A History of Official Deception and Its Consequences reported on a similar scenario during the Cuban missile crisis of the Kennedy era .
 The only way such a thing could have been perpetrated is if among that large group not a single one of them possessed a shred of decency, and all of them were criminally insane . "Only the only way" could be perpetrated was if not one of the group's members was criminally insane
 Hunter S Thompson died at the age of 67 as a result of a gunshot wound to the head . Yet, it is said that he was attempting to expose a massive cover-up and government plot .
 The rules of engagement were changing again with regards to the response to terrorism . At any rate, as had taken place at Ruby Ridge, the rules were changed again .
 In America, the so-called ""Patriot Act"" changed the way suspects were dealt with . In Britain, suspects were shot in the head — a realization of the old ""shoot first, and ask questions later"" method of interrogation .
 In October, United States forces invaded Afghanistan, outlawed the Taliban government, and set up a pro-U.S. government . The Taliban government was outlawed in October .
 "These methods will bring only greater instability and disorder in the world," he said . "They will bring greater instability, disorder," he added .
 North Korea is arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while starving its citizens . The North Korean regime is arming its citizens with missiles, weapons and mass destruction . North Korea has a history of starving citizens, starving them .
 States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten then peace of the world, says President Obama . States such as these, like these terrorists, constitute a axis of bad, says Obama .
 The prophet Muhammad himself is said to have personally taken part in seventy-eight battles . Muhammad himself was said to take part in the battles .
 In fact, defensive jihads are considered by Muslims an unavoidable personal responsibility when Muslim faith, Muslim land, or Muslim people themselves are attacked .
 War with one Muslim people or land, then, is by Islamic definition war with all Muslims . War with a Muslim people, land, or war with a land, is war with the whole world .
 Senior U.S. leaders say Muslims hate and attack us for what we are and think, rather than what we do . Americans should not continue to believe that Muslims hate us, not for what they think or what they do, says Obama .
 The Islamic world is not so offended by our democratic system of politics that it is willing to wage war against overwhelming odds, says author . Americans are free to vote, speak freely, and pray, or not, as they wish .
 With due respect for those who have concluded that we are hated for what we are, think, and represent, I beg to disagree . I contend that your conclusion is errant and potentially fatal nonsense . The U.S. should not be 'hated' for what they are,
 The author goes on to point out that it is United States policies toward Muslim nations that have moved Muslims to act against the U.S. After all, Muslims in Afghanistan fought against communist Russia, too .
 Bin Laden and most militant Muslims, therefore, can be said to be motivated by their love for Allah and their hatred for the United States policies and actions they believe are damaging — and threatening — the things they love . The U.S. government's actions are damaging and threatening to destroy
 "They will use whatever weapon comes to hand, including weapons of mass destruction," says Julian Zelizer . "Their goal is not to wipe out our secular democracy, but to deter us by military means from attacking things they love"
 There is evidence that bin Laden and other Islamist leaders would like to end the war, get back to their families, and live a less martial lifestyle . There is also evidence to the contrary, in fact, showing bin Laden would like ending the war .
 They are weary of war, but not war weary in a way making them ready to compromise or fight less enthusiastically . The U.S. is weary of the war but not weary of it, they say . They are tired of the conflict but not tired of it .
 In both cases, participating in a defensive jihad was a duty to God and therefore had to be pursued until victory or martyrdom . Jihadists in both cases had to pursue until victory, martyrdom or death . Jihadist jihadists in the U.S. must continue their jihad,
 For the Afghans, their jihad continued until the Soviets were stopped from destroying Islam, killing Muslims, and occupying Afghan land . The three things they love most and that united the ethnically and linguistically diverse insurgent groups .
 America's political, military, and media elites portray efforts to kill bin Laden as nothing more than a necessary act . Many Muslims see that effort as an attempt to kill a heroic and holy man who lives and works only to protect his brethren and preserve their faith .
 Muslims are praying and working for the survival of a man better characterized for them as a combination of Robin Hood and St. St. Francis . Americans are told U.S. forces are hunting an Arab version of Timothy McVeigh .
 Francis ofAssisi is unlikely to be betrayed for $25 million in U.S. reward money . Francis of Assisi is an inspiring, devout leader .
 The anonymous writer of ""Imperial Hubris" is not optimistic regarding U.S. chances for victory in Afghanistan . Anonymous writer of "Imperial hubris" not optimistic about United States chances .
 Many questions still remain about the tragedies of 9/ 1 1 1, and doubtless will linger for a long time to come . Many questions remain about 9/1 1 and will linger forever .
 Some conspiracy theorists believe that the 1941 attacks on Pearl Harbor were allowed— or even orchestrated by— FDR (well-known as a prevaricator), as a means to get the American public behind the war . FDR is well-known for his role in the World War II .
 Why, sometimes I believe as many as six impossible things before breakfast? Sometimes I've believed as many an impossible thing before breakfast. Why?
 Black scabs form over the scars of those who have been in contact with anthrax-infected livestock . This etymology stems from the black scabs that form over scars from contact with livestock .
 A more dangerous effect of Anthrax in humans can occur when they breathe in the anthrax spores . The spores can also be inhaled by people who breathe in anthrax .
 Anthrax appeals to terrorists because it is easy to cultivate and hardy . Anthrax is hardy and easy to grow and hard to cultivate, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Letters laced with weapons-grade anthrax spores killed five people in the U.S. this year . Five people were killed in the United States this year by letters laced with anthrax .
 Among those targeted were Senator Tom Daschle and television news commentator Tom Brokaw . Among the targets was Senator Tom Daskle and news anchor Tom Browaw .
 As frightening as biological attacks are, very few of them kill more than a few people . Few of the most deadly biological attacks in the world have ever been recorded .
 If two hundred twenty pounds of aerosolized anthrax were released over a major city, the effects could be as lethal as a hydrogen bomb . According to one assessment by the U.S. government, if two hundred . twenty pounds could be released, it could be lethal .
 The World Medical Association recognizes the growing threat that biological weapons might be used to cause devastating epidemics that could spread internationally . Biological weapons could be used in biological warfare .
 The release of organisms such as smallpox, plague, and anthrax could prove catastrophic in terms of the resulting illnesses and deaths compounded by the panic such outbreaks would generate . — American Medical Association .
 Their symptoms might baffle doctors or mimic those of more common illnesses . Symptoms might be similar to more common symptoms .
 Anthrax was deliberately developed as a weapon in the second half of the 1900s by a number of countries, the United States and Russia among them . Given the virus' 30 percent kill rate, nearly two billion people could die .
 The culprit or culprits of the anthrax attack have not as yet been apprehended . The culprits are still being sought .
 On the surface, Enron seemed like a terrific company in which to invest . But now, it's not so easy to invest in the company .
 Enron had started life as a Houston oil pipeline company and morphed into being primarily an energy broker . Enron was the poster child of deregulation, the company's poster child .
 There was a disconnect between how Enron presented itself and who it really was behind closed doors . Yet, Enron was the subject of a major investigation into the company .
 Enron bookkeeping was a maze of partnerships and subsidiaries that camouflaged shady deals and pernicious problems . Enron's incrediby complex and meticulously manipulated bookkeeping is a maze .
 In the end, company officials admitted overstating earnings by $586 million . Company officials admitted that they overstated earnings by more than $600 million .
 Enron posted a $638 million loss in the third quarter for this year . Enron also admitted owing a whopping $3 billion dollars to the company .
 Enron's hoped-for acquisition by rival Dynegy, which would have infused $23 billion into the company, fell apart . The company's stock was reduced to junk-bond status after a reduction of its stock .
 Based on the juggling, ventriloquism, optical illusions, high-wire acts, sleight of hand card tricks, and men being shot out of cannons . Chief Financial Officer Andy Fastow would have been more fitted to life in a traveling circus .
 Andy had no qualms about manipulating matters so that his personal fortune was enhanced, either . Andy's personal fortune would have been enhanced if he had been successful .
 Enron's accounting shenanigans got out of control near the end, when they were not just cooking the books but charbroiling them in true Cajun fashion . Arthur Andersen, who should have served as a check on overzealous Enron officials, chose not to report them .
 Arthur Andersen left it up to their client, Enron, to turn themselves in — or not . In fact, it was left up to Enron's client, Arthur Andersen, to make their decision .
 This method allows a company to post all the estimated future earnings of a deal into the company's books immediately . The method allows companies to post their estimated future future earnings into their books .
 While doing this made Enron look good out on paper, it put pressure on them to continue landing more and bigger long-term contracts . Enron: "It put pressure" on Enron to land more and more lucrative contracts .
 This they needed to do because corporations are judged by those they care most about primarily by growth . This is because they care more about growth than growth, the CEO says .
 If they recorded $100 million in earnings in one quarter, the pressure was on to record more than that next quarter . Pressure was on for them to record even more in the next quarter, and so forth . The pressure was put on to be even more successful in the quarter after that
 The treadmill revolves ever faster, and its incline rises ever steeper . The treadmill is a treadmill that revolves around faster and faster than ever .
 The deceit and cheating eventually caught up to the unprincipled principals of Enron . Enron was the world's largest leaky energy company .
 Many of Andy Fastow's structured-finance vehicles, which seemed so clever — even elegant — not long before, now stood revealed as rickety contraptions, lashed to one another and rigged to explode .
 Rather than a reliable Rube Goldberg-esque construct, Fastow's machinations resembled a TNT-laden train trestle . Fastow: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 Enron leaders were caught with their collective hands in the cookie jar . The exposure of the leaders led to bankruptcy for Enron and the collapse of Arthur Andersen . Arthur Andersen also lost huge amounts of investor's money .
 At the time Enron collapsed, they were on the verge of moving into a new corporate headquarters building across the street from their relatively spartan former digs . Enron was about to move into the new headquarters building .
 The building's current occupants could save a little money on interior decorating costs by using Enron stock as wallpaper .
 Like currency bearing the visage of Jefferson Davis, such stocks are now hardly worth more than the paper on which they were printed .
 The Enron implosion shone a light on cooked books and funny business at other corporations, too . The intensified public scrutiny that settled in after the fallout of the Enron collapse shone in .
 WorldCom, Global Crossing, Adelphia, and Tyco were among those to quickly make the news in a similar negative fashion as had Enron . Some of these companies were WorldCom and Global Crossing .
 The accounting firm that Enron used, and who aided and abetted them in their steamy ""book"" kitchen, Arthur Andersen, was also a casualty of the self-inflicted wound of complicity in egregious wrongdoing .
 Scott Sullivan was sentenced to five years in prison in 2005 for his role in the largest accounting fraud in U.S. history . WorldCom finance chief Scott Sullivan has been convicted of five years of fraud .
 A total of $1 1 billion was mishandled — a stupendous sum which averages out to more than $30 for every man, woman, and child in the U.S. The total of mishandled money averaged out to $30 per person .
 More than two centuries of government 'of the people' in the United States came to an end at the beginning of the twenty-first century .
 "Every week, if not more, people will say, 'God, that was a close call. And every week ... people will be surprised," she says . "They will say they were close to winning the race," she adds .
 "If what America represents to the world is a leadership in a commonwealth of equals, then our friends are legion," says Dr. Strangelove . ""If what we represent is empire, then it is our enemies who will be legion"
 Most of those victimized were civilians, trying to get on with the business of day-to-day living . As happened two years prior, most of those victims were civilians . Most of the victims are civilians .
 An advance force of carpet bombs was to be followed by a ""army"" of carpetbaggers . The carpetbags were to be used to carry out carpet bombings .
 The House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly to give President George W Bush the authority to use military force against Iraq . The U.N. had not given the U.S. permission to use such force, but the House voted overwhelmingly .
 The Senate then joined the House in a show of solidarity in favor of the use of the U.S. military against Iraq . The House then joined in an even greater show of support .
 In the Eye of the Storm, Dilip Hiro writes of the alleged Iraq/al Qaeda connection . According to the longtime Saudi intelligence chief Prince Turki, "Iraq does not come very high in the estimation of bin Laden," Hiro writes .
 Jamal al Fadl, a key Al Qaeda defector, said there were individual Iraqis in Al Qaeda . He said there was no specific Iraqi group that Al Qaeda was backing . Al Qaeda is backing an Iraqi group in Iraq, he said .
 Bin Laden criticized Saddam for attacking Muslims and killing women and children, he told U.S. authorities . He told the United States authorities that bin Laden . criticized Saddam ""sometimes for attacking . Muslims, but most importantly for not believing in 'most of Islam, '
 The idea of an alliance between Saddam and Al Qaeda seemed outlandish . So the idea of a Saddam-Al Qaeda alliance was outlandish . Al Qaeda has a history of fighting in Iraq .
 Israel was guilty of being in breech of more U.N. Security Council resolutions than Iraq was, says Hiro Hiro . Hiro also brings out in his book that Israel was in breeching of more United Nations Security Council .
 U.N. weapons inspectors had been searching for such, but in vain . The United Nations had been looking for such weapons inspectors . U.S. inspectors had searched for such a weapon .
 Bush administration ran out of patience and apparently thought inspectors weren't looking hard enough . The Bush administration, though, ran out patience .
 By invading Iraq, Washington will initiate a conflict the course of which is very hard to predict . The course of the conflict will be very difficult to predict, says George W. Bush .
 The best scenario would see Iraqi soldiers defecting in droves and civilians welcoming the Americans as liberators . The U.S. hawks want Iraqi soldiers to defect and Iraqi civilians to welcome the Americans .
 An eventuality is based on the information and expectations of the exiled Iraqi opposition . Such an eventuality would be based on information from the exiled opposition, it is claimed .
 History shows that exiles are the last people to have a correct grasp of the current situation in the country they have left . Exiles should be aware of the situation in their country, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The scenario visualized by the Iraqi National Congress and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan in March 1995 failed to materialize . More recently in Iraqi Kurdistan, the scenario visualizing by the . Iraqi National . Congress and . Patriotic . Union of . Kurdistan in Iraq has been the subject of
 To imagine that a people who have suffered grievously at the hands of the United States for twelve years, and have grown deep hatred for it, would turn out in thousands to greet American soldiers and their Iraqi cohorts as liberators .
 The U.S. has been generally wrong in gauging popular feeling in Iraq and devising policies likely to turn Iraqis against Saddam and his regime . Washington's scenarios were often conceived in consultation with the Iraqi opposition, author says .
 The U.S. has failed to grasp a basic element of popular psychology, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The United States has not grasped a basic aspect of American psychology, he says .
 In Iraq this is precisely what happened after the Pentagon's bombings of Iraq — in January and June 1 993, September 1996, December 1998 and December 1998, and February 2001 . In Iraq, this is exactly what happened again after the bombings .
 U.S. policy of punishing sanctions against Iraq has ended up aiding Saddam to tighten his grip over society by rationing, author says . Sanctions have not caused Saddam's ousting or destabilization of his regime, he says .
 The sanctions allowed Saddam Hussein to blame any and all bad conditions in Iraq on the sanctions, and simultaneously increase, rather than diminish, his control over the people . Not only was he, as the dictator of the country, to a great extent immune to personal privation, the sanctions allowed
 This was so because his government was administering the distribution and dissemination of necessities, doling out what little there was to those who maintained their loyalty to him and his regime . This is so because of his government, he administered the distribution of necessities .
 Since the invasion of Iraq, thousands of civilians have been killed, including members of the U.S. and Iraqi military forces .
 Approximately 100,000 Iraqi civilians, the majority of them women and children, have died in Iraq since the invasion this year . According to the British medical journal The Lancet, The Lancet says approximately 100,00 Iraqi civilians have died since 2003 .
 Most of the deaths have been the result of air strikes by the United States -led ""coalition"" forces . Most of these have been caused by air strikes .
 Among these 14 were his wife and children as well as his parents . Among the 14 people he was killed were his family members .
 As it had in 1991, 1993, 1996, and 1998, this year, the United States bombed Iraq . The U.S. bombed Iraq in Iraq in 1991 and 1993 .
 The American military bombed and shelled the areas they were purported to be occupying . Like an attempt to smash a mosquito in a preschool classroom with a sledgehammer, the U.S. military bombed the area .
 In many cases, Iraqi citizens were killed with no connection to the military or its government . Many of the bombs and shells killed Iraqi citizens had no connection with the military .
 As of the time of writing, the United States occupation of Iraq, three years old, continues . The U.S. occupation continues with no end in sight .
 The invasion of Afghanistan seems to have played right into Osama bin Laden's hands . Allegedly undertaken to fight terrorism, this tactical blunder seems to play right into the hands of bin Laden .
 Al Qaeda was overjoyed at this turn of events because now U.S. troops were spread out across Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula . Now United States troops are spread out, and close at hand, and easy to target .
 There is nothing bin Laden could have hoped for more than the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Iraq is the second holiest land in Islam, a place where Islam had been suppressed by Saddam . The Sunni minority long dominated and brutalized the Shia majority; where order was kept only by the Baathist barbarity that prevented civil war . Iran and Saudi Arabia would intervene, at least
 Iraq without Saddam would obviously become what political scientists call a ""failed state, "" a place bedeviled by its neighbors and — as is Afghanistan — a land where al Qaeda or al Qaeda-like organizations would thrive . In short, Iraq .
 Bin Laden: Surely, thought Americans would not want to create this kind of situation. Surely, he thought bin Laden, the Americans would .
 In the end, something much like Christmas had come for bin Laden . The gift he received from Washington will haunt, hurt and hound Americans for years to come .
 Ousting Saddam and replacing him with a democratic regime in Baghdad will open Iraq's rich oilfields to U.S. corporations . The United States is now dependent on petroleum from Saudi Arabia, which provided the bulk of the hijackers for the 9/11 attacks .
 Washington will introduce democracy in Iraq, from where it is bound to spread to the rest of the region, they claim . Furthermore, they say, Washington will bring democracy to Iraq, and that it will spread .
 There is a well-known and oft-quoted aphorism about those ignorant of history being destined to repeat it . There is an often-repeated aphorist about those who fail to understand history .
 Britain had earlier failed to harness Iraq, as it had failed to do so again . It seems to apply even better than usual in this case, as Britain had failed in Iraq .
 Most Iraqis were glad to see Saddam Hussein removed from power, but they would not stand for the U.S. staying on and trying to run their country after the removal of Saddam Hussein was accomplished . A key point driven home in Jon Lee Anderson's book ""The Fall of Baghdad""
 Most Iraqis want Americans to simply leave and allow them to run their own affairs . Most Iraqis are frustrated with the lack of American involvement in Iraq .
 I wondered if Washington's war planners had studied the history and taken some of its lessons into account . I wondered whether Washington's planners had taken some lessons from the history into account.
 Muslih told me that he and most Iraqis had been pleased by the American overthrow of Saddam Hussein and had had high expectations of what would come next . He told CNN that most Iraqis were pleased with the U.S. overthrow and had hoped for more .
 In May 2004, the city of Eureka, California and the Kay family returned a portion of Indian/ Gunther Island to the Wiyot tribe . John Adams: "The only maxim of a free government ought to be to trust no man living with power to endanger the public
 A parcel of greater than forty acres was included in the transaction, including historic Tuluwat village, where the massacre of 1860 had taken place . The deal includes a parcel of over forty acres of land, including the massacre site .
 The tribe had earlier, following extensive fundraising efforts, purchased one and a half acres on the island .
 Indians look around at the malls and stores of America, and say, 'None of this is ever going to be ours' Indians look at malls, stores and stores as a challenge to the American Dream .
 We don't need only to remember the tragedy, but to also remember the gift, to live in this place, to know it gave us birth, to feel the responsibility we have for it . We need to remember that we have responsibility for it, and that we are responsible for it
 "We have to sit down and figure out how to not hurt each other any more," he said . "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with my family and friends again," he added .
 To see change as failure, as some kind of cultural corruption, is to condemn Indians to solitary confinement in a prison of myth that whites invented for them in the first place, says John Sutter . Sutter: Change as failure is a cultural corruption that condemns Indians to isolation in a
 In the past five centuries, Indian life has been utterly transformed by the impact of European horses, firearms, imported diseases and modern medicine . The rich mingling of native bloodlines with those of Europe, African, and the Hispanic Southwest .
 In many ways, the Indian revolution of the 1990s is itself a form of adaptation, as Indians, freed from lockstep stewardship of Washington, search out new ways to live in the modern world .
 The Indian story does not, of course, end with an intellectual accommodation with the past or even a moral coming to terms . The story doesn't end with intellectual accommodation, it does with a moral .
 When Indians have stepped from the roles to which we have assigned them, we have often seen nothing at all . Imagining that we see the Indian, we often see little more than a warped reflection of ourselves .
 There will be no end to history, but an end may be put to the invention of distorting myth, says author .
 Indians are not, at last, lost age, but men and women of our own time, struggling to solve twentieth-century problems with the tools of our shared civilization . With that may come a recognition that Indians may not be, at least, at all, of a lost age .
 To see Indians as they are is to see not only a richer tapestry of life than our fantasies ever allowed, but also the limitations of futile attempts to remake one another by force by force . To see Indian life is to be a rich tapestrophy of life, says
 The relationship between Indians and other Americans may yet remain an uncertain one, an embrace that permits neither consummation nor release, but that is, nonetheless, full of hope . Stripped of myth, the relationship between Americans and Indians may still remain uncertain .
 George seems to have known exactly what he wanted from an early age . George is a prosperous walnut grower in Tulare County, California . George's walnut farm is located in the heart of California's largest city .
 He said it was his brother Theodore who was truly the most successful in the family . Nevertheless, he said that it was Theodore who had the most success in his family .
 Albert's two half-sisters Lula Mae Dixon and Thora Wheeler are the only siblings of Pop Shannon, Albert Kollenborn, Esther Shannon Welch, and Alice . Albert's siblings Albert and Albert are Albert's half-brothers Albert and Esther .
 Diebold is one of three major suppliers of electronic voting machines that were used in Ohio in 2004 . Diebold was one of the three suppliers of the machines used in the 2004 election .
 Now is the time to wake up to that fact. If we weren't convinced of that before these last elections, then we should wake up . If we were, it's the time for the U.S. to get back on the track .
 Public policies are not now, nor have they ever been, settled through elections . Even beyond the fraudulent elections of 2000 and 2004, public policies have not been settled by elections . Public policies have never been settled in elections, says Julian Zelizer .
 The situation in Iraq seemed to go from bad to worse . Reminding many people of Vietnam, the situation in the country seemed to get worse . Vietnam is one of many countries in the Middle East .
 The Iraqis had been liberated from dictatorship by Operation Iraqi Freedom, but their newfound liberty was not something they could easily cherish . The Iraqi government was overthrown in 2003 .
 Iraqis now have the freedom to express their opinions, to surf the Web and watch satellite TV, and to join the political party of their choice . But now too terrorists and criminals are free to strike at will, seemingly, against whomever they want, whenever and wherever they want .
 A year after George W Bush declared Iraq delivered from evil, it was still missing the essential ingredient still missing in Iraq a year after the war .
 No Iraqi I knew felt comforted or protected by the continued presence of 130,000 American soldiers in the country . No Iraqi felt better by the presence of U.S. troops in Iraq, says CNN's John Sutter .
 American troops lived inside secure compounds like the Green Zone or Saddam's former palaces and military camps . Because of the risks to their own safety, they lived in secure compounds, protected by sentries .
 When they emerged, they engaged with Iraqi society from behind their protective coating of flak jackets and Kevlar helmets and weaponry . They moved around in armoured vehicles, guns at the ready, moving around in armoury vehicles .
 Most days, several of the soldiers are killed by ambushes or roadside bombs detonated by remote control . Most days of them die from ambushes, several days of being killed by roadside bombs or ambushes .
 The soldiers often opened fire, sometimes wildly, spraying everything around them . After such incidents, soldiers opened fire on them, sometimes spraying them .
 "All too often they killed Iraqi civilians who just happened to be there, within range of their bullets" "Iraqi civilians" were often killed by the soldiers, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In March alone a series of targeted ambushes on Iraq's roads resulted in the deaths of about twenty Western civilians, including businessmen, civilian contractors, clergymen, and relief experts . In the month of March alone, about 20 Western civilians were killed .
 Most Western reporters and other civilians remaining in Baghdad moved behind walls that surrounded the Palestine and Sheraton or the Al-Hamra . The Lebanon Hotel was apparently targeted because it hosted some foreign guests .
 Baghdad residents were the only people in Baghdad living without such protection . Iraqis were living in the capital's capital, Baghdad, for the first time since 2003 . The Iraqi government has been fighting a growing insurgency in Iraq .
 The number of murders and rapes had skyrocketed since the fall of Baghdad . Carjackings, kidnappings and kidnappings for ransom had also skyrocketed in Iraq .
 Kelvin Shannon is the grandson of Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee/ Alice Rosalie Shannon . He is the great-grandson of Pop Shannon, Esther Shannon Welch, Albert Lee Benjamin Kollenborn, and Alice Kollmanborn . Kelvin is the son of Albert and Albert
 Her daughters Rosie Lee Shannon and Sharon Dee Noland, who live in the same town of Mokelumne Hill, California, cared for her up to this time . The two daughters lived together until her death, and she was taken to a hospice .
 Alice had to be rehospitalized in a nursing home in Jackson, California . Alice was taken to a nearby nursing home, where she was taken back to her home .
 Alice outlived her husband Albert by 2 1 years . In terms of the calendar, Alice lived longer than her husband by 2 years .
 Some claim that the effects of climate change (popularly known as ""global warming"") have intensified, and will continue to intensify, the severity of hurricanes, among other things . The effects of global warming are said to have intensified .
 You can't stop it, but you can keep the progressive warming to a minimum . It's not easy to stop, but it's a good idea to keep the temperature in the future .
 If we can keep it down another two degrees until 2010, then we may lose some species, but I'm hoping we can still maybe keep coral reefs . We may lose coral reefs, but we may still be able to keep coral .
 Coral reefs can't persist above a certain temperature . But if it goes over that by much, we will simply lose coral reefs . The algal symbiont cannot persist above that temperature .
 And alpine environments will no longer exist, because there will be no more mountain for them to go up, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The alpine environment will not exist, he says .
 The sea level has risen from four to eight inches in the last century and will keep rising any where from five inches to six and a half feet in the next one . Sea level is expected to rise from four inches to eight feet in next century .
 "The climate system has a long lag time, and we can't reverse the effects that are happening or in motion even now," says climate expert . The climate system is in motion now, he says, but we cannot reverse it even now .
 Climate change is unlike any other environmental crisis we face in that it is global and slow moving . It is unlike other environmental crises we face, climate change is global, slow moving and global . So climate change can be very different from any other crisis, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 "It has a lot of momentum, and once it gets going, you're not going to stop it," he says . "Once you get going, it's not a matter of stopping it. It's going to get going," he adds .
 What we've already put up, we're not feeling the full effects of, so even if we stop it now, we will still feel its effects . We will still be feeling the effects of what we put up now, even though we have already done so .
 Global warming is also the thing that the individual can do the most about, without asking anyone else's permission, like trading in their SUV for a Honda Civic .
 The number of intense hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones throughout the world has indeed been increasing .
 There has been a sharp rise in the number of category 4 and 5 tropical cyclones over the last thirty-five years . Tropical cyclones have been recorded in the past 30 years .
 They have tallied the number of severe hurricanes over two consecutive 14-year spans . The number of hurricanes has risen over the last 14 years .
 Hurricane Katrina and Wilma were the worst hurricanes since 2004 . Hurricane Katrina was the worst year to hit the U.S. since Hurricane Katrina in 2004 .
 Low-lying Louisiana, surrounded by levees, had been a catastrophe waiting to occur for some time . The low-lying state of Louisiana has been a disaster waiting to happen for years .
 State's vulnerability to hurricanes has increased dramatically due to the deterioration and disappearance of coastal wetlands, which slow down storm surges . That state's vulnerability has increased because of the deterioration of the coastal wetlands .
 He either doesn't realize the implications of what he's doing, or simply doesn't care about the long-term damage done . He either didn't realize what he was doing or didn't care much about the consequences .
 Flood-control levees starved the soil and dehydrated the former wetlands . Instead of periodic flooding to replenish and invigorate the soil, the levees starve the soil .
 The rapid rate of coastal wetland loss in Louisiana has been well-documented for more than a quarter century . It's been well documented for over a quarter decades .
 Short-term economic interest has driven the decision-making process in the U.S. "It's been the case almost everywhere at almost every time in history," he says . The U.N. government has been in touch with the world for decades .
 Hundreds of people died as a result of Hurricane Katrina, many of them trapped in the city without a way out . Hundreds of thousands of people were trapped in Hurricane Katrina .
 Some were told not to worry, the Superdome would be open and, if worse came to worse, they could repair to that mega-coliseum and be safe there . And some were told that they could be safe in the Superbowl .
 For those who had to resort to the Superdome as a temporary residence, conditions were neither safe nor well-provided for . Conditions were not safe nor provided for, though, for many .
 In addition to the hundreds of deaths, tens of thousands lost their homes and all their possessions . Tens of thousands of people are believed to have lost their lives and possessions .
 These refugees were dispersed to various cities throughout the country, to start life anew . These became refugees and were dispersed .
 New Orleans residents have lived in New Orleans since 1964 . Not to the same extent as those who had lived there, they have lived there since .
 Throughout the country, gas prices skyrocketed to their highest historic levels — often over $3 per gallon . Nevertheless, throughout the U.S. gas prices continue to rise .
 The United States-led coalition had expected to be welcomed by the Iraqis with open arms . But many Iraqis and other Muslims continued to meet them with arms of a different sort .
 A strongly entrenched insurgency kept up the pressure on U.S. forces and Iraqi citizens . The Iraqi government has been fighting an insurgency since 2003 .
 True insurgencies are more serious than isolated incidents of terrorism or revenge, says President Obama . "True insurgencies" are serious enough to be serious, says Obama .
 An insurgency is a type of conflict that shares many commonalities with ""conventional"" warfare . The insurgency is an insurgency that shares common commonality with conventional warfare . An insurgency can be described as an insurgency .
 They are exceedingly difficult to overcome, as their purpose is to wear down the opposition, the invaders, by destruction so catastrophic and unrelenting that the attacker decides any possible victory would only be Pyrrhic . They are extremely difficult .
 Insurgency is, in fact, the only form of warfare that has ever been successfully employed by a minor power to defeat a superpower . Insurgent warfare is the only way to defeat the superpower, the author says .
 Modernday examples include Algeria in the 1960s, when the French were defeated there by the natives . Vietnam War in the '60s and '70s ; and the '80s; and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 The insurgency in Iraq is being carried out primarily by the nation's once-ruling Sunni Arab minority . Sunni Arab minorities now fear a massive power loss to their arch-enemy, the Iraqi Shiite majority .
 By this year the insurgency had actually transformed into a low-grade Civil War between the two Iraqi Muslim sects . In fact, by this year, the insurgency there had actually become a low grade Civil War .
 Sunnis believe leadership of Islam is assumed by elective office . Shiites believe primacy in the faith is passed on as a birthright . Sunnis and Shiites differ on the role of leadership in Islam .
 On so many fronts, military and otherwise, the world seemed to edge closer to oblivion this year . This year, chaos seemed to be on the rise, but it was also possible to anarchy .
 An array of perfect storms, both literal and figurative, seemed to be on the verge of simultaneously converging . The storms were on the brink of converging in the U.S. and beyond .
 An analysis of such would call for a separate and different type of book, though, though . An analysis such would be called for a different and different kind of book .
 We end this tome on a positive note, with the following and final chapter . The final chapter of the book ends with a happy ending .
 On September 8 th of this year, Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee Shannon will celebrate their fiftieth wedding anniversary . "Road Less Traveled"" by Robert Frost is from Robert Frost .
 Shannon and Kollenborn families have four children and five grandchildren . The Shannon-Kollenborn family has proved successful and stable, as evidenced by their four children .
 The events that made the melding of these two families possible, for the most part, seem very commonplace and ordinary . CNN.com: "The most part of the story seems very commonplace"
 Combined, these events form a virtually miraculous linkage of deliberate decisions with serendipitous happenstance . Combined, though, they form an almost miraculous link between deliberate decisions and serendine happenstances .
 Had any of a number of decisions not been made, or been made at a different time, or were somehow thwarted, Theodore and Rosie Lee would have never even met . Theodore Lee's wife, Rosie, is now a best-selling author in the world .
 Desire Howland would not have been born if John Howland had not hung on for dear life after being swept overboard on the Mayflower's 1620 passage to the ""New World" Desire was born after Howland was swept overboard and died in 1620 .
 Without Desire, George Gorham would have never existed . Gorham never come to California from Massachusetts and married Susan Lucky .
 If any one of the fighting Gorhams of colonial times had died before fathering the child who ended up in the Howland/ Gorham/ Silva/ Nelson line, Pop Shannon's children — including Theodore Russell — would never have existed .
 John Gorham was born during a diphtheria epidemic in New England . Had he succumbed to that oft-fatal disease, the family line would have ended with him .
 Shannon had not come to California from Canada in 1889, his father and siblings would probably not have come in 1891 . Shannon came to California in 1889 from Canada . Shannon's parents and siblings moved from Canada to California .
 Will Shannon and Gertie Bailey would not have married in Trinity County at the Turn of the Century . Shannon and Bailey were the first couple to marry in the county .
 That also would have meant no Theodore Roosevelt Shannon, which would have mean no Theodore Russell Shannon, etc. That would also mean no Roosevelt Roosevelt Shannon . That would have also meant no Teddy Russell Shannon .
 Harry Kollenborn and Lizzie Huddleston married in 1906 in northern Missouri . The couple were incompatible but married in 1903 in a joint home town .
 If the answer is no, whether he really would have followed through on his threat would be a moot point as far as this question of all the pieces falling perfectly together goes — they wouldn't have; couldn't have .
 Albert Kollenborn would have moved his family there from Colusa, instead of Fort Bragg . Albert would have been able to move his family to the U.S. Army base .
 Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee Kollenborn would probably never have met in that case . The case is the subject of a new book, "Theodore Russell Shannon" Shannon and Kollenbirth, published by The Washington Post, published in 2009, is published by Pulitzer Prize-
 And all this is just scratching the surface of all the decisions and happenings, all the seemingly trivial events that made the difference between things turning out as they have and not turning out so . And all the things that make a difference in the outcome of events that have turned out to be
 Shannon/Kollenborn family is not unique to the Shannon/ Kollenborn extended family .
 Each one of us here on earth exist only because of fortuitous happenings and non-happenings, decisions large and small . The lives of all of us are a miracle almost beyond comprehension .
 This kaleidoscopic juxtaposition requires just the right number of revolutions of the cylinder. Indeed, this kaleidoscope requires just a few revolutions of cylinder .
 The cessation of revolutions, allowing the pieces to settle into their necessary spot, takes place at the precise millisecond and with the exact perfect touch on the barrel . Necessary, too, is that the cessation of . revolutions, allow the . pieces to . settle into . their necessary
 The deceleration and temporary interruption of the ballet, the musical ""rest,"" must be made with ultimate finesse, otherwise— all is lost . The rest of the musical "rest" must come with finesse and must be masterful .
 This astronomically low-chance, super-high stakes existential lottery is not at all impossible to win, though . This is a super-low-chance high-stakes existential lottery, though. It's not all about the odds of winning, but it's not impossible .
 Reader, wherever you may be, you are one of those victors in the quest for life .
 My parents and grandparents settled in a little town near the moist green coast in Northern California . My mother and grandmother lived in the same town for decades .
 My immediate family located at Hydesville while my grandparents lived a few miles distant in Carlotta, Michigan . My parents lived in Hydesville, Michigan, while my grandmother lived a couple miles away .
 My sister, Effie, who was three years older than me; and my brother Edgar, five years younger than I was. My sister Effie was three . My brother, Edgar, was five years . I was five .
 "My grandmother soon became mother and grandmother to me and I owe much to her," she said . "I owe much more to her than anyone else," she added. "I am a proud member of my family and I am proud to be a member of the family"
 I used to follow my grandfather all around and I would lead the horse for grandfather when he plowed. I would follow him around and lead him for him when he hit the ground, he says .
 When it came time for grandfather to go fishing, I dearly wanted to go with him, but as I was just a little noisy creature, I was not invited . When he came when he went fishing, he said: 'As I was ... not invited. As I was a little
 This left me wondering, but now I realize that he must have enjoyed this opportunity to meditate . This left him wondering . Now I realize . Now, I realize this . It must have been a good time for him to be alone .
 Sometimes he used worms that I proudly picked up for him while walking in back of him as he made fresh furrows in the fields . Sometimes he picked up worms and used them to make new furrows .
 We walked two miles to school and this was my mode of transportation until I was 16 years old. We walked to school two miles from home . This was my way of getting to school .
 "I remember as a girl the making of all of our soap, which is completely foreign to the young folks of today, and was just one of the chores for us," she says .
 We poured water through them and as it drained off, it formed into lye . We then poured water into them and then poured it back into a bottle .
 "With a big roaring fire under the old black wash pot, we thus made our soap," says the author of the book .
 "We had to draw water from the will in the yard, fill the old pot and diligently use the wash board" The family had to use the will and old pot to get water from a pot in their yard .
 When I was about 8 years I used to go down to the river bar and fill a flour sack full of rocks, and in the evening my grandfather would get down on the floor with me and show me how he would and did build his barns, fences and his house out of
 "This was a wonderful time for me and I can never forget how kind he was to me," she said . "I can't remember how kind I was to him," she added .
 During the Spring and Summer months we were busy canning fruits and vegetables so that we had plenty of canned goods on hand for the long winter months . Another memory I have is that during the spring and summer we were canning fruit .
 It took some three or four hours to fetch groceries from the closest store, which was eight miles away by the horse and buggy . This was quite handy, to have the food canned and in our home, as it took some 3 or 4 hours to get there .
 My grandparents had a few cows and I used to milk, churn, and mold butter . My grandparents were able to milk and churn butter from their cows .
 We kept the butter in a big crock and stored it and all of the milk and milk products in the well house where it was always cool . The butter and milk was stored in a crock in a large well house in a well house .
 One day my grandmother and I went to see some friends and we were about there when our horse starting acting funny . One day our horse started acting funny. We were going to see friends and when we got there, our horse acted funny. It was the first time I'd seen her
 Someone had lost a cow and it seems as though they found her on the river bar and it didn't want to come home . The cow was found on a river bar in the area and didn't seem to want to return home .
 The horse seemed to sense that something was wrong, and then a while later, on our way home, at the very same spot, the horse acted funny again, and grandmother got out and held the horse until he got out of the cart .
 The horse knocked her down and the wheel of the cart went over her arm . But as we found out later her arm wasn't broken, although it was very sore after that . The horse then knocked the horse down and she was knocked down .
 One of the neighbors caught the horse at the bridge and brought him to a friend's house to be picked up later . The horse was picked up by a friend and taken to a neighbor's house later .
 I went to get my grandfather who then went and picked up my grandmother . I went and got my grandfather, who then picked up his grandmother . My grandmother was also in the hospital when she died .
 When I was still with my parents, when I was about five years old, I was five . Another memory which is very plain is when I went to see my parents at the age of five, he said . He added: "Another memory which I remember very clearly was when I
 I went to my uncle's home and my cousin, Will Smith, went with me to grandmothers . While climbing over a fence, I stepped into a bee's nest and was stung quite badly .
 Will picked me up and ran the rest of the way (it was about a half a mile) to grandmothers, climbing the fences with me as they got in his way . Will then ran the other half of his way, climbing fences with grandmothers .
 The first heifer that I had was given to me by my grandmother, so that I would have a cow of my own on which to learn how to milk, she says .
 I had a dear friend, her name was Josie Barney and one day at school, she fell and she was never able to walk again . She was one of the first girls to fall and never walk again. Josie was a very special friend to me .
 I would go to see her once every week, then she died and was buried the day before Christmas . I would visit her once a week, but she died before Christmas, she said .
 When I went out to feed the chickens my pet hen, a special hen, would fly up on my shoulder and there she stayed until I got to the place we fed them, the chickens . When I was going to feed them, she would fly on her shoulder . She stayed until
 I met my future husband a year before grand mother died, and had seen him many times where we both happened to be at homes of mutual acquaintances and friends . I met his future husband in the year before her grandmother died .
 The next year casual friendship grew into love but since I was only sixteen we decided to wait awhile for marriage but catastrophe invaded my life about this time when my beloved grandmother passed away at the age of seventy . Since I was just 16, I had a casual friendship grow into love .
 My grandfather had passed away six years earlier at the age of seventy-one . My grandfather died six years before .
 When my grandmother died I went to live with my father, for a short time before Will and I married . I went back to live in the UK with Will after my grandmother's death . Will and Will married in 2011 .
 My heart still aches for my grandmother and my last memory of my grandfather bears mentioning . My grandmother died at the hands of a young woman in the 1940s .
 The waters were so high that my uncle had to put his body in the back of his wagon without a coffin, to take it to uncle's place . A coffin was obtained before it's trip to his final resting place in the cemetery at Hydesville .
 Clarence Bailey, my father, was born on December 22, 1850 and I don't know when he died . Clarence Bailey was born in 1850 and he died in 1945 .
 I don't know when my grandparents, William Eaton and Electra Bailey, were married . William Eaton was married to Electra Bailey, Electra Eaton . Electra was born to William Eaton, the daughter of Electra and William Eaton .
 "Just a month and a day before I am seventeen, we were married on December 23, 1900," she writes . "We were married just a month before I was seventeen, and a month after I was born, I was a baby."
 Our first home was rented in Carlotta where we spent a year and a half in Italy . We spent the first year in the city and spent the rest of the time there . We are now in the UK for the first time since we moved to the UK .
 In May 1902 we moved to Trinity County in northern California, and took up a homestead on the Eel River . We lived there for eighteen years before moving to California in 1902 .
 The following paragraphs and pages will tell of some of the experiences we had in the mountains . The following pages will show some of our experiences in the mountain mountains .
 "I can remember one time when I didn't see another woman for two whole years. I can remember when I was in a relationship with another for two years," she says .
 It was a peddler and when he started to open our gate and enter, he noticed our dog, backed out and kept right on going . It was the peddler who was trying to open the gate to enter .
 I remember how we became acquainted with our first neighbor, Mr. Lamply . I remember him as a good neighbor. He was a good friend of the late mayor .
 Before we moved to the hills, we made several trips to work on the cabin, and when we came out, we camped out under the trees . When we moved out, the cabin was full of wood, and the cabin is still full of logs .
 After moving, we stacked up logs so that we could later add another room onto the cabin, but then we heard of another place and moved into it instead . We stacked up some logs to later add a room to the cabin but then heard of a new place instead .
 She brought over a hen, and six baby chicks, excusing her generosity by saying that they were for the baby . She had brought over the hen, saying that she was only for her baby .
 The log cabin had a front room with a fireplace, also a kitchen, bedroom, and a kitchen . We had busied ourselves getting a room fixed upstairs for one more bedroom . The cabin was a log cabin with a front .
 There was the barn on the place already, and the well on it, and a bucket even to draw up the water . The well was already there already, with a well and a good well . There was also a bucket for the water, and there was a well for the well
 I had to make a short hike up the hill to the house, after drawing the water . I was forced to make it up a short walk to the home after drawing water .
 There were many coyotes around at the time of the time we came, but the first one I saw was one that Dad Shannon caught in a trap . There were also coyotes that were caught in the trap .
 After that, while herding the young pigs and turkeys, I would catch sight of many of them . After that I would see many of the animals in the wild . The animals were herded by herding in the field .
 Prince, a colt, came up onto the porch and stick his head in at front door . He was surprised to see his owner's pet colt come up on the porch . Prince was the first animal to stick its head into the front door.
 Someone would have to be left outside to keep watch on the mischievous ham . Often times when we walked to the post office, one of our little pet pigs would follow us .
 Wildlife was abundant and one day while we were herding the pigs, they seemed excited and noisy . The pigs were herded by a herd of pigs, and the pigs seemed excited .
 The rattlesnakes seemed to be everywhere when first we moved to the hills . "Rattle snakes seemed to seem everywhere when we moved here," says author .
 One day I fixed a place under the bushes to lay my baby so I could help with the hay . One day she fixed a spot under the bush to lay her baby so she could help the hay.
 Just as I was about to put the baby down, I saw a rattlesnake; and it scared me so badly that I didn't help much with the hay that day . The baby was being put down when she saw the snake, she said .
 "I saw two or three rattlers in the gateway. Another time I was just coming back from getting some wood from the wood pile," he says . "Another time I came back and saw rattlers on the gateway"
 "When March came I would go out and hunt the turkey nests while there was still snow on the ground," says author . "I would go hunting for turkey nests in March," she says .
 We raised the turkeys to sell to sell so we would have the ready cash we needed . We raised turkeys for sale to raise money for the first time . We are selling turkeys so we can raise the money we need .
 I'd have to gather them so they wouldn't freeze and dad made small individual houses for each hen . Dad made a small individual house for each of the chickens .
 Some turkeys came to our place and Dad and I ended up taking them back to the neighbors from the ranch where they came . Dad and Dad took them to the neighbor's ranch and took them back .
 When they wandered off, coyotes would get in the pack, scattering, and scaring them . Then kill them just for pleasure, not even hungry enough to eat them . When the coyotes wandered off they would get into the pack and kill them .
 An old hen was making quite a commotion only a short while after I had taken care of them so I went out to check on her . She was making a loud commotion when I went to look after her .
 "I looked under the shed that was in the yard and saw a rattlesnake lying there. I looked under it and saw it lying there," she said .
 We heard a noise and upon investigating we discovered that the sow had eaten some of the baby chicks . The sow was found to have eaten the chicks in the nest .
 They did not tell us when we bought her that she would do such a thing, they said . They didn't tell us that they bought her when she was a baby, she said .
 Around Christmas time, we would sit up most of the night getting turkeys ready for the market . Around Christmas, we'd sit up all the night preparing turkeys for market .
 The next day Dad would start out for Fortuna, which was some 70 miles away, to sell our turkeys and to bring back a supply of groceries which would last six months . Dad would go back to buy groceries and sell turkeys .
 The two trips to ""civilization"" were the only ones made in a year's time, for it was a long drawn out difficult trip . Two trips to civilization were made in the year .
 "I only made one trip away from home, and that was to Fort Seward," she says . "We lived there for 18 years, and we only lived away from that home," she said .
 "We walked for four hours to visit with Mrs. Mrs. Barbara," she said . "We went to visit her and walked for hours to see her," Barbara said .
 We could only visit for a half hour in order to get home again before dark set in .
 It was not an easy life, but it was a good life. But it was worth the walk, says Bob Greene . Greene .
 Mother left father at this time, and we traveled by boat to San Francisco . Father left father, and mother left him to live in San Francisco, California . Mother left him at this point .
 'It took us a little more than 24 hours and I was sea sick the whole time, along with Effie. It took us to the beach, and Effie got sea sick, and she was sick,' she said . 'It was a very difficult experience for Effie,
 As soon as we reached the city, I and Edgar were placed in an orphan's home . As soon after we . reached the . city, we . were placed into an orphan . home .
 We were there almost a year before we again joyfully made our home with grandma and grandpa . We were in the home for almost two years before returning to the country .
 Effie went to live with a Methodist minister, who was very good to her . Effie now lives with a family in the United States .
 Edgar walked in front of a child swinging, and the edge of the swing hit him in the mouth, almost cutting his tongue off . While Edgar and I were in the home, Edgar walked . He walked in . front of the child swinging . Edgar .
 People were surprised that he could still talk as good as always. After this, people were surprised to hear him talk again .
 "My grandparents didn't know where we were and so he couldn't know of the straits we were in," she says . "He didn't have to know where he was," she adds. "He couldn't have known of the situation."
 Schoolteacher, while I was at the home, wrote to friends of hers living in the Eureka area and the news reached my grandparents . My schoolteacher sent the news to friends in the area, and it was passed on to grandparents .
 Folks in the area gathered up the $ necessary to bring us back to Hydesville but they gave the money to my father, to go and get us, and he drank it up .
 Mr Godfrey went to the boat and stayed there until it sailed for San Francisco .
 I knew the only place I had to go was with his folks and this is what we all wanted. I knew it was the place we were going to be going to, and I knew I was going to have to go there . I knew this was what I needed to do,
 "My father gave his consent for Dad and I to marry, but then a couple months after we married, he left the country and I have never saw him since," she said .
 We took up two different homesteads in Trinity, Trinity and the last one was near the river . The last one of the homesteaders was near to the river.
 This house was built on a hill overlooking the river and had a beautiful sweeping view of the hills around us . It was built in front of the river overlooking the hillside .
 "I could see the river from my kitchen window and watch its changing moods. I could see it from a kitchen window," she says .
 "The river was turbulent and angry in the winter," says author . "I could see logs and every kind of debris, being battered and carried downstream," she says .
 "We built two barns down by the river and there we stored hay for the cattle," says the owner of the farmhouse .
 We built sheds around one so that they could get out of sleet rain and snow . The sheds were built around one each so they could be out in sleet and snow.
 The other place was just right of the fruit trees, by the Shannon buttes . The other places were just a few yards away from the buttes.
 An old school friend and her husband came to take up a homestead near us . The couple are an old school friends who came to live with us on a farm .
 One day a friend, Harry Parry, from Humboldt, came out and the two of them went hunting for deer . The two men were able to hunt for deer for the first time in the area .
 Harry accidentally shot John to death in the excitement of the hunt . Harry and John were hunting in the area when Harry accidentally killed John .
 One of our neighbors, Mr Espie, went to hunt his horse when it was snowing, and he got lost and died . He got lost when he went hunting his horse in the snowing .
 The searchers found where he tried to keep warm by going around and around a tree . But when they found him, it was too late. He was found dead at the scene .
 She had unsaddled her horse and with the saddle had tried to keep her self warm, but to no avail . She had been trying to keep herself warm but was unable to keep it warm .
 Sadness also came to our house when our Girlie was bitten by a rattlesnake and we had to bury her . Sadness came to the house when she was bitten and buried .
 He asked John Holtorf if he would carry the mail that day, as he had to bury his girl . Holtorf had to ask Holtorf to carry the post that day . He asked Holtorf for help carrying the mail .
 John said he couldn't as he had to be at that picnic, and it was too bad that she had to die just at this time . John said: 'It's too bad she had died just this time. She had to have died'
 This answer made us both feel real bad, as it was too bad she had to die at all, and she certainly couldn't help what day the Lord took her home . This answer was made to us by the hospital staff, who were shocked to hear what happened .
 Dad asked Mr Caar to carry the mail so he could attend Girlie's funeral, and he said yea, right away . Dad asked him to carry mail to attend the funeral of his daughter .
 They were the only ones except for the grave diggers to come to her funeral . They were only ones only to come for the funeral .
 Everyone else had to go to a 4 th of July picnic and this has never ceased to leave a horrible feeling with us . This has never stopped us from going to a picnic . We are still trying to find out what happened to us .
 Gray was so sick she couldn't come to the house to comfort or help us, she was at this picnic . Yet she was there to help us. She was at the picnic. Gray was sick. She couldn't help us .
 Maude Gilman said she'd come but that it was too late by the time she heard . Maude . Gilman: "It's too late for the time I heard. I'm not going to come"
 She said even if she didn't know or like the parents, she would have come for the child . She said she would not have known the parents or didn't like them .
 Frank Lampley invited us all to come home with them, and we appreciated it but we had to go home . The team had been invited to stay with them but were forced to return home .
 We had a true friend who was with us all the time, right through to the end. We had to say goodbye to him, and he was always with us . We are sad to have lost him, but he was a great friend .
 A little while after we lost her, our first school burned to the ground, our children's next school was the old Clem cabin . A little . while after she lost her school, our . first school was destroyed, and a little while later, the children's . next school
 Another school was built in 1916 and Ted went to school there, and so did his children and Kenneth's a little while . Ted and Kenneth attended the same school in 1916 . Ted's children also attended the school .
 It is across a dip and field where Ted and his wife built. Ted and Ted built the house . It is still standing . Ted's house is still in the ground and is still there .
 I lost a brand new white coat I had just bought and worn just one time. I lost it all because it was a new coat I'd only worn one time . I lost the coat, which I'd worn just once .
 "The first thing I thought about was a rattlesnake. One day Marian was down by the river and the first thing she thought about is a rattlenake," she says .
 She had seen a rattler but it had went under a log and we couldn't find it, she said . She said she'd seen it but it went under the log and was unable to find it .
 Another time I heard her screaming and she had stepped into a bee's nest while out with her brother Theodore while he was cutting wood . Another time she was screaming when she stepped in a nest of a bee nest .
 The horse would swim across the river and dad would go over, suspended in the air, in a bucket . It was no easy task then and when the river was dangerous in the winter, the horse swim across .
 When Kenneth, our second son was born, exactly two years to the day after Theodore, a woman came in to stay with me, as Dad was away working and didn't want to leave me alone . Kenneth's second son, Kenneth, was born exactly 2 years after Theodore .
 She built a big warm fire and put some baby clothes on the chair in front of the fireplace . The baby girl was born in December .
 I'd arranged to be in the living room and had gone to sleep . But awoke to find the baby clothes on fire, also some of the wall paper . The fire started in the baby's clothes and wall paper in the wall .
 "There were some cartridges on the mantle of the fireplace and the logs would go up in a flash and the bullets could explode who knows where," says author . "The bullets would explode who knew where"
 The woman dashed in and put the fire out before it had a chance to get any worse . She dashed in to put out the fire .
 "We raised six of our children in Trinity Co. . . . Our sons still live there . We raised six children . .
 The oldest son, Theodore, still has the old homestead . Around 1944 it burned to the ground, and there is hardly a trace of where it stood . Theodore's oldest son Theodore still owns the old home .
 The men thought the place was safe, and they went to sleep and it burned to the ground . He said the couldn't leave and they placed men at his place but the men thought it was safe . The men went to his place and the place burned to death .
 Dad built a barn for Theodore Theodore in Trinity County, after having moved south . Dad built the barn in the year of 1948 . Theodore was 70 years old when he turned 70 .
 We camped out in the old Clem cabin which was built many years ago in Kettenpom Valley . It was built by Clem Clem in the 1960s and was built in the area .
 After many years of being away from Trinity and Dad Shannon had passed away, I took a trip back with my grand daughter Laura and her husband and her great grand daughter, Laurie . The trip was a trip to Trinity and Shannon's daughter Laura .
 The first thing I remember seeing were two of the wild deer going across the road . "The first thing is that I remember remember seeing two of these wild deer," she says. "I remember seeing them crossing the road."
 We went through Covelo, which in all the years I had lived in Trinity, I had never been there . We had to go through the town, which I'd never been before .
 It was a beautiful trip and we journeyed on into Orland to visit some friends and coming home we stopped in Weaverville and visited the old Joss House where the Chinese used to worship their Gods .
 "We read in the paper about one family that worships there, and it was so interesting," says mother of one of the families .
 Laura's home in Eureka burned to the ground, also her father's which stood right next to it . We had the most wonderful trip, but it was when we arrived at my grandson Ted's home that we received word that Laura's house had burned .
 Laura lost everything, and little Laurie could not understand what was it all about . Laura lost her life, but little Laurie did not understand it .
 They placed their trust in Jesus Christ who is the head of their home . They took the news wonderfully though, and placed the trust in Christ .
 Theodore Theodore was burned quite badly while fighting fire, but not critically . Theodore suffered burns in the blaze but was not seriously injured . Theodore was a firefighter at the fire .
 Theodore's neighbors are helping to build a new house for Theodore . Theodore's new house is being built in honor of Theodore's family .
 Laura and Russ have built on to their trailer and it is nice and they are comfortable also . Laura's husband and wife Russ built on their trailer . Laura says she and Russ are very happy to live in the trailer .
 "They had left and were looking for work, and they wrote, asking us to come down," she says . "They wrote, and asked us, to come come down. They had left ... and they had asked us to go," she said .
 We arrived in Tulare in the winter time and stayed with Carl Shannon in a little house he had . Carl Shannon was the owner of the house he lived in .
 During this time I gave birth to a daughter Eda, and two sons, one of which was still born . One of the children, one still born, is still alive .
 Kenneth stayed in Tulare for a little while but soon returned north to look for work in the woods again, and Theodore soon followed him . Kenneth stayed at Tulare, California, but Theodore stayed at home in the wild .
 While we were living at Carl's, and Robert was about 7 years old, he gave me a scare . "Robert was about seven years old," she says .
 George didn't realize anything was wrong and was playing a round under and around the swing through all this . He said he didn't know he was in trouble .
 When Dad and I first went to Trinity, the trip was made with the horses and the large wagon he came from Tulare with . It took a week of long hard days from Carlotta to Trinity .
 When we left Trinity to go to Tulare, we started out in a mail truck and went as far as Alder point, where we spent the night, catching the train the next day for Oakland . We spent the day in the mail truck, and the night in a truck,
 "It took the whole day, and was dark by the time we got to Oakland, and my sister Effie Whetstone and a daughter Annie, met us at the station and we stayed with them for 3 days . We stayed with Effie and Annie in Oakland, California,
 The children and I stayed with Dad's sister, Marian Brubaker, while he went to Tulare to make arrangements for us . Then we went to Dinuba, and the children stayed with Marian's sister . Dad's daughter was also staying with Marian while he made arrangements .
 We stayed with her several enjoyable days, and Dad and Carl came back for us . We stayed for several weeks, and Carl and Dad came back to us .
 "We stayed on the Carl Shannon ranch four years, living in a small comfortable home and helping Carl in the fruit," says daughter .
 Dad went before us and purchased a large apartment house just outside of Los Angeles, in a town called Wilmington, in Wilmington, California . Dad went ahead of us and bought the house before us .
 "We sold the place in Shafter and moved to a far out place called Lost Hills, Calif. I can't remember the exact time or date" "We moved out of Shafter to Lost Hills"
 George and Lavern built our house which had 2 bedrooms, a kitchen, a front room, and a big back porch . George and Lvern built the home which had two bedrooms and a large back porch.
 We raised chickens, pigs, horses, cows, and Dad farmed Alfalfa on the land . We raised livestock, pigs and horses on the farm . Dad's farm was raised on the property .
 While we lived here I had acquired 5 daughters-in-laws and 2 sons-in, in-laws . They had all given me grandchildren .
 "We left Lost Hills on Friday with our possessions in our pick-up and drove to Tulare to spend the night with George and his wife . George and George spent the night in Tulare, California, with George .
 We went to the real estate office and the salesman took Dad to look at some property while I waited in the truck . Dad was looking at a property in the back seat of the truck when he got into the car .
 When they got back, Dad had decided to take the place and now we had a home in Gridley, Gridley . We raised sugar beets, tomatoes, and one cow .
 Dad liked this part of the country very well, and so did so did 1.1 . 1. 1 especially remember one Christmas when I had almost all of my family home . Dad liked it very well .
 We didn't have enough room for everybody in the house and the men slept in the barn . We had to sleep in barn because of the lack of room for all the men . The men were sleeping in barn .
 One day a man came by and noticed our tomato crop and said he would like to buy our place . "He said he wanted to buy us place. One day he said he was going to buy it," says owner of tomato farm .
 "Dad always made such close friends with his animals. One thing I think I think is worth mentioning is how Dad always made friends with all his animals," he said .
 Capay, a farming community outside of Orland, is called Capay . It was actually Capay - a little farming community in Orland . Capay was actually a small farming community near Orland.
 The Doctor put him into the hospital as he had suffered a heart attack . He put him in the hospital after he suffered a 'heart attack'
 Gary George, and Marian, and Eda, arrived late the same night, and they were so much comfort . "Gary George" and "Mara" were the first to arrive late the night . Eda and Gary George arrived late that night .
 George took me in to stay with friends who had offered their home to me, The Macy's of Orland . I couldn't stay alone while he was in the hospital so George took her in .
 Theodore and his daughter and her husband arrived at Theodore's home in New York . Theodore's daughter and daughter were there for a couple of days . Theodore had only been there a few days when Theodore's family arrived .
 Laura stayed with me when the men had to leave for home. We went back home and Laura stayed . Laura stayed home with me. Laura stayed in the house.
 "She stayed with us until we left Orland, which was a little better than two months," she says . She stayed with the family for two months .
 Dad "couldn't have come home when he did if we didn't have anyone with us," says his father . Dad couldn't have gone home if he'd come home without someone else with him, he says .
 Dad was telling Laura of the cost of the hospital, it tickled her so when he used his Black Angus in terms of cost, instead of Dollars and cents . I remember when Dad was . telling Laura, "It tickled . her so much that when he told her of the
 "I came to know my grandparents so intimately, and to love them so completely," she says . "I love them completely. I came to them so intimately," she writes .
 It was a blessing for me to stay with them, and listen to the stories Grandpa would tell about early life, coming from Canada and to Fortuna .
 George and Gary took care of selling the livestock and property and we purchased a trailer house . As soon as Dad was well enough, we took it to Tulare, parking it on George's place . It was great. — Laura)
 Dad was to suffer so terribly from a blood clot in his leg. Then all too soon he was to be rushed to hospital . Dad's death was tragic and tragic .
 Doctors tried to help him with medicine, but he just didn't respond . The doctors tried to try and get him to feel better but he refused to respond .
 He wondered and worried about who would take care of me, and do all of the little jobs he did for me, such as cutting my toe nails, and seeing to it that the little everyday things were taken care of . He said: "He wondered and . worried about . who
 "I can never forget how he worried over me when it was him who was so sick," she said . "He was so worried about me when I was sick. He was so concerned about me," she added .
 This was how he was, and I know it, but I fear that too many people didn't understand him . This was the way he was ... but I'm not sure how many people did not understand him, he says .
 "I now realize he did this so that I would have a good life with plenty, and not be a burden to our children," she says . "They felt he was too conservative with his money, but he now realizes he did it to help me have plenty"
 Financially, I am able to do what I want to do and go where I want, and buy what I need . I'm able to go where and go when I want and buy where we want,’s author says .
 "I feel that he was a good and generous man in his own way, in the only way he could be," she said . "He was a generous man," she added. "In the way he was the only man I could be"
 At the funeral I looked around me and I found all my children, great grandchildren, and so many great grand children with me when I did need them so much . The funeral will be held in New York City, New York, on November 28 .
 Your mother and grand-mother, Gertrude Bailey Shannon Shannon, 1967 . Your mother, your grandmother, your mother .
 In 1967 my granddaughter Laura came and we visited all my friends in Capay, Fortuna, and Eureka, plus all my family up north, spending quite some time in Trinity . In 1967, Laura came to visit her family in Trinity, spending most of her time in
 We went to Fort Worth for a few days, to visit her brother and wife, the Ellises . The Ellises are the Ellis, who live in Fort Worth .
 "These were the highlights of the journey for me. We went many other places but these were the highlight of it for me," she said. "We went to many other countries but these are the highlights for me."
 'I stayed with her for three years, and when I had to leave because she had a heart attack, it made me sad for I came to love her. I stayed with [her] for three . It made her sad for me to leave her,' she said .
 Three weeks ago, my grand daughter Laura came after me, and we have visited the family and friends who are left . We have visited many of the family members who have left, including the family who have been left .
 She promised to help me finish and put together this book, before I went back home . Also promised she would help me put together a book, which she promised to do .
 "Before saying goodbye, I'd like to tell you how much I love you all, and how proud I am of all of you," she said .
 Theodore was just 3 months old when we moved to Trinity and we stayed there all through his seven yrs. of school . We stayed at Trinity for seven years . Theodore is now a senior at Trinity School .
 We stayed there while he went into Eureka, no, to Fortuna for eighth grade . "We stayed there," he says, "while he was in Eurella, no. He went there to go to eighth grade."
 After completing his 8 th grade, he went to work for Hammond Lumber Company, in the woods . He went on to complete his 8th grade .
 Rosalee Alice Kollenborn February 11, 1938 Ted and Roz Shannon are living in a large beautiful home, which is their own in the hills above San Andreas . Theodore Russell Shannon Shannon was born in 1934 .
 The couple have just bought and moved into their new home, complete with swimming pool . They have just moved into a new home with a swimming pool and a pool .
 Gertrude Irene Shannon June 24, 1936 . Richard Harold Crook Dec 12, 1926 Anniversary Mar 3 1,1956 Anniversary . Richard and Irene were married at the age of 18 .
 Kenneth was born in Trinity, Trinity, January 18, 1904 . He was delivered by a woman who really knew ho to deliver babies . Kenneth's birth was delivered in 1904 .
 Kenneth went to school in the community school until he was out of the 8 th grade and then he went to work in the woods . Kenneth went into the woods as a boy in the 8th grade and worked in the wood .
 Kenneth and Louise had two sons after they lost her, then after a couple years, they divorced . Kenneth married and Louise gave him a daughter, Linda . After a few years of marriage, they had two children .
 He worked for many years for Pacific Lumber Co. and retired this January, 1969 . He retired from his job in 1969 .
 He supposedly is retired, but he keeps busy all the day long, working around their home . He keeps busy planting a huge garden, big enough for all their kids to share . The garden is big enough to feed all the kids .
 They are living just outside of a little town in Northern California, near Eureka, called Carlotta . The family is living in Carlotta, a small town in northern California . They say they are happy to be here for the first time .
 Debra May, better known as Girlie, was born March 30, 1906 . She was born in Trinity, Trinity, in 1906 .
 She made biscuits and was not going to tell her father that she had made them . She waited as long as she could, after he had eaten a couple of them, and just could not wait for him to say anything .
 The day before she was bitten by the snake, she and I went up into the field where the two oldest boys were working in the hay, & she and Kenneth ran a race to the house . She and Kenneth were running a race when the snake bit her, and she died .
 Dad and Theodore and Kenneth were up on top of the hill, working in the hay . The 3 rd of July, 1911, 1911 was the 3rd of July . Dad was working on the hay when Theodore was killed . Theodore was the only son to be killed .
 Girlie took Howard up, walking with him around the side of the mountain, through the woods and the brush . Girlie walked with him through the brush and woods .
 The rattlesnake bit her on the inside of the instep . She hadn't quite reached the field when she was bitten by the animal .
 She begged for water but someone told us to give her whiskey, and keep all the water away from her . Someone told her to drink whiskey, but someone else said to keep her away from the water .
 It wasn't the 3 rd after all because that is when she died and she did live for a day . She actually died a day later .
 Howard was 2 Vi when Girlie was taken from us, and Theodore was 9 . Theodore and Kenneth were 9 and Kenneth was 7. Howard was just 2 Vi at the time of the tragedy .
 She is buried in her family's beloved Trinity County, in Hoaglin Valley, real close to where Theodore and Robert live .
 Howard was born February 14, 1908 . He was delivered by Dad, because he didn't like the way the midwife delivered Girlie . Howard was delivered in Trinity, Texas .
 Howard also went to school in Trinity up to the 8 th grade . We left Trinity and went to Tulare where he went to go to school awhile before we moved to Shafter where he graduated .
 When he went north, he met and married Kate and they had two girls and a son . He now has three children with Kate and two with Kate .
 He lived in various places, going back to Trinity as most of the boys did, including Trinity . He was a member of the school's first generation .
 He is logging now out of Willits but will shortly go to Hales Grove just north of Rockport, over on the coast . He is now logging now .
 Marian was born January 7, 1912 in Trinity, Texas . Marian was brought into the world by her father . She was born in 1912 .
 Miss Elsie Holtorf carried her into her home and did a fine job of setting the arm . Miss Holtorf was carrying the baby into a home .
 The school which is on the Shannon ranch today was where Marian slid off, and Miss Holtorf packed her about a half mile to her home . The school where she slid off was the school which was where she was rescued .
 It was the little place just at the foot of the hill going up the road to the old Shannon place . The little place was the place where it was the first place to go to the Shannon place.
 Marian went to grammar school in Trinity & in 1920 the family moved several times . She finished school in Shatter and went to finish high school in Wasco . Marian was born in Trinity, Shatter, Wasco and Shatter .
 She went to work in a telephone office in McFarland where she met our beloved Irish . She went on to become a mother-of-one .
 Marian married Dick Haney on June 29, 1967 at a small family wedding . Marian died December 15, 1959 .
 Robert was born in Trinity also and delivered by his father . He was born March 15, 1916, in Trinity .
 He was playing out in the yard with a cat and I looked out to find out where he was doing . I no more than went back to my canning when I heard him crying and found that ha had hit his head against the old grindstone and cut his forehead .
 "I picked him up and went to find Dad who was raking somewhere on the ranch," she says . "I went to pick him up, went to look for him," she adds . "He's a good boy, but he's a bad boy," she writes .
 Robert attended Trinity, Trinity and several other schools before graduating from Shatter . Robert attended school in Trinity and other schools .
 He met Belle in Trinidad and they married and had two sons and a daughter . He married Belle and they had three children .
 They are now living in Trinity, where he is employed by the County Road Department . They have been married for more than 20 years .
 Lena Belle Blake was born in 1914 and died in June 1939 . She was married to Robert Blake . She died in 1939 .
 "He picks people up all over the country and really enjoys this form of communication," he says . He picks up people all over country and enjoys picking people up from all over .
 He even interested the most isolated member of the community into getting a one-in-a-piece .
 George was also among the many of the many Shannon children born in Trinity . He was also delivered by his father .
 He went to high school in Wasco and was an honor student all four years . He was a high school honor student .
 He was very active in the Future Farmers of America, and is now a successful farmer in Tulare, California . He was active in Future Farmer's of America and was active with Future Farmers .
 Estelle had trouble with her feet and she passed away on June 18, 1967 at the young age of 47 . Estelle died of complications from her feet .
 The last couple of years were so rough on her but tender words from George, to the effect that he was remembering the darling she was, left all of us who loved them both with warm memories .
 George is still living and farming in the Tulare area and is a very well known man all through the valley area . George still lives in Tulare and is still a well-known farmer .
 Dale was in a Honda accident, and he has had one successful operation on his feet and will have another one this summer . Dale was injured in the Honda accident . He has had a successful operation in the past .
 Eda was born September 4, 1920 in Tulare in a hospital and we named her after her Aunt Eda . She was born in a Tulare hospital in 1920 and named Eda after her aunt .
 She went to several schools and she graduated from high school in Wasco, Wasco . She went from several schools to several high schools .
 Lavern Kenneth Cordy and Eda Irene S were married in September of 1937 . Lavern was married to Eda in September 1937 .
 Merna Lee Cordy was born in August on the 23 rd in 1938 . Their daughter was born on the same date .
 Calvin Shannon was born June 11, 1924 in Tulare, California . He was born along with a twin brother who was still born .
 While overseas he met a long lost cousin, Edgar Whetstone and they became very good friends . While overseas, Edgar met his cousin, and became a good friend .
 After returning home, he became engaged to a lovely girl from Westport, Miss Jeannie F. Larssen .
 He also purchased an airplane for pleasure purposes, and one day in the early spring, on March 10, 1949, he took the plane up and couldn't get the wheels on the ground . The plane was a pleasure plane .
 "After several hours he died and after more hours, he was washed up to shore, which I am so thankful for," says mother-of-one .
 Calvin's brother Robert was a passenger in the plane and when he gave up , the tide brought him in, and he recovered . Calvin's sister was also a passenger .
 They didn't want the shock of a phone call to hurt us worse, but the radio blurted it out to us . They had driven steadily to reach us as quickly as possible, but they had driven slowly to reach .
 My little son was still born, and was then buried in a cemetery in Tulare, California . "My little son is still born," his mother says .
 I always desired to know where his little grave was, so in or about 1965 I went to the office and inquired . "I went to [the office] and inquired," he said, "about 1965"
 'They were able to show me his little grave and I was able to put a marker on it, after all these 40 odd years' 'I'm not going to see him again, but I'm going to put it on my son's grave,' she says .
 Gary was born in Shafter in 1929 in an adobe house and went to school . Gary graduated from the Wasco High School in Wasco, California . He was born January 14, 1929 .
 Gary and his family are now living in Tulare, California, and he has continued with farming . Gary says he is proud of his family's success in the community .
 Gary Shannon will always be remembered as the last of the William Shannon children . Gary is the baby of my large family and he will be remembered for his role in the family . He will always remember as the son of William Shannon .
 Possibly a son of either Thomas Kemper Carr , or his brother John Carr . Possibly a child of either John Carr or his son Thomas . John Carr was a member of the family .
 John was a long-time resident of both Trinity and then Humboldt counties . John was the author of the book ""Pioneer Days in California,"" quoted many times throughout this book .
 Dollie Johnson was a married name from Dollie's first marriage . Her maiden name was Kohl, or possibly Cole, or perhaps Cole . Dollie was married to a man named Johnson .
 Esther's middle name may have actually been Silva, her mother's maiden name . Esther was named Silva, Silva, by her mother . Esther's mother was also named Silva .
 They lived in San Andreas only one year, 1968, San Andreas . They lived there in 1968 .
 Robert was named after Will's brother Robert, not after his father or both, or both of them . It seems rather strange to say that Robert was born after his brother Robert . Robert is the son of Will, Will, and Robert's father, Robert's brother .
 It is unclear who Gertie meant here; neither she nor Will had a sister named Eda, unless her sister Effie's middle name was Eda .
 There are sixteen other Westports in the United States, but there is no reason to believe that Calvin's fiance was from one of these other locations . If she had been, she would have mentioned which one she hailed from, it would seem that Gertie would have said which one
 Ted Shannon's parents are William Frederick Shannon and Gertrude Shannon . Ted Shannon, Hoaglin Valley, was born into a family of three .
 My father was born in 4 Corners Ontario Canada in 1877 and came to Tulare Co. about 1890 . My father came from Canada and moved to California in 1890 .
 Her father was a drinking man and she was separated from her mother when she was a small girl . Her father and mother separated when they were separated from each other . She says her father was an alcoholic and her mother was also a drinker .
 Her grandparents were Eli Eaton, they were early settlers in Humboldt County . Eli Eaton was a pioneer of early settlers .
 Father worked making shingle bolts for Beckwith, what is now the Mantecin ranch just west of the Van Duzen River grange hall . Father worked on what now is now a ranch west of what is called Mantecins .
 Theodore R Shannon their first child was born at the Felt place at Carlotta Jan.02.02 . Theodore was born in Carlotta, Italy .
 He met Arnett Shields who told him about homestead land in Trinity County, Texas, in March, 1902 . The land was homesteaded by Shields in 1902 .
 He went out on horseback to look at the land, there was two foot of snow on the ground . He said he went out looking for the land . He went to the land and found it was two feet of snow .
 The place he first looked at was government land, it had too much young brush on it. It had too many young brush, he said . The place where he first started looking was the government land .
 The land my father first looked at was taken up by Abe Clover . Abe Clover took up the land in later years . The land is now in the hands of Abe Clover.
 My father went back to Humboldt Co. Co., bought six pigs, a dozen dairy calves to bring out . His father went to the U.S. to buy pigs and dairy calves .
 "The first house the folks had was just a lean-to cabin, had no siding on it for awhile. The first house was just an old lean to cabin," says author . "It was a lean to a cabin. It was just the first house. It had no
 Arnett Shields and my father were good friends by this time so Arnett told him about the George Kindred place, a better location, lots of water, so he moved over in 1902 . He moved over on Kindred Place in April, 1902 .
 My brothers were born in the old homestead, Kenneth, Howard, Robert and George, also my sisters Deborah May and Marian Adele . My brothers and sisters were also born .
 Deborah was bitten by a rattlesnake July 1, 1911 while bringing water to her father and myself in the hayfield . Deborah died of a venomous bite . She was bitten in the attack .
 Holtorf in Hoaglin Valley they had the post office, Also a man by the name of Espie. Holtorf . Holtorf was also known as Holtorf and Espie .
 Mr Espie was coming into his place, was very cold, got a little ways from the place . He was found frozen to death by a pine tree .
 Wade and Grace Atkinson and their mother lived about two miles due west from us . Wade and Gracie Atkinson lived in the Atkinson family home . Their mother lived two miles away from them .
 There was a cable crossing the main Northfork branch of Eel River, near Bob Hoaglin ranch . The cable was used to cross the Northfork River .
 When the river was too high, father tied the horse and walked the four miles to Caution and carried the mail on his back . Father tied his horse up to the river and carried mail on the back .
 We have five children, William F Shannon just out of the army, Laura who is married to Russel Gibney, Theodore R Shannon Jr., working for the Union Lumber Co., Ft. Ft. Theodore Jr. Shannon Jr. worked for the U.S.
 Gertrude is a bookkeeper at the Community Hospital in Ft. Bragg, North Carolina . She is working at the hospital in the state's largest city .
 Miss Derring was her first teacher, Miss Lillian White was her second teacher . Miss White was also a teacher at the same time .
 My folks left the ranch in 1919 to go to Tulare where my father rented his brothers fruit orchard for 8 years . In that time three more children were born, Eda, Gary, and Calvin . My parents had three children .
 Mr Espie's place lay north of the Hoaglin school a short way . Another account mentioned his death also: ""Mr Espey's place . lay north . of the . Hoaglins school a . short way. A short way from the Hoagslin school .
 He was quite crippled and he lost his life in Bluff Creek Canyon . He was attempting to hike to Zenia, attempting to reach Zenia .
 Mariposa Tulips on Long Ridge, Diogenese Lanterns on Hamen Ridge . Mr Algy Lampley and I attended school together with a hermit thrush, in Hoaglin .
 This is the only place where his name is given as Kenneth; elsewhere he is called Clarence . The only place he is given is in the UK where he is known as Kenneth . He is also known as Clarence in the United States .
 My father Jeremiah Bliss Nelson, was working on the railroad for Hammonds, Hammonds . He was working for the Hammonds. Nelson . Nelson's father was working in the railroad .
 It was for many years the largest lumber mill on the coast with the exception of Weyerhauser Lumber Company in Washington . The mill is located on the east coast .
 From Samoa, we moved to Fields Landing, (where we lived in a houseboat on the landing) and which I do not remember . We lived in the houseboat in the landing, which I remember .
 I was about three when we moved to Fortuna, where my brother Gerald was born . I was three when I was born, and my brother was also three . My brother Gerald is now a successful businessman in California .
 From Fortuna, we moved to Eureka, on sixth street between C and D Streets, and near a laundry . We are now in the middle of a laundry line in the city .
 "It was very different in those days, and I can remember much of the change," says Bob Greene . "It's very different now, and it's very exciting," says Greene .
 My father was called into the service in this time period, and perhaps was a soldier for two years . His father was perhaps two years in the service, perhaps even two .
 He was preparing to board a ship when the Armistice was signed, and so did not go to the front . He was not going to the war but was preparing for a ship .
 His allotment had been slow in coming, and his mother had had to go to work to provide for us . He had been forced to work in order to get his allotment . His mother had to work for him and he had to live with her .
 Her sister took care of us, while she was at work at Abe's Chop House as a waitress . Her sister was a waitress at the Chop House .
 Our mother never ran him down to us children, nor did she discuss him to us . She never discussed him with us, nor discussed him to her children . Our mother was always supportive of her husband's career .
 She was always so proud, never complaining about her lot, and she surely must have had occasion to do so, with three small children to support and raise . She is always proud of her family and never complained about her life .
 "Father had been gone so much of our life that I don't ever remember any of us even missing having a father," says daughter . "I don't think we ever ever remember missing our father," she says .
 Our mother cooked, washed, cleaned, cleaned and sewed, played dolls, popped pop corn over the fireplace, took us to the Sequoia Park on Sundays, Samoa Beach for picnics on Sundays when it was nice .
 When she and her father broke up, both sides of the family never came round . I mention this last, because when she and my father split up, neither side of family came round. Both sides of family never come round.
 They were afraid that she would ask them to taker her in, or help out financially . They feared she would want them to take her in or ask them for help .
 I think now though, of how lonely and hard it must have been for her; especially after we had all been read to and tucked into bed . I think . of how very lonely and well-liked by her, especially after all the children were read to bed .
 She was perhaps so tired, that when she went to bed she was already half asleep . She had been in the middle of the night when she left the house .
 I began school at Lincoln School on Harris Street, between California and Summer Streets . I was a student at Lincoln High School in New Jersey .
 My mother then moved to 1001 A Street, right across from the Washington School . Her mother then lived in the same place as her mother, who later moved to Washington .
 I was then in upper A grade, and who should be my teacher but the same Mrs. O'Neill was my teacher, she says . She says, "I was in upper grade, but who should have been my teacher?" She says.
 "At six, at six, I probably thought that she had come there to be with me," says the author . "To me, at . six, she probably thought she had . come there was her," he says .
 My mother moved here because she had changed jobs, and was working at the Eureka Woolen Mills, and we were closer to school . My mother had moved here to be closer to her daughter's new school .
 When I was twelve years old, I received a second-hand Piano for my birthday, and It was the most treasured gift I ever received . When he was twelve, he said, 'It was the best gift he had ever received'
 I was always playing on the edge of the table, across the front of a chair — anything that had an edge that I could pretend it was Piano or Organ . I was also playing piano, organ, organ and piano .
 "I realize that it probably originated in listening to the beautiful organs that they had in Theaters. Looking back now, and since," I realize that . Looking back, and . since; I realize . that . probably originated from listening to . the beautiful organ organs that . they had
 The Silent Days, when the words appeared across the screen, and the Organist accompanied the action on the Organ . The silent days were the Silent Days .
 The organist always well groomed, sitting in a pool of light in the darkened theater . Perhaps, an interlude of one-half hour before the movie started, one could sit and enjoy the sound of just the music .
 My mother went with me to the Convent, and asked the sisters if they would give me lessons . And so, my mother went . with her to the sisters, and so, she asked them to give her lessons . The sisters were the sisters who gave her lessons.
 "I took lessons for over a year, and then came down with an illness, definitely not a child's," she said . She said: "I'm glad I took lessons. I took it for a year. I'm glad to have had it."
 Erysipelas, which is an acute inflammatory disease of the skin, due to infection by various strains of streptococcus and accompanied by fever . It is accompanied by a fever .
 I awoke one morning, my head just pounding; aching clear across the temples. It was the first time my head had been pounding, I had a headache .
 "Being unable to find anything wrong with me, outside of my headache, gave me some Aspirin, and figured I would be all right after a bit," says author . "I was able to find out what I was going to do after a few days."
 "I knew I didn't feel good, but did not get up out of bed," she says . "I could see that she was worried. She was worried," she writes .
 He sent my brother down to the store for a prescription, after he had questioned and questioned. He sent him down for it, and he sent him to get a prescription .
 He wanted to know if I had cut myself anywhere, or scratched myself and didn't remember that I had done it, but it had not seemed important, he said . He asked me to tell him if he had cut himself anywhere and had scratched himself anywhere . He said it was not
 He seemed to know that somewhere, somehow, there had been skin broken to allow infection in . But he seemed to be aware of the fact that skin had been broken .
 The symptoms all pointed to this one thing and he felt that he was right in his diagnosis; but he was still perplexed when he left . The symptoms were all pointing to the same thing, but he still felt perplexed .
 "After awhile, I began to feel better and started thinking over what he had said, and tried to think if I had had a cut and it had gotten well, but I could recall nothing whatsoever," she said .
 This she did, she then tore a piece of white flannel to wrap around it . This she then wrapped it around herself .
 Laying there, my head being warm and sweaty — I reached to scratch a spot on top of my head, and encountered a small scab . The scab felt no larger than a head of a common pin .
 "I was in bed for three weeks before I was allowed to get up and go outside," she says . "That first day was only for a few minutes," she recalls . "I'm not allowed to go outside for a long time," she writes .
 The Erysipelas had almost completely circled my head, when the medication finally conquered it . I had a high fever for several days, and the medication was finally able to conquer it .
 "My love for music still went on and I kept up with what I knew. However, my love for . music still . went on . However, I still love music and I'm still very proud of my work .
 "My closest friend was a little Finnish girl, Aili Weijola, who lived across the street from me," she says . "I was very close to my closest friend," she adds .
 One block away lived the three Douglas girls; named Evelyn, Merle, and Eileen . Evelyn and Merle Douglas lived in the Douglas home .
 Evelyn bossed all of us, and we were always together; at least, up until the teens . Evelyn was always bossed by Evelyn, and she was always with us, until we were teens .
 We attended Winship, which was called Junior High because it had only seventh and eight grades . Winship was a Junior High for seventh and eighth grades .
 While attending Junior High, I used to baby-sit the Fire-Chiefs children when they wanted to go out . "I used to babysit them when I was in Junior High," she says of her friends .
 The Carlson's had a Player Piano, with thirty or forty rolls neatly piled on top . Carlson's was a player piano, with 30 or 40 rolls piled in top .
 Carlson taught me how to use the Piano Bench, and we would sit on the piano bench, and sing along with the words . Carlson taught him how to play the piano, and the three of us would sing along .
 I was fascinated with all the little holes which made the music come out, and the keyboard with all of the black and white notes flashing up and down, faster than the eye could seen . The keyboard was the most powerful instrument in the world, with a keyboard with black & white notes
 He sat in his cage, atop a nice table in the entry hall, and greeted everyone who came into sight . He sat atop a table in his new home, atop his cage . "He was a very happy man," he said .
 When I was 15, I was asked to teach the four and five year old class of Sunday School . We always attended Sunday School, and when I was fifteen, I taught the 4 and 5 years old class .
 The Nash's would take us with them with them to Weymouth Inn . About this time, we were old enough to be taken to public dances; and the Nash's .
 All of my life (since I was twelve, and my little girl friend Aili taught me to Waltz) I would rather dance than eat. All of her life (Since I was 12,    - and her little . girl friend . Aili . taught me
 "I was about seventeen when my mother had a nervous breakdown from working too hard, coupled with a rupture. I was about 17 when I was at the center of my mother's nervous breakdown," she says .
 She was not expected to live, and everyday I walked, or went by trolley to the County Hospital . She was given a life-saving diagnosis at the time of her death .
 "I had to go in the afternoons, because she did not want to have to worry about me getting home at night," she said . "She had to do it in the afternoon, so she didn't worry about getting home in the evening," she added .
 The T B Hospital was right next to the hospital and many of the men patients had the run of the grounds, and freedom to leave the grounds . Many of the hospital patients were able to roam the grounds and leave .
 There was about eight blocks to walk from the end of the trolley line up to the hospital, and it was heavily wooded . There was eight blocks of wooded terrain to walk to hospital .
 Sidewalks in those days were about 30 to 36 inches wide, and when it was dark you also had to worry about not stepping over the edge; and carrying a flashlight . Sidewalk was about 30-36 inches wide; and walking with a flashlight was also required .
 I arranged with Mr Saunders, my bookkeeping teacher, to take that course in his evening class which was several times a week . I arranged to take the bookkeeping course in Mr Saunders' evening class .
 "I would come home, make the beds, straightened the house and go to see our mother," she says . Then she would go home and straightened up the house, straightening the house . "Then I would go back to see my mother. Then I would make the
 I can never remember disobeying my mother, and don't think it even ever occurred to me . "I can never think I would disobey my mother," she says. "I don't even remember it even occurred"
 There had been a bread line for a year or two, but finally many were out of work . The line had been there for a few years, but now many are out of the work .
 Women, who were trained for office work, secretarial, clerks, etcetera; were asking for jobs in homes to pay for their keep . Women were asked to work in homes .
 My mother had recovered enough finally, that while she could not go back to the Woolen mills still needed a job to earn some money to take care of us . My mother was finally able to go back and work in the mills .
 Wallace asked her if she would consider doing some practical nursing for him . Wallace asked for her to do some of his practical nursing, she said yes .
 He needed a woman that he could trust and train to take care of an elderly lady . He needed to be able to train and care for the elderly lady, he said .
 The lady was the mother of his close friend who worked in the Scotia Bank . She was a close friend of the bank worker who worked at the time .
 Mother took the job; and from then on, for some thirty years did work in private homes . Mother worked for 30 years at private homes. Mother took it on to the job .
 "I did have to go there for an interview; but first I went to my teachers to see how they felt about my quitting school just two weeks before the end of school," she says .
 "They all felt that I should avail myself of this opportunity while I had the chance," she said . "I'm not going to be able to do this again," she added .
 "There were so many trained people looking for jobs, and they thought that I was sufficiently schooled to handle it," she says . "They thought that she was sufficiently educated to be able to handle" the job market .
 "I called them about the job, went to Redway from Eureka to see them, and got the job," she says . "So taking my courage in hand, I called them [Redway] to talk to them," she writes .
 They said they didn't want someone who was experienced; that they wanted to break their help in themselves . "They said they wanted someone who is experienced," said the woman .
 "They were opening a subdivision office there on the land, and wanted a girl in there at all times," she says . "They wanted to keep her in there, and she was there all times"
 They hired an accountant from Eureka to set up the books, and I was to sort out the various checks bills, papers, etc. from the past several months and enter them into the accounts . They hired a new accountant to help them sort out their bills and papers .
 The Incorporation had purchased a large quantity of lumber from Scotia Lumber Company, and other materials to build a number of houses, but did not keep up with any kind of regular payment schedule . When they did find time to make one, they failed to make an adequate payment .
 All of this time, they were selling a lot of lots; many for cash; but taking the money to Los Angeles, where they would throw big parties, as part of advertising to sell properties . The parties would be part of the advertising for properties .
 It was busy during the tourist season; and little doing the rest of the year . It's busy during tourist season, but little doing rest of year .
 I was not able to obtain work, so my mother suggested that I go to school at Miranda with my brother and sister . I was able to get a job, so I went to school with my siblings and sister at Miranda .
 Only first year bookkeeping, typing, shorthand, shorthand were offered this year .
 They were probably beginning courses at the school, so had not been given before . They were likely to be given before, but had not previously been taught before .
 Sewing for two periods, English for one period, Library for two classes, and practice with their little school orchestra . So, she took Sewing, English, and Library for three periods . Sewing also took English, English and Library .
 This was a small high school, so it took practically the whole school, to fill the cast . The cast was cast by the entire school, including the entire high school . This was the first time the cast had been cast .
 Production started, and from playing for one period now, and another period later, we were utilizing all of my periods, which was very rewarding . Production started and from one period to one period later we were using all the time .
 South Fork High School is on the south fork of the Eel River, but is situated in Miranda, Miranda . The school is located in the south-east of the river . It is called South Fork, because it is located on the South Fork River .
 "We were married on Saturday morning, and my new husband had to be back to work on Wednesday morning," she says . "We got married Saturday morning. We got married on Sunday morning. My new husband has to go to work Wednesday morning."
 There were four ""60"" Caterpillars, and the responsibility for the landing, logging, and men was his .
 In January, he had been getting ninety cents, then a cut to eighty cents . Then he got seventy-two cents, and then to sixty-seven cents . In January he was getting 90 cents .
 They re-hired all the married men still living in the company cabins, but could promise them only four hours work a day, two and three days a week . The men still live in the cabins could only work four hours a day .
 The company lowered the rent from $10.00 a month to $2.50 a month . The mill was not running — the company was merely making work by having the men repile the lumber .
 "It was a little sustenance, not much its true, but it sure beat nothing. It was a bit of sustenance ... but it certainly beat nothing," he said .
 Humboldt County suffered the least from the depression, than did any place else . Humbumbumbin County suffered less from depression than any other county, author says .
 Hammond Lumber Company woods, took you inland about twenty miles, and the only way to get there was by train . The only way you could get to the woods was by logging .
 The train with around twenty to thirty empty flat cars would leave Crannell on Sunday afternoon, about four o'clock . It would sometimes take two and one-half hours to get to Camp 41 where I lived .
 Our friends, who lived at Camp Forty-Three were Watchmen for the camp, and had at their use a Speeder, which they could use at their will, and would come over several times a week to visit .
 One day after we had been married, we were at Cleo and Red's visiting, and we all decided to go on further to an older camp to look around . One day, after we'd had a whole week, we all went on further .
 It's really fun, this miniature flat-car with an engine; the sun is shining, the birds are singing . The wind is blowing in your hair, blowing it this way and that way . It was really fun .
 The iron wheels going around, and around, until in your subconscious you hear and feel the rhythmic motion, and the even steady thump, thump as it moves over the tracks . In your subconscious, you hear, and feel, as the iron wheels are going around .
 Cleo and Red had to stay around the camps — in case fire broke out . It was the Fourth of July, and it was a safe time for the dogs .
 In which case, Red would have to get word to Crannell for fire fighting crews . Red would then have to rely on the help of firefighters .
 There were phones at strategic points along the tracks, mainly for the use of the train conductors . The phones were used to call in to the train dispatcher for clearance .
 The Malley would be ready to make its trip down to Crannell around noon time, and any of the men who wished to go home, or go to town; had to take this train .
 A camp would be composed of a long building which was used as the Cook-house . Camp would be made up of long buildings which were used as Cook-houses . Camps would be formed of a camp which would be used as a camp .
 There would be a small building with a phone, desk, chairs, which would be the time-keeper's office . The time-keeping office would be located in the small building . There would also be a phone and a desk with chairs .
 Enormous meals were always prepared, and enormous plates of food were served family style . The family style meals were prepared and served with enormous plates .
 It was an ordinary sight to see any one take a plate of eggs and scoop off four to eight of them onto his plate, plus an equal helping of potatoes, biscuits, pancakes or toast; butter, jelly, and syrup .
 Dinner was always two types of meat, two kinds of vegetable, beans, hot biscuits and loaves of bread . butter, jam, milk, coffee, pies and cakes were also included .
 "I could go on and on, until I will have written the book that I intend to write some day," says the author . "Some day I will write a book. Some day I want to write another book," she says. "Some of the world's most important books
 We could drive up to the last two miles of Camp 9, and walk the rest of the way . We could also walk the other two miles, or walk the whole way .
 September 1934 Our second son is born at Hydesville on the 3 rd June 1936 . June 1936 Our second daughter is born on the 20 th , at Camp Baker . September 1934 .
 September 1941 We move to Camp 3, Ten Mile Camp; where the children will go to school at Camp 2 . September 1941 The children were moved to Camp 2 and Camp 3 . The children went to camp at Camp 3. September 1941 .
 "We move to Westport, where, I not only cook for our crew, but for the Burman crew," she says . "I'm not just cooking for my crew, I'm also cooking for Burman," she adds .
 War is declared 'officially' over, and Ted's brother comes home from overseas . Ted's sister is killed in Afghanistan in 2007 .
 Calvin Calvin was killed in the accident when the plane plunges into the ocean . Calvin was the pilot of a plane that crashed two miles north of Westport .
 I am helping out at the Elementary School; playing the Piano, helping with the singing; teaching the children songs . I am also making costumes for their programs at Westport. I am playing costumes for the Westport programs .
 "I have two children yet to put through school, and I do have some assistance from him," she says of her husband . She says she has two children still to go to school .
 "I felt and still do, that children need their parents home with them at night. I felt and I still do," she said. "I still do."
 "I went to work for Lee Wilson, owner of the Rexall Drug Store, as bookkeeper; where I kept all records," she says . "I was a bookkeeper. I went on to be a pharmacist. I kept records. I worked for Lee."
 Payrolls, quarterly reports, cash registers and balanced tapes, handled all cash and banking . "All cash and bank were entrusted to me. Payroll was entrusted with me. I handle all cash, banking and banking," she says .
 We charged and figured Butane-Propane gas tags; used various bookkeeping machines for posting to accounts and ledgers, other routine jobs .
 "I went to work for C Louis Wood, the Dodge dealer, where I did some bookkeeping and Accounts receivable and payable," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 "I went to work for Coast Tire Recapping Company where I did similar work. I went on to go on to do similar work," he says . "I was a tire collector. I did a lot of it," he adds .
 I went to work for Eastman Transport and Trucking Company where I did general office work . I went on to work as a general office worker at the company .
 I worked for Thomas Construction Co. of Fresno; one of the three companies . The company is one of three construction companies in the area .
 Head Start volunteer for Head Start in New York City, New Jersey . She says she was a teacher at Head Start and advanced to assistant level .
 Debris would fall off the timber and mud from the woods packed into the tires and dropped onto the road . Mud would fall from the trees and mud would be packed in the tires .
 A family was driving on such a day, lost control and went down an embankment . A family lost control of the vehicle and went into an embancment .
 On the opening day of the trail, dad and his lawyer met at a coffee shop in the county seat, Ukiah .
 A comment was made that the driver hoped his license wouldn't be checked as he was restricted from driving at night and without glasses . The driver said he hoped that his license would not be checked .
 "A look of complete shock came over their faces when my dad and his lawyer took their place in the courtroom," says his father-in-law . "They were shocked when they were in court for the first time," he says .
 Dad was a big robust man with such a love of family, animals and even the sky . Dad was also a big, robust man who loved family and animals . He is remembered as a 'big robust man'
 When a story was told, even if you didn't think it was funny; when he laughed, everyone laughed . "When a story is told, it's not funny," said the father-of-one .
 When we would be out in the woods or on a rocky ledge; when he got ready for a nap he could sleep any where. He could sleep anywhere he wanted to, including on a ledge .
 He would find a spot, lie down and with his body — re-arrange the setting until he was comfortable, he said . He would then re- arrange the setting to make it comfortable .
 "Always said his land provided for the wildlife so whenever he wanted venison, he would go kill a deer," he said . "He would go killing a deer"
 She sometimes would use the leftovers out of the refrigerator, add a few items and come up with a wonderful casserole . She sometimes used them to make leftovers .
 The ranch and surrounding ranches are so far from "civilization" that each property has their own electrical power source . Each property has its own electricity source .
 If you own a small jet plane, you can land safely . The regular planes use it frequently, and the regular planes also use it often .
 The fowl population did an excellent job of keeping pesky earwigs under control . The earwig population was kept under control in the wild .
 We had one rabbit that was so buck toothed and how it ate and survived was a mystery . How it survived and survived is a mystery, the author says . We had a rabbit so buck-toothed that it survived .
 A large workshop and a duplex were built; also a large master bedroom and sunroom . Within a few years, a large workshop was built; . Also a large bedroom and a sunroom were built .
 We lived in Westport for a few years before electricity was provided to the area . We lived there for several years before we got electricity .
 There was a pay phone at Van Horn's grocery store but my parents were the first to have a phone in the home . My parents had a phone at the home, but I'm not sure how long it lasted .
 We listened to favorite programs on the radio, played games and played musical instruments . We listened, played, played and played instruments in the family .
 I recall the family sitting so silently as the broadcast was made about the dropping of the atomic bomb . I recall sitting so silent as the family sat silently as it was made .
 "My uncle Bob and Belle and family lived about seven miles north at Union Landing," he says . "I spent a lot of week-ends there. My uncle Bob lived there," he adds .
 The ride to Fort Bragg to attend Junior High seemed so long and many of us napped both ways . Many of the time we were in junior high class napping both ways. The ride was so long that many of the kids napped on both sides .
 The fog would be so thick; could only see a few feet in distance or a rock slide would happen right before or after our bus had approached or passed . The fog was so thick that the fog would only be visible in the distance .
 The third grade was the only one I spent in Trinity County, attending the same school as my father . I was in the third grade at Trinity County School in Trinity .
 He was one of its first students and after completing the eight grade, he went to work . He was also one of the first students at the school .
 The one room school house is still being used today as ranch quarters for the owner's foreman . The one-room school house was used as a school for the foreman in the 1930s .
 The roads were not maintained as they are today and we had horses instead of bicycles . The road was not maintained today and horses were not as well as they were today . "We had horses rather than bicycles," says the author .
 If our house and barn locations had been reversed, our parents would have been paid for the distance to school, even though we were not taken by car . If our parents had been paid, our children would be able to go to school .
 Seven students were required to fund a public school so Florence Stevens brought her daughter to meet the quota . Florence Stevens' daughter was also needed to fund the school .
 Making up the group were the two Lampley girls and four of us Shannon's . The group was made up of four Shannon's daughters and two Shannon's.
 "We tried to time it right at the halfway point so we could climb into her pick-up," she says .
 During the hot summer afternoons, she was very creative in ""outings"" and we could collect floral specimens or bugs . We could collect flowers or bugs, bugs or flowers, she said .
 My brother Ted was such a slow eater that he usually took the entire lunch hour to finish his food . Ted's brother Ted usually finished his food in the last half of the lunch hour .
 "The truant officers came calling frequently and finally realized our situation wasn't on the books. The truant officer came to the children's home to find out that they were truant."
 We spent many summers at the ranch while my father would harvest portions of timber off his land . We spent most of those summers at his ranch while he would harvest timber .
 We would walk the fences, ride horses checking on the cattle, or climbing on board the big ""Caterpillar"" which he used for building roads or pulling logs onto a landing so they could be loaded on trucks .
 "Hired only my dad for construction or repair of all the roads on his properties," says son . Hired only his dad to build or repair roads on properties . "He hired only one of his properties to do so," says daughter .
 Besides the main ranch which was his get-away, were the Lone Pine and Armstrong . The Lone Pine, Armstrong and Armstrong were his main get-aways .
 He made trips to Africa gone of Safari's, and brought home his trophies . His trophies were proudly displayed on his walls .
 It had servants quarters, a separate room which was refrigerated where meat was cut up . A separate room where meat is cut up was also refrigerated .
 The house was patterned after a villa you might see in Scandinavia . It seemed surreal to believe that it was in Trinity County .
 Once the plants were at a certain size and we were able to distinguish vegetable from weed, we were responsible for keeping the weeds out of the garden . We were responsible to keep weeds out. Once we had the plants at certain size, we would have to distinguish vegetables from weeds .
 At the ranch, we always had such a large garden, it appeared to be five acres in my mind, says author . At the farm, the garden was so large that it looked like five acres, he says .
 Swimming hole at Salt Creek was so inviting and the dumb weeds stood in our way . Swimming holes were so inviting that the photo was taken by the photographer .
 After the garden was processed, the goods always tasted so good in the winter . The garden always tasted good in winter .
 It also was a beautiful sight to see all the products sitting on shelves . It was the first time the shelves had been opened .
 At this time, my father had an opportunity to contract with Rockport Lumber Company . At this . time, his father had a contract to Rockport . Lumber company .
 There weren't any homes available for rent so my parents went shopping at Westport which was twenty miles south . My parents went to Westport to buy a new house and bought a new set of clothes .
 In the once busy bar-room was a player piano and the several rolls of music provided variety . The bar was once a busy bar, but now it has been closed .
 Mom eventually enrolled us in piano lessons but I didn't practice or become determined . Mom eventually enrolls us in lessons but she didn't become determined to practice .
 "It's a decision I regret to this day; not being able to play. Playing baseball with the neighborhood kids was more fund and it's more fund," she says .
 She had always made matching outfits for Laura and Laura with panties to match . She always had matching outfits with matching underwear .
 Laura and I growled about still having the dish chore with all the added people but it didn't hurt us . Laura and Laura grewled about not having a dish chore but they didn't feel it hurt them .
 Older kids were transported to Fort Bragg; thirty miles away on winding roads . Older kids had to be transported to a different location . Older children were transported .
 The school was located on a hill overlooking the town and the view of the ocean was breathtaking . The school is located in the town overlooking the ocean .
 We'd barely present one program to our community and she would us working on the next one, she says . She would be working on a new program to help the community .
 I remember our ""May Pole,"" decorated with streamers and one girl chosen as Queen . One girl was chosen to be Queen. I remember .
 Baskets were filled with fresh flowers and put on the door step of a favorite neighbor or another lady in the community . The flowers would be placed on the doorstep of a neighbor or a woman in a community .
 I went through all the 'chairs' and then was juvenile master for a few years . I went on to be juvenile master at the age of 16 . I was a member of the 'chair' and 'master' for a number of years .
 "I memorized the installation of officers and the initiation of new members plus knowing the regular meeting regulations," she says . She says she memorized officers' installation and initiation procedures .
 The closest shopping center was Fort Bragg and it was fifteen miles from our home . The nearest shopping center to the home was the Fort-Bragg Mall Mall Mall .
 We also were allowed to buy one comic book and were careful not to buy the same as our siblings . We were also told to buy comic books and not to use the same ones as siblings .
 "I still do not know why I responded to that comment as children had respect for older people and did not say no or question a request," she said . She said she still does not understand why she responded to the comment .
 I believe this was the first and last time my father spanked me and I was heartbroken . I believe it was the last time I was spanked by my father .
 A nurse also lived in our camp and she applied a 'butterfly' bandage and I don't even have scars . "I don't have scars," she says of her injuries .
 Vacations were normally to the San Joaquin Valley to see relatives on my dads side . Vacations would normally be to see family members on my dad's side .
 'I vowed not to take my children away from their home at this ""festive"" time of year. After this experience, I vowed to not take them away at Christmas .
 Dad was color blind so one of us had to be on guard to tell him which color the light was . Dad had to use a flashlight to find out which light was in the room .
 "Only once upon our return did we find our house had been burglarized and the gifts missing," says the author of the book .
 Before my father returned from the woods one night, I vividly remember my mother being aware of a prowler . My mother was aware of the prowler. Before her father returned, she had been in the woods with her .
 She moved furniture to cover windows and the adrenalin must have kicked in as she moved the piano to block the front door . She also moved furniture and furniture to block windows .
 "The person was scared away by the lights of my dad's vehicle as he came down the driveway," says daughter . "It was a very scary moment," she says .
 Several men searched the area and then helped move the piano back to its spot . The piano was moved back to the piano's spot after it was discovered .
 Canning was done in every household to preserve fruits and vegetables when the fresh products were not in season . Canning is a popular way to preserve fruit and vegetables .
 "I recall the family sitting in the front room listening to the radio when there was a ka-boom. I recall the . family sitting . listening to . the radio . When there were a .ka-booms, the family sat in the . front room watching the radio
 A large pressure cooker hadn't performed properly and every inch of the large kitchen showed evidence of the peas . The kitchen was full of a large amount of work to complete .
 We were not wealthy so it also meant the cost of the peas and the pressure cooker . We were also forced to use a pressure cooker to make our own meals .
 'I can still see the fields of wild poppies surrounding our place and how gorgeous it was. I can still remember how beautiful it was,' she says .
 "My dad's favorite story about me was when he came home and I had been playing in the dirt. My dad came home from work and found me playing in dirt," he said .
 He would ask how he got so clean and would grin and say my mama washed me . He would say my mother washed me. He would grin when asked how clean he was .
 Each Friday we were allowed to board and ride the train as it was the only day their schedule met ours . The only day the train's schedule met our schedule was that Friday .
 On modern maps today it is named ""Heller-Highwater Airport,"" a cutesy name assigned it by its current owner, Andrew Heller . The current owner of the airport is also known as "Andrew Heller"
 In 1882, her parents homesteaded in Graham County, KS where she grew up . Her parents moved to Graham County in 1882 . She was born in Kansas City, Kansas .
 He grew up on a homestead in Jewell County, KS which his parents had claimed in 1872 . His parents claimed the property in 1871 .
 Life was hard and lonely on the prairie and Belle looked forward to children . Belle was lonely and had no children .
 He sent Belle and the three children ahead by train while he followed by freight train with the livestock . Belle and three children went by train with their livestock .
 When Belle looked across the farm she saw beautiful flowering fruit orchards covering the hillsides . Belle's farm is full of beautiful orchard orchars covering the fields . Belle says she is proud of her family's heritage .
 She saw sparkling, clear waters of Sugar creek meandering around rich bottomland flanked by huge sycamore trees .
 It was a paradise to Belle, but she still felt a longing for the open prairie, stretching for miles toward the horizon . It was the first time Belle had seen the prairie in her life .
 A 2-story evaporator, log granary and grey rambling rail fences scattered here are scattered here and there . The site is located in a state of unknown unknown .
 Atop the hill, against the forest stood a lonely frame house, weathered silver-grey by the elements of time . The house is now a weathered, silver-white frame house .
 White rock fireplace chimney and front porch overlook the emerald green valley below . Its outstanding features were the huge white rock chimney .
 When Thomas arrived with livestock and two stock dogs, the place came alive . Thomas arrived at the farm with livestock, two dogs and two livestock . Thomas: "When Thomas arrived ... it came alive"
 Thomas piped cold water from a spring above the house into the house and wash house he built next to the kitchen . He built a wash house next to his kitchen to wash clothes .
 He dug a fruit cellar with concrete walls and steps for storing fruit and vegetables for winter use . He dug the fruit cellar in a bid to store it for the winter .
 Four more children were born on the farm, Mary Eunice in 1909, Alice Gladys in 1911 and Andrew Jackson in 1913 . Andrew Jackson died in 1913 at the farm in rural Virginia .
 Charles Hurley in 1915, named for the family doctor, lived only four months . Baby Charles was named for family doctor and died at four months later .
 When the children were old enough to attend school, Tommy built a long swinging bridge over Sugar Creek . Anchoring it by heavy cables to huge sycamore trees on one end and steel cables anchored firmly in heavy concrete pillars on the other end .
 Every child in the family clattered over the bridge endless times to cross Sugar Creek . The bridge was built for the first time in the 1930s and '50s .
 It was a work of engineering skill and durability, lasting until the children were grown and gone from home . The children's house was built in the 1960s and is now a museum in New York .
 Tommy led the children to the little white church he and the neighbors helped build . Tommy and the others helped build the church he helped build in his childhood home . Tommy says he and his neighbors built the white church together . Tommy is now raising money to raise money for a new generation of
 He loved to debate and sing, often inviting neighbors into the home to sing and play . He often invited neighbors to his home to play and debate with him .
 The children loved it when he sang ""Gypsy Davey"" and played his harmonica as they promenaded across the worn wood floor . He had a clear tenor voice and a clear 10or voice .
 Tommy became ill with a kidney disease and died on October 9, 1915, leaving Belle with seven children . Belle had seven children with Tommy .
 Nothing could move her from the farm, even though she had to sell most of the stock . The farm was full of stock, but she was able to sell her most of it .
 Belle's life was dedicated to her seven children and she declined to adopt Andy and Alice . The family doctor and close relatives offered to adopt the children .
 In 1919 as Belle was cutting sorghum cane for winter molasses, the sharp knife slipped, cutting into her shin bone . Belle's shin bone was cut by a sharp knife cutting into the bone .
 He explained to Belle that her only hope was for him to amputate above the poison . Belle's only hope is for her to be amputated above the poisoned poison .
 Belle's heartbeat was stronger and her temperature was lower . Next morning when he returned, he was amazed that Belle's heart beat stronger and temperature lower .
 The doctor could only shake his head, knowing he had just witnessed a miracle . The doctor shook his head as he watched the miracle unfold .
 Fifteen year old Ruth dropped out of school and became nurse and second mother to Mary, Alice and Andy . She is survived by her husband and three children .
 Man and Effie did the outside chores which consisted of milking, feeding the stock, cleaning the stalls, and cutting wood . Effie and Man did chores which included feeding stock and cleaning stalls .
 A good neighbor, Port Howard, came with a big load of wood during a blizzard . Port Howard is a good neighbor to a neighbor in the area .
 Belle saw all her children grow up together on the farm, but her leg never fully healed from the dreaded gangrene . Belle's leg was gangrene and she never fully recovered .
 Lillian graduated from Springfield Business College and worked as a secretary until she returned to Dug Hill in the 1920s . She took a job as general secretary to the Linebarger brothers, owners of Bella Vista summer resort .
 They were her greatest love next to her three children, Georgia, Evelyn, and Nadine . They were their greatest love, she said .
 He was service manager for Burger Motors of Bentonville for thirty-four years until a tragic accident took his life in 1972 . He died in 1972 after being killed in an accident .
 Alice and Mary worked their way through school and married soon after graduation . Mary and Alice worked their own way through the school years . Alice and Alice married after graduating .
 Alice had six children, one, Alice Rosalie, was born on the old farm in the same house her mother was in . Alice's mother was Alice, Alice's grandmother, Alice and Alice's sister, Alice . Alice was born at the farm in same house as her mother
 Tommy Green and Alice Kollenborn are the only surviving members of Tommy and Belle Green's seven children . Green and Alice Kollenborn are the only remaining members of the Green family .
 Virginia Belle lived on the old home place until all the children were grown . She lived there until the children had grown up .
 Thomas and Virginia Belle now rest beside Baby Charles and Belle's parents, Margaret Eunice and Sylvester Myers, in the family plot overlooking their beloved farm home .
 The rich farm land is buried beneath golf carts and manicured fairways . The rich farmland is buried under golf carts, manicured golf courses .
 Other sources indicate his first name was James, not Jesse . Only memories remain of Jesse, Jesse .
 He was born in Coleborne, Ontario, Canada, June 9, 1870 . He was the second in a family of four sons and one daughter, born to Robert and Deborah Shannon .
 The parents left Canada in 1891 and came to California, making their home on a farm near Visalia, where Mr Shannon died . Mr Shannon's parents were born in Canada and lived in Visalia .
 Their son, Carleton J., lived on the parental farm in Canada until he was 16 years old, attending the public school near his home . Carleton lived in the family home in Canada .
 At 16 he became self-supporting and for three years worked at such employment as he could find in the vicinity of his birthplace . At 16, he was self-supported by his mother and father .
 At 19 he was making only fifteen dollars a month and he was not at all satisfied with his income . At nineteen he was . making only 15 dollars a . month .
 In 1889 he reached Tulare county, all traveling expenses paid, with twenty dollars in his pocket . But he saved the little money that he could and in 1889 reached .
 Robinson, a year and eight months, then worked two full years for John Frans at stock-raising. Robinson . Robinson worked for two years before working for two others . Robinson, Robinson and Frans, respectively, worked for stock-raiser. Robinson. Robinson worked two years
 By 1897 he had enough capital to purchase a farm of one hundred and forty acres, which was the nucleus of his present ranch . Returning to the Frans ranch he became Mr Frans's partner in handling stock .
 In 1900 he bought two hundred and forty acres more and in 1902 another hundred acres, bringing his holding up to four hundred and eighty acres in sections thirty -two and thirty -three, township nineteen, range twenty-five, located five miles northeast of Tulare, California .
 He has improved and cultivated the tract until it ranks with the best ranches in the county . The tract is now considered one of the best in the area .
 By later purchases he has become the owner of fifteen hundred and sixty acres . He has also purchased over 150 acres of land .
 Forty acres are devoted to peaches, one hundred to alfalfa and eighty to vineyards . Forty acres of peaches and one hundred acres are dedicated to the farm .
 He has a dairy of 16 Holstein cows, keeps an average of four hundred hogs and raises seventy -five beef cattle yearly . He has also raised some fine Percheron colts . He keeps average of 4,500 hogs .
 He is a member of the Dairymen's Co-operative Creamery association . He is president and manager of the Farmers' Irrigation Ditch company .
 "Public-spiritedly he is all that his many admiring friends could wish him," he said .
 Mr Speaker, at this time I ask that my colleagues join me in paying tribute to a selfless act of heroism performed by Officer Ted Shannon of the California Highway Patrol . Mr Shannon was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head in the head .
 Officer Shannon was awarded the State of California's highest honor for bravery, the medal of valor . Officer Shannon received the award on November 13, 2013 .
 This medal has been awarded only 40 times, and those upon whom it has been bestowed are indeed a select group . The medal has only been awarded to 40 people .
 Officer Shannon came upon the scene of a head-on collision involving an automobile and a pickup truck last December . Officer Shannon says he was responding to a report of a collision in December .
 Officer Shannon attempted to remove the occupant of the truck from the vehicle . After radioing for fire and ambulance assistance, Officer Shannon radioed for help .
 Repulsed by the expanding fire, he used his patrol extinguisher to subdue the flames, then attempted again to remove the victim . The victim died in the blaze .
 gasoline leaking from the truck's dislodges gas tank caused the fire to spread to the second vehicle . At this point, gasoline leaked from the tank . The fire was caused by the leaking of the gas tank .
 Officer Shannon then turned his attention to the three occupants of that car . The three occupants were found in the vehicle .
 He was able to pull out an unconscious young girl, and was removing a second victim from the blaze when two passersby rendered assistance . Two passersby also rendered assistance to the man .
 The driver of the car was pinned in the wreckage, and could not be removed from the wreckage . The driver was pinned and pinned, and was not removed .
 Officer Shannon applied his highway emergency medical training in an effort to assist the two unconscious teenagers who were now clear of the accident . Officer Shannon then returned again to the task of rescuing the two trapped drivers .
 He suffered the effects of smoke inhalation, as well as second degree facial burns, and the threat of explosion was very real . He suffered from second degree burns to his face .
 All four young victims of the accident succumbed to the massive injuries they sustained . Despite Officer Shannon's incredible efforts, all four victims succumbed to their injuries .
 Officer Shannon Shannon was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head . Officer Shannon was the first officer to die in the line of duty in the U.S. hospital .
 California Highway Patrol officer is a 16-year veteran of the state's Highway Patrol . He is an award-winning veteran of patrol .
 Acts of bravery such a bravery such as his are few and far between, and they are certainly deserving of our recognition and tribute . Acts of courage such a hero such as this man are rare and rare .
 "I know that my colleagues will share in my pride, enthusiasm, and gratitude," she said . "I am proud and grateful to this outstanding individual," she added .
 I observed headlights in my rear-view mirror and identified a Chevy Vega as it passed alongside me . The Chevy Vega was seen in the rear of the car .
 It had appeared to be traveling a little fast for this narrow, winding side road . I decided to run a speed check on it as it proceeded north on 49 .
 I waited several seconds to allow the Vega to go around a right curve (so as not to alert the driver that he was following him) I started the patrol car and accelerated hard once on 49 as no taillights were in sight .
 The Vega and a mid-60s GM pickup were tangled together both badly damaged . The collision was a collision with the Vega and the pickup .
 They had obviously collided head-on and also obvious was that the occupants had to have sustained serious injuries . It was also obvious that they had suffered serious injuries in the collision .
 The glow I had seen was from fire in the GMC's cab, and it was growing in intensity . The glow was from a fire that had been growing in the cab of a GMC, police say .
 I was only about 2/1 th of a mile away when the grinding high-speed collision occurred . I did not hear what was surely a very noisy impact .
 I can only guess that I was starting the CHP Dodge patrol car at the time of the crash . I can't guess that it was a police car .
 I grabbed my two-way radio mike as I pulled to a stop just short of the vehicles, advising Stockton CHP Dispatch of a major injury accident with vehicles on fire . The accident occurred on a stretch stretch of highway in Stockton, California .
 As I ran to the burning pickup, I noted slumped and motionless occupants in the Vega . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he says. "It was a terrible accident," he adds .
 The site of carnage was eerily silent. Except for the murmur of burning fuel, the site of the carnage was silent . Except for a murmur, the scene of carnage remained silent .
 Due to the sloping nature of the terrain, the driver's side of the GMC was tilted downhill . The burning GMC is tilted downhill. The burning vehicle is a GMC .
 The driver was lying across the seat, his head near the passenger door . He was lying in the passenger seat when he was hit by the crash .
 "I did not take the time to determine if he was alive as my priority was to get him out of the fire," says firefighter . "I didn't think he would be alive as I didn't want to take him to the hospital," he says .
 Flaming fuel illuminated gasoline flowing out of the neck of the in-cab fuel tank . The fuel tank is filled with gasoline and fuel .
 When I first opened the right door, the fire was extending up to around the driver's knees. When I opened the door, I saw the fire extending up . The fire was extended up to . around the . driver's . knees . The driver's car was engulfed in flames and
 I emptied my fire extinguisher as the flames spread, but only managed to temporarily reduce, not extinguish, the fire, which soon encompassed his entire body . The fire was so intense that it engulfed the entire body of the victim .
 I continued attempting to remove him until I noted that burning fuel had flowed down to the Vega and its left front was on fire . I continued to try and remove him from the vehicle . I noted the burning fuel flowed down the Vega's left front had been on fire.
 There was a young male passenger in the right front and a young female in the rear both motionless and quiet . Both motionless, quiet and quiet, they sat motionless in the passenger seat .
 Due to the low roof structure of the car, I had to tilt the front seat occupant's head back to get the clearance to remove him from the car .
 Cradling him in my arms, I drug him about fifteen feet from the Vega, noting that he was still breathing . Cradled him in his arms, he drug him to the ground, noting he was breathing .
 As I turned my attention to removing the rear seat passenger, a youthful male approached and offered to help . He offered to remove the passenger from his car . The incident occurred in the early hours of the morning .
 The driver of the car was also still alive when she was rescued from the burning car . She was taken to a spot away from the car where she was found alive . The driver was also taken to hospital .
 CHP officers gave both victims oxygen until an ambulance crew took over the life-sustaining efforts, freeing us to do accident investigation . Other CHP Officers arrived .
 The GMC driver allowed his vehicle to drift onto the southbound shoulder, overcorrected, and slid into the northbound lane where it collided head-on with the Vega . The driver of the GMC was not injured in the collision .
 The much heavier and faster moving pickup drove the Vega backwards off the highway in a southeasterly direction . The vehicle was driven by a much heavier moving pickup .
 Both Vega passengers arrived at Mark Twain Hospital alive, but unfortunately, they were too severely injured to survive . Both passengers died in the hospital, but both survived .
 "My ensuing Medal of Valor would have been so much more rewarding had they lived," he says . "I would have received the Medal of Honor if they had lived," says the soldier .
 CHP unit crashes a GMC into a lane on Highway 49 . The driver of the Vega slid into his lane, but CHP says he didn't see a CHP in his lane . CHP officer says the driver should have been further up Highway 49 beyond the spot .
 I was more in fear of my future well-being. As to the medal, while I certainly cherish and am proud of it, there was more than one other occasion in my CHP career when I was less in fear .
 Firefighters in Eureka say burning vehicles do not explode as shown in the movies . "Burning vehicles don't explode violently," firefighter says . "My previous stint as a fire fighter taught me"
 1 sustained burns on my forehead and smoke inhalation . Yes, it was extremely hot . 1 sustained burnings on her forehead and inhalation from smoke . She said: "Yes, I sustained burns"
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send photos of your favorite travel destinations by email jennifera.com/worldwide .
 I know there were others who helped in various ways, and I apologize for any omissions in this list . I apologize .
 Bonnie Arnold, Ken Artlip, Marion Bishop, Patricia Graves Burrell of the White Lily Clan, Phillip Carnahan, Evelyn Cimino, Kate Clabough, Betty Cox, Gertrude ""Trudy"" Crook, Barbara Dickey, Lula Mae
 Redwood Genealogical Society, Nancy Riley, Rogers Historical Museum, Mrs. Peoples Peoples, Gerald Philp, Lori Radkey, Lori. Radkey and Nancy Riley attended .
 You will come here and get books that will open your eyes and your ears, and your curiosity, and turn you inside out or outside in . You will find books that open eyes, and ears and curiosity .
 John Howland 1599*-1672 born Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire, England; 1620 Mayflower passenger 1 . Howland died in 1672 in a firehouse firehouse .
 Elizabeth Tilley 1607-1687 born Henlow, Huntingdonshire, England; 1620 Mayflower passenger 2 . Tilley died in 1687 at the age of 50 .
 Desire Howland 1625-1683 born Plymouth, Massachusetts . Captain John Gorham 1621-1676 born Benefield, England . Captain Gorham was born in Benefield .
 Mary Otis 1652-1733 bornHingham, Massachusetts . John Gorham II 1651Nov., 1716 born Marshfield, Mass., Massachusetts . She was born in Marshfield and died in Hingham .
 John Gorham III 1688-1769 born Barnstable or Yarmouth, Massachusetts . Prudence Crocker 1692-1779 born Barnstow, Massachusetts 5. Prudence Custer was born in Barnstable, Massachusetts.
 George Raymond Gorham 1819-1906 born Nantucket, Massachusetts . Susan Lucky 1847-1894 born Eel River Island, California 9. Susan Lucky was born in California . Gorham died in 1906 .
 Esther Silvia Nelson 1912-1997 born Samoa, California . Theodore Roosevelt Shannon 1902-1979 born Carlotta, California 12. Theodore Theodore Shannon Shannon was born in Carlotta . Theodore Theodore Roosevelt died in 1953 .
 The site does not connect generations 3 and 4, but the book does make that link . The book only goes through the fifth generation from Mayflower passengers .
 By combining these two sources, the complete line from John Howland and Elizabeth Tilley down to Esther Silva Shannon—and beyond—can be traced .