 He has a profound interest in history and writes articles on key figures of history and key events that have occurred since the early modern historical period .
 He has an interest in the history of the Renaissance in Italy during the rule of the House of Medici which saw a rebirth of art, architecture and science along with the presence of some of history's most famous names such as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo .
 The Cold War was the closest it has ever been to Mutually Assured Destruction . U.S. and USSR led the world to the closest ever being to M.A. Destruction .
 This blog is primarily focused on the Renaissance period and 20th century . It will also include posts on other periods of history that are of interest to Josh .
 Josh has no intention at all of infringing upon any author's/blogger's copyright claims . This blog is simply a site for expressing Josh's interest in the subject of history as well as educating .
 This led to the formation of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic which only exacerbated tensions between the West and the East . The two countries became a physical division between capitalist and communist states .
 Unlike the crisis of Berlin, a hardline military policy was taken by both sides which arguably had the result of bringing these two superpowers to the very brink of nuclear war . Unlike Berlin, unlike Berlin, both sides took a hard line military policy .
 It is important to register that in order to answer this question, we must take into account that the policies of both countries can also be viewed as the causes for these crises . It is also important to consider that both countries' policies also can be seen as causes of these crises, says
 The differing political policies adopted by both sides was indeed a factor in itself which can be seen as a cause for the 1961 Berlin Crisis .
 East Germany was the only communist single party state which had effectively been created from nothing . It became a representative model for which all communist states should follow . East Germany became the model for all communist countries .
 The reason for Khrushchev wanting to exert a large amount of Soviet influence in Berlin was because of the pre-existing fear of another German invasion of Russia with there having already been one in 1914 and another in 1941 .
 Political policy in both West Germany and West Berlin was much more liberal and allowed for the flourishing of Germany . East Germans inevitably attracted East Germans to cross the de facto border between these two countries .
 Geneva Conference of 1959 and Camp David Summit highlighted a failure from both sides to agree on each other’s proposals . Both U.S. and USSR political policies were similar in the sense that they both wished for German unity .
 From this we can argue that the inability from both sides to accept each other’s political proposals and thus political ideologies contributed greatly to the eventual construction of the Wall . From this, we can also argue that both sides were unable to accept political proposals .
 The political policies undertaken by both sides were largely focussed on being effective in the short term . It can be seen that in Cuba, the political policies were aimed at being effective short-term .
 Politically, the Soviet’s influence in Cuba was to essentially worry the U.S. that there was now a communist state 120km away from American soil . The United States was worried that the communist state was now 120km from its borders .
 It can be perceived that the political policy of the USSR was a protectionist policy . The adoption of Cuba into the Soviet sphere of influence was more because the Soviets wanted to deter the threat of a U.S. attack . stabilising missiles within Cuba was simply a way in allowing this
 The political policy adopted by the United States was highly defensive as well as an example of its policy of containment . Contrarily, the U.S. adopted a highly defensive approach to the situation in Afghanistan .
 The need for a defensive policy was strengthened by Castro’s coup in 1959 and his announcement that he had shifted from an anti-US Cuban nationalist to a communist . Castro's coup was the result of his decision to become a communist in 1959 .
 If we are to compare the political policies of both these crises it can be viewed that though it eventually failed, politically the U.S. and the USSR were much more willing to compromise over Germany as opposed to the crisis in Cuba which highlighted that these two sides were indeed polar opposites
 The political policies in both crises can also be seen as the foundations for the social policies adopted by these countries . The political and social policies of these countries can be seen in the wake of these crises, says David Cameron .
 The social policies of the USSR in East Berlin and East Germany were very restrictive and worked to repress the ordinary Berliner . The USSR's social policies in Berlin and Germany were extremely restrictive .
 Though eastern Germany claimed to be democratic, it was in fact far from it . The eastern region of Germany was far from democratic, says the mayor .
 In comparison to the treatment of western Germans, the Soviet system in East Germany was very much oppressive . The USSR social policy in Berlin can thus also be viewed as this .
 The Staatssicherheit was responsible for political surveillance and espionage . The newspaper, radio and television were all controlled by the secret police .
 The social policies imposed on West Berlin by the US, Britain and France were much more liberal likewise to their political policies . To contrast, West Berlin's social policies were more liberal .
 Life in West Berlin brought more prosperity, with average wages being much higher than in the east . There were no secret police and no censorship, and there was no censorship .
 Social policies adopted by both sides in Berlin can be seen as a cause for the crisis . The completely contrasting social policies adopted in Berlin are seen as the cause of the crisis, say experts .
 The migration of defectors from West Berlin to East Berlin created a “brain drain” for the USSR’s East Berlin . There being over 10,000 defectors per week by 1961, significantly increasing tensions between the two sides .
 Khrushchev was led to believe that the only feasible way to deal with the inferiority of the East in relation to the West was to physically cut off both sides from each other with a wall . If anything, the varied growth of both East and West Berlin and the social prosperity of
 In Cuba, it can be argued that the social policies from both sides were perhaps not as distinguishable as the policies in Berlin . Cuba's social policies are perhaps less distinguishable than those of Berlin's in Berlin, says CNN.com .
 Khrushchev threatened in July 1960 to send Soviet troops to Cuba to defend the island if the U.S. dared invade it . However, the USSR’s social policy if anything was one that was friendly to the Cuban populace .
 This amicable social stance taken by the USSR was mostly because of the importance of having a communist state in the Western Hemisphere . The USSR’s recognition of the . importance of a communist . state in Western Hemisphere was the main reason for this amicable stance taken .
 The United States social policy was much more offensive and threatening. Whereas, the U.S. social policy is much more threatening and threatening .
 Kennedy sent a force of around 1400 Cuban exiles to the Bay of Pigs with the hope that this would trigger a popular uprising against Fidel Castro . In 1961, Kennedy sent around 1400 exiles from Cuba to Cuba .
 Comparing the social policies adopted by both sides in each of the crises, we can acetate that it was not so much the social . policies themselves that caused a crisis . The conflict between these two differing social policies . adopted by the United States and the USSR exacerbated the climate for a
 The economic policies of both the U.S. and the USSR were in fact similar to the social policies imposed on both western and eastern Berlin . These policies stemmed from very contrasting politically ideological perspectives .
 Sales of foreign goods were restricted and currency sales were strictly controlled in an effort to obtain foreign exchange . Sales of currency was strictly controlled by the government in an attempt to get foreign exchange money .
 Khrushchev wanted to modernise the East German economy but under very strict supervision . The East German government was keen on modernising the country's economy .
 In the first 7 months of 1961, 207,00 defectors had left East Germany to settle in the west . The economy in West Berlin and indeed West Germany was flourishing at a much faster rate to its eastern competitor .
 From this we can infer that these two juxtaposing economies were a direct cause for the crisis of 1961 . The two economies of 1961 and 1961 were the cause of the crisis in 1961 .
 The economic policies of both sides was the main cause for the construction of the Berlin Wall as it was built to block the loss of intellectuals from the East which if anything was caused by the differing economic policies .
 In Cuba it is perhaps sensible to assume that a strategic economic policy in Cuba was not a priority . U.S. and USSR channelled a lot more effort into their military and political policies instead .
 The US imposed an embargo on Cuba in 1962 crippled the Cuban economy . It demonstrated a dramatic souring of strong US-Cuban relations which had existed prior to the Cuban revolution .
 To contrast, the economic policy of the USSR in Cuba thrived off the deterioration of relations between the U.S. and Cuba . Cuba's economic policy was similar to that of the Soviet Union, which thrived .
 In 1960, the Soviet Union signed an agreement to buy 1,000,000 tonnes of sugar per year for the next 5 years, tying the two countries together and resulting in there being a Communist country in the western sphere of influence .
 By viewing the economic policies taken by the U.S. and the USSR it is clear that they both stem from differing political motives . Both countries' economic policies stem from different political motives.
 The U.S. antagonised Cuba because of their domination of the country pre-revolution which resulted in a much more restrictive economic policy . The USSR was keen to spread communism to the West and thus cemented relations with Cuba by supporting the economy generously .
 The US/USSR influence on the German economies had a much more direct impact on Berlin and the whole of Germany . Comparing the economic policies in both crises, it is apparent that the U.S. influence on Germany's economy was more direct than in the 1960s .
 In Cuba, the economic policies were enforced at an early stage and exacerbated tensions between the U.S. and the USSR . They had more of an indirect impact on the crisis as they provided the foundations for the non-confrontational military conflict .
 It is necessary to cover the military policy chosen by both sides and to assess whether this can be regarded as a factor which caused a crisis . It is also necessary to assess if this is the cause of the crisis .
 In truth, the military policy from the two sides was far-fetched and less important than the socioeconomic and political policies . The military policy is less important to the socioeconomic, political policies, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff made refining contingency plans for various military probes of the railway to Berlin . They were prepared to implement a blockade similar to Stalin’s blockade in 1948-49 .
 There was also an understanding that the Allies lacked military strength so the U.S. and NATO were advised to build up their military power .
 Khrushchev largely exaggerated the military capability of the USSR with the hope that this would force the Allies to withdraw from West Berlin, recognise the legal existence of USSR and recognise the GDR’s right to control Berlin's borders .
 Comparing these military policies one can argue that they simply cannot be seen as a cause for the Berlin Crisis of 1961 as they were never put into effect . Comparing them to the policies of 1961, the Berlin crisis of 1961 was never a cause .
 They were merely extended precautions for the potentiality of a conflict between the two sides . They were simply extended precautions, they said .
 The United States initially adopted an offensive military policy in Cuba which soon transformed itself into a defensive policy . The U.S. changed its policy to a more defensive approach to the island nation .
 This can be seen in the Bay of Pigs Fiasco when the CIA trained 1,500 exiles to overthrow Castro in 1959 . The CIA trained ex-patriots in Cuba .
 The United States military policy, specifically during the crisis, was merely retaliatory, as naturally, the United States recognised a need to defend itself at all costs . The U.S. military policy in the 1980s was simply retaliatory .
 If we are to compare the military policies between these two crises it is obvious that what differs between these crises is that in Cuba there was a clear motivation that if worst came to worst, a military/nuclear conflict was inevitable, so we can argue .
 The policies adopted from both the U.S. and the USSR in each of the crises can be seen as the causes for the crises themselves . To conclude, I have argued my case .
 In Berlin it would seem that the socioeconomic and political policies were the main causes for the crisis in 1961 . But I would argue that the political policies taken from both sides is what allows these other policies to also contribute to the causation of the crisis .
 The differing ideologies immediately separated the two sides which ultimately allowed for a conflict in interests in how to deal with Germany . Despite various attempts to reach an agreement to re-unite Germany, many attempts to do so were unsuccessful .
 The deployment of nuclear weaponry was an indication that nuclear war was almost unavoidable . I personally perceive the military policy as the main cause for the crisis largely due to the deployment of . nuclear weaponry being an indication .
 The Berlin Crisis highlighted that the capitalist modus viventi seemed to be much more popular than the communist way of life . My reasoning behind this is that the Berlin crisis highlighted that . The Berlin crisis was highlighted by the Berlin Crisis .
 The title is suggestive that the policies, the causes of and the crises themselves were all separate to each other but I would argue the opposite and that each of these factors support each other . The title of the book suggests the policies and causes of crises are all separate but that is the opposite
 Berlin Crisis can be viewed as a national crisis which involved the U.S. and the USSR, whereas Cuba was arguably a global crisis which was applicable to the world . The Berlin Crisis was viewed as an international crisis, rather than a domestic crisis .