 The Soviets relied on checkered shirts and tight quarters to sneak thousands of troops into Cuba . The Soviet Union relied on tight quarters for the smuggling of troops .
 Operation Anadyr began in the summer of 1962 to ship thousands of combat troops to Cuba . The Soviets employed an elaborate ruse to ship troops to the island in Cuba .
 A few thousand soldiers donned checkered shirts to pose as civilian agricultural advisers . Soldiers posed as agricultural advisers for the U.S. Army in the 1980s .
 Many more were issued Arctic equipment to throw off the scent, sent aboard a fleet of 85 ships and then told to remain below the decks for the long voyage .
 CIA estimated on October 20, 1962, that 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet troops were stationed in Cuba . The true number of Soviet troops was more than 40,000 .
 A concocted cold was blamed for President Kennedy’s cancellation of public events . To keep news of the crisis from leaking, a concocted Cold was blamed on President Kennedy's cancellation of events .
 Kennedy attempted to avoid arousing public concerns in the first days of the crisis . Kennedy's official schedule included a planned seven-state campaign swing in advance of midterm elections .
 On October 20, 1962, he abruptly flew back from Chicago to Washington, Washington . He was killed by a plane crash in Chicago .
 The president's physician fabricated a story that Kennedy’s voice had been “husky” the night before and that he was suffering from a cold and a slight fever . Kennedy's physician said he had a cold, fever and a cold .
 Kennedy spent the rest of the day in bed with aides before deciding on a naval blockade of Cuba . He instead engaged in five hours of meetings with advisers .
 President Kennedy’s aides drafted a speech announcing a military invasion of Cuba . President Kennedy's aides drafted the speech . The speech was a response to a Cuban uprising .
 Kennedy informed the nation of the naval blockade around Cuba on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy made the announcement in a dramatic primetime address in 1962 .
 An alternative speech with a much different message had been drafted days before, however, in the event the president opted for a military strike . The alternative speech was drafted in advance of the president's decision .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, a Soviet military intelligence officer, passed along vital espionage to the CIA and British intelligence officials . He passed on vital espionage about Soviet missile systems .
 CIA agents analyzed aerial photographs taken over Cuba . That knowledge proved extremely valuable for the CIA agents analyzing the aerial photographs .
 On October 22, 1962, KGB officials arrested Penkovsky in Moscow, Russia . It is believed he was convicted of espionage and executed in 1963 . It's thought he was executed in 1962 .
 On October 27, 1962, a Soviet-supplied surface-to-air missile downed an American U-2 plane, killing its pilot . Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was killed by the missile in October .
 President Kennedy posthumously awarded him the Distinguished Service Medal . He was awarded the Medal for his service in Vietnam .
 Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba in 1962 . The move was not a unilateral move, but it wasn't a unilateral decision . The removal of nuclear missiles was ordered by the Soviet leader .
 Secret back-door diplomacy, rather than brinkmanship, defused the crisis, defuses the crisis . Secret back door diplomacy instead of brinkmanship defused, defusing the crisis.
 Once Kennedy announced the blockade, the Americans and Soviets were in regular communication . The Americans and the Soviets had regular communication during the blockade .
 The October 28 agreement was hammered out the night before in a secret meeting between Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The agreement was agreed in secret meeting that night .
 The Attorney General’s outreach and offer to remove missiles from Turkey was so clandestine that only a handful of presidential advisers were aware of it at the time .
 It was 13 days from when Bundy showed Kennedy the incriminating U-2 photographs to the announcement of Khrushchev’s decision to remove the missiles . The number has been drilled into history with Robert Kennedy's memoir “Thirteen Days” and the 2000 motion picture of
 The world breathed a sigh of relief after the news of that 13th day . But the tense situation did not suddenly abate . The tense situation has not yet abated .
 Although the Kennedy administration thought all the Soviet nukes were gone, they weren’t . The Kennedy administration had hoped they would be gone, but they still had nukes .
 President Kennedy lifted the Cuban blockade on November 20, 1962 . President Kennedy was satisfied with Soviet assurances that all nuclear weapons had been removed .
 Khrushchev had intended to train the Cubans and transfer the missiles to them, as long as they kept their presence a secret . The Cubans were trained to use the missiles as well as keeping them secret .
 The Soviets removed the last of the nuclear warheads from Cuba on December 1, 1962 . Soviet concerns about whether Castro could be trusted with the weapons mounted, however, led to Soviet concerns .