 President John F Kennedy and his family brought glamour, charm, and enthusiasm to the political scene . The Kennedys were the first family to be elected president .
 For many, the Civil Rights and feminist movements represented the realization of democratic ideals . For many people, the civil rights movement was a model of democracy . For others, it was a symbol of freedom and equality .
 For some, the changes these movements ushered in represented social upheaval . For others, they were social upheaval. For others they represented social change .
 The spirit of optimism so emblematic of the early 1960s soon dissolved, as President Kennedy, his brother, Robert F Kennedy, Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson and Rev. Michael Kennedy were assassinated in 1968 .
 Martin Luther King Jr. and several other prominent civil rights leaders were assassinated . MLK Jr. was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi in 1968 .
 Vietnam War, generally supported by Americans early in the decade, also became a catalyst for social protest . The Vietnam War was generally supported, but later became a symbol of anti-war sentiment .
 As the news media intensified its scrutiny of America's role in Vietnam, gruesome images filled the television airwaves . The images introduced many directly to the horrors of modern warfare .
 Kennedy was elected president in 1960 by a thin margin over then-Vice President Richard Nixon . Kennedy won a narrow margin over Nixon .
 Kennedy, at 43, was the youngest man ever elected president and the first president born in the twentieth century . At 43, Kennedy was the first man to be elected president in the United States .
 His stylish wife Jacqueline and their young children, John and Caroline, brought vigor and exuberance to the White House .
 Kennedy promised that the United States would put a man on the moon before the end of the decade . He embraced the Civil Rights Movement and embraced the civil rights movement .
 As television use increased during the 1960s, the Kennedys used the new medium to their advantage .
 In 1960, Kennedy performed calmly and confidently during the first-ever televised presidential debates against Nixon . In 1960 he performed calmly, confidently in the first televised presidential debate .
 After inauguration, Americans followed the new first lady on a televised tour of the White House . The administration released to the press a steady stream of photographs of the president interacting with his young family .
 On April 17, 1961, an invasion force of Cuban exiles went ashore at the Bay of Pigs, but were quickly defeated . The invasion force was quickly defeated, an embarrassing beginning in foreign affairs for President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy urged Americans to take steps to prepare themselves in case of attack . After the failed Bay of Pigs incident, President Kennedy said Americans should prepare for attack .
 Many companies sold underground shelters designed to protect families from nuclear attack . The shelters were designed to help families from a nuclear strike .
 Ranging from simple concrete block constructions to elaborate facilities that could comfortably house a whole family inside termite-proof walls and thick metal doors .
 By October 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had deployed two dozen nuclear-armed ballistic missiles in Cuba . The Cuban government had deployed more than a dozen of the missiles .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy announced a quarantine of the island . The island was quarantined by President Kennedy .
 American ships were deployed and at the ready to confront any vessels carrying weapons . U.S. ships are deployed and ready for confrontation with any vessels with weapons .
 With Soviet ships en route to Cuba and a confrontation looming, Americans gathered at churches and families stockpiled food and supplies . Americans gather at churches to stockpile food, supplies .
 The Kennedy Administration sought a solution during an agonizing six-day period . Meanwhile, the Kennedy administration sought to find a solution .
 America shared a collective sigh of relief, having perhaps come closer to a nuclear war than at any other time in its history . America's nuclear war was perhaps the closest to nuclear war ever seen in history .
 President Kennedy was assassinated while riding in an open limousine in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . President Kennedy's legacy includes the Kennedy legacy of his assassination .
 The event was traumatic for Americans, partly because the first family had become so much a part of their lives through television and the print media . The first family was a major part of the U.S. life .
 Television stations covered Kennedy's funeral live, which ushered in a period of national mourning . Television stations carried out the funeral live .
 Many Americans felt that a unique era of youth, excitement, and promise had been snuffed out almost before it began . Many felt that the era of youthful excitement, excitement and promise was snuffuffed out . Many Americans feel that the country's youth had been lost .
 Lee Harvey Oswald apprehended President Kennedy's apparent assassin . Oswald was captured by police officers in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . Oswald is believed to have shot President Kennedy in the head .
 Jack Ruby burst through a crowd of reporters and television crews surrounding Oswald as he was transferred to another facility . Ruby burst into a crowd after his arrest in Dallas, Texas, two days after he was arrested .
 Oswald's death, and the subsequent death of Ruby from cancer in 1967, left open many still debated conspiracy theories regarding the president's death . Many still believe others, such as Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, organized crime figures, perhaps even government agents might have been involved in the assassination .
 Lyndon B Johnson succeeded Kennedy as president and inaugurated a series of programs meant to spread American prosperity to a wider number of people . Vice President Johnson succeeded JFK as president .
 President Johnson's War on Poverty was modeled after Franklin D Roosevelt's New Deal . It included the Food Stamp program, public housing, job training, and the creation of the healthcare programs Medicare and Medicaid .
 Johnson also worked with Congress to push through legislation that had been supported by President Kennedy, including civil rights reforms .
 The most widely recognized civil rights leader of the era was Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The Civil Rights Movement was the first black leader of its kind .
 As head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King preached nonviolent resistance, including boycotts, sit-ins, and marches . King, a Baptist minister, was patterned after the ideas of Mahatma Gandhi .
 King's efforts in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963, were met by brutal police repression and were widely reported on television news, leading to expanded support for the Civil Rights movement . King's effort in Birmingham was met by police repression .
 King gave his famous ""I Have a Dream Speech" in front of the Lincoln Memorial . King gave the famous speech in the front of Lincoln Memorial in 1964 .
 King's speech presented King's vision of a society in which all people would be judged by their character rather than their skin color . King said that all people should be judged on their character, not their color, in King's words .
 The speech quickly became one of the most famous moments in American history . The speech was one of America's most memorable moments .
 On April 3, 1968, King gave his final speech, ""I've Been to the Mountaintop,"" in which he described both his vision of the future and his belief that he would not live to see it . King gave the speech that he believed he would never live to
 The following day he was shot and killed in Memphis, Tennessee, by James Earl Ray .
 King's assassination sparked riots in several cities and further divided the nation . King's death sparked riots across several cities, further divided nation .
 Many groups violently opposed the struggle for equal rights, including the Ku Klux Klan . The KKK was among the most violent groups to oppose the fight for equality .
 Politicians and state government officials also resisted the dismantling of segregation in the U.S.
 Among the most violent tactics employed by segregationists was a wave of church bombings . Segregationists used church bombings as a means of fighting segregationists .
 The most deadly attack was directed against the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, on September 15, 1963 . Four girls, age 10 to 14, died in their Sunday school classrooms in the attack .
 In 1963, Medgar Evers, a prominent National Association of Colored People activist, was gunned down outside his home in Jackson, Mississippi . He was shot to death in 1963 .
 In 1964, three civil rights workers were murdered in Mississippi by Ku Klux Klan members . Three civil rights activists were killed in 1964 by the KKK in Mississippi .
 Malcolm X, a charismatic speaker and former member of the black separatist Nation of Islam, was murdered in 1965 . In 1965, Malcolm X was murdered by the wife of Malcolm X .
 During the 1960s, segments of the African American community became more militant, often carrying out their struggle for justice under the Black Power slogan . Increasingly during the . 1960s black Americans carried out their struggles for justice with the Black .
 Huey Newton and Bobby Seale founded the Black Panthers in 1966 . They rejected the nonviolent, integrationist approach of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther Luther King Jr. In 1966, the Panthers were one of many Black Power organizations that rejected the idea of integration .
 The Black Panthers adopted a paramilitary style and focused on creating community services, such as free breakfasts for school children . The Black Panther movement was founded in 1968 .
 In 1967, the Black Panthers were involved in a shootout with police in Oakland, California, California . The incident occurred in the city of Oakland, which is home to the Black Panther movement .
 An officer was killed, and Newton, who was wounded, was convicted of manslaughter . Newton was wounded in the shooting, but was not killed . Newton, a wounded man, was found guilty of manslaughter in 2010 .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed racial segregation in public facilities and banned gender discrimination . The movement led to an array of important legislation . The Voting Rights Act made literacy tests for voting illegal, and the Voting
 The American Indian Movement tried to focus the nation's attention on treaty violations . The movement was formed in response to treaty violations by Native Americans .
 The group dramatized their cause by occupying Alcatraz Island, in 1969 . Founded in 1968 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the group was founded in 1968 .
 Between 1964 and 1968, the United States moved from an advisory role toward South Vietnam to a more active role . The U.S. was spearheading military action against communist-backed forces in the South known as the Viet Cong .
 Close to half a million U.S. military personnel were in Vietnam in 1968 . Over 16,000 Americans had been killed in the conflict .
 The Viet Cong proclaimed a cease-fire in conjunction with the annual three-day Vietnamese holiday known as Tet, scheduled to begin on January 30 . However, they instead infiltrated cities and towns across South Vietnam .
 The communist assaults were repelled, some with great loss of American lives . The U.S. was attacked by the Soviets in the early 1950s .
 The Viet Cong was effectively destroyed, but the military defeat ended up being a psychological and public relations victory for the communist forces . The defeat was a psychological victory for communist forces in Vietnam .
 Millions of Americans concluded that U.S. forces were unable to secure even the largest cities of South Vietnam . What little support remained for the war evaporated quickly .
 President Richard Nixon gradually turned over primary combat responsibilities to the South Vietnamese . President Nixon responded by gradually turning over combat duties to South Vietnamese forces .
 Antiwar activity increased during this period, particularly on America's college campuses . Unsatisfied with the rate of demilitarization, antiwar activity actually increased .
 By the end of 1969, more than 40,000 Americans had been killed in the conflict . The conflict was over the course of three decades .
 Attitudes toward patriotism and supporting the nation in wartime changed during the second half of the 1960s . Attitudes towards patriotism and support for the war changed during that era .
 A growing number aggressively questioned American foreign policy, and the soldier, traditionally a hero, fell in stature . The soldier's stature was diminished as a result of his actions .
 For the first time in American history, returning veterans faced job discrimination and other forms of bias . Returning veterans face job discrimination, according to CNN iReport .
 The Vietnam War and the rights of women and minorities, the political turmoil of the 1968 presidential election, changing sexual attitudes, increased drug use, and radically different styles in clothes strained not only the country as a whole but also individual families .
 With so many changes in American society, children and parents found themselves disagreeing over many areas of everyday life . Children and parents often disagree over issues such as parenting .
 Moral and religious issues were often at the heart of family conflicts . Moral and political issues were also at the center of family disputes .
 Sexual freedom, including pre-marital sex, multiple sexual relationships, and unmarried couples living together, proved difficult for many parents to tolerate . Sexual freedom was difficult for parents to accept .
 The 1968 race for the White House, ultimately won by Nixon, was one of the most polarizing in American history . Nixon's victory in the 1968 race was ultimately decided by a landslide victory .
 Eugene McCarthy attracted vehement support from young voters opposed to the Vietnam War . The assassination of Robert F Kennedy, the assassination of his brother, and widespread antiwar demonstrations at the Democratic Convention in Chicago, also helped .
 Americans split not only along party affiliation, but by age, race, views on women's rights, and U.S. foreign policy . Americans split along party affiliations, age and race, and views on foreign policy, among other things .
 The generation gap and other manifestations of national divisiveness would haunt the nation . For the rest of the decade, and long after, the generation gap would haunt . The nation would be haunted by the legacy of that generation gap .
 At the same time, there were many challenges facing the nation in the 1960s as well . At the time, the nation was facing many challenges .