 Major events included the Soviets attempt to break the U.S. blockade as they were bound to Cuba . Major events that had occurred during this crisis included the Soviet attempt .
 Both sides agreed to remove Cuban missiles in exchange for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . Both sides came to a compromise which consisted of removing the Soviet Union removing the Cuban missiles .
 The Soviet Union agreed to remove there IL-28 bomber from Cuba . The plane was removed from the Soviet Union's Cuba .
 Kennedy ordered a blockade of Cuba as a result of the discovery that the Soviet Union had planted missiles on the island . Kennedy had ordered the blockade after discovering that the Soviets had planted the missiles .
 An attempt by the Soviets to break the blockade would likely have sparked a military confrontation that could have quickly turned into a nuclear exchange . The blockade would have sparked military confrontation .
 This event was a very significant moment which impacted the Soviet Union as well as the United States due to the damage that was barely avoided . The United States and the USSR were barely avoided by the incident .
 It is clear that the number of nuclear weapons that were targeted at soviets from sites in Western Europe and Turkey caused the soviet Union to feel uneasy and live in fear . It was clear that . The number of . nuclear weapons . that were . targeted at . sovi
 They felt that the deployment of missiles in Cuba would be a way to level the playing field . They said they felt it was a way of leveling the playing fields in Cuba .
 Another key factor in the Soviet missile calamity was the hostile relationship between the United States and Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba's hostile relationship was a factor .
 The Kennedy administration had already launched one attack on the island, as well as the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . The Kennedy Administration had already attacked the island .
 Castro and Khrushchev viewed that launching the missiles was a affective method to avoid further U.S. aggression . Castro also believed that launching missiles would avoid further US aggression .
 The events that had occured at sea provided a positive sign that war could be avoided . However, they did nothing to address the problem of the missiles already in Cuba .
 Roberts believes that war should not occur and instead should be dealt with words . However, he realizes that countries are always fighting and therefore use their words to hurt, but in reality causes physical actions .
 Tensions had risen between the countries, continuing through the week due to the tie . Tensions between the two countries had risen throughout the week .
 As a message, an American military plane was shot down over Cuba, and in Florida a United States invasion force was prepared . The message was a message to the U.S. military plane . As a result of the shooting, an invasion force had been prepared .
 The fear of the unknown was deterring both sides of this crisis from developing a safe plan . Both sides of the crisis were trying to find a solution to the crisis .
 It is clear that due to these events both sides of this meaningless war were impacted significantly due to the conflict and lack of communication which was yet to be solved . Both sides of the war were affected by the conflict which was still to be resolved .
 The Soviet Union finally agreed to remove their IL-28 bombers which the placed in Cuba . Quarantine – increased controversy due to different perceptions on the Crisis .
 The United States uncovered the Soviet plan during routine surveillance flights in September of 1962 . President Kennedy issued a public warning against the offensive weapons in Cuba .
 Despite the warning, the U.S. continued to service Cuba, capturing pictures of highly advanced nuclear missiles under construction . Despite the warnings, the United States continued to servail Cuba .
 Cuba had developed a higher amount of mistrust with America creating more tensions between the two countries . Due to the U.S. unknown observance of Cuba, Cuba had become more suspicious of the United States .
 Kennedy decided he would not allow any dangerous or offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba . As a result of America’s founding of the nuclear missiles, the U.S. president decided not to allow dangerous or . offensive weapons .
 The U.S. decided to check on the progress of the Soviet Union's missile termination progress . Soon after this message was received by the Soviets, the United States decided to send a message .
 The United States was angered to see that they were still continuing their missiles and had not listened to their orders . The U.S. was angered that they continued to continue their missiles .
 America felt that the only option now was to attack Cuba and take down their missiles themselves . The U.S. felt that it was only possible to take down Cuba's missiles . America felt it was now only option was attack Cuba .
 This led to much controversy between the U.S. and the Soviets . The topic of whether to stop or continue their nuclear missiles was argued . The Soviets and the United States argued over whether to continue nuclear missiles .
 In the end, the Soviets decided to take down their missiles in Cuba, in return for the promise that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . The Soviets decided in the end that the United States would not be invading Cuba .
 The lack of communications between the soviets and the U.S. allowed much controversy argument . The sovets had little communication between them and the United States .
 Compromise between the U.S. and the Soviets – tensions decreased . The compromise between the United States and the Soviet Union which resulted in the Soviets removing cuban missiles, in exchange for the America’s promise not to invade Cuba .
 Despite enormous tension, Soviet and American leaders found a way out of the impasse . Despite the enormous tensions, Soviet leaders managed to find a way to reach an agreement .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for a promise by U.S. leaders not to invade Cuba . During the Cold War, the Americans and Soviets had exchanged letters and other communications .
 If this compromise did not occur, it is certain that nuclear war would have occured . If this . happened, it would have been certain that . nuclear war . would have occurred .
 Cuba was still stuck in the middle of the Soviets and the United States . Luckily for Cuba, this event had saved them from war and destruction allowing them to continue their lives .
 President Kennedy made little effort to conceal his continued desire to see Castro overthrown . He had already resisted the Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 . President Kennedy wanted to overthrow Castro .
 Documents dating to April 1962 described a plan to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro . “Operation Mongoose” was scheduled for October 1962 . Cuba was able to discover documents from April 1962 .
 Khrushchev proposed that the Soviet Union install missiles in Cuba aimed at the U.S. which Castro agreed with . As a result of the proposal, Castro agreed to the installation of the missiles .
 This had increases the tensions between the soviet union and the united states . This had increased the tensions . This led to the rise in tensions between Russia and the United States .
 The missiles were terminated resulting in both countries reaching a realization of the dangers they had escaped . The leaders of both countries desired to avoid future confrontations .
 A hot line was developed between Moscow and Washington to decrease the possibility of accidental wars such as this one . As a way to do so, a hot line has been developed between Russia and Washington .
 The two began to work toward the creation and signing of nuclear test ban treaties . They also began to sign agreements to limit arms sales to Third World countries whose rivalries might create conflict .
 It was understood that in any future conflict directly involving either U.S. or Soviet troops, the other superpower would use only local forces to fight them by proxy .
 The policy, followed in both Vietnam and Afghanistan, outlived both the Kennedy and Khrushchev administrations, proving that it had a lasting effect on both countries .
 Showed how this had impacted the relationship between the two countries positively rather than negatively . Also showed how it had impacted their relationship positively . Showed that the relationship had been positive rather than negative .
 The Soviets had impacted the crisis by attempting to break that United States blockade of Cuba in order to make it there . The U.S. had been trying to break the blockade by trying to get to Cuba .
 The Soviets were also involved in a compromise with the United States in order to prevent nuclear war from breaking out . The Soviets and the U.S. were involved in the compromise .
 This was important in developing an agreement in order to keep the future of both nations safe from war, as well as to keep conflict away . The agreement was important to keep both countries safe from conflict, and to work without war .
 The Soviet Union also agreed to remove their IL-28 bombers from Cuba . This is important because it also impacted Cuba by agreeing to remove them from the country .
 These events and occurrences had affected the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union by preventing the biggest nuclear war, and allowing issues to be resolved such as the nuclear compromise . The Cuban Missile crisis has influenced this control and change .
 Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Send us a photo of yourself to the gallery for a gallery of your best .
 Professional experts can help Ask expert for help . Or Give us your email address and we’ll send this sample to our new Facebook page .
 By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Agreement . Email Send me the sample by email email jennifer.com .
 Use the sample to test your knowledge of products and services available at www.mailonline.co.uk . Use the supplied information to help us understand our shopping habits . At the bottom of the page, please contact the Samaritans for details .
 Use our extensive database of written samples to find the inspiration or research you’re looking for . If you are such a student, you can use our database to find out what research you need .
 You can also use our tools to come up with interesting topics and points to argue in your paper . Use these tools to help students understand topics in their paper .