 This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness . See also the Cuba history of the bombs list of colonial governors of Cuba and list of presidents .
 His troops withdraw after being decimated by fevers and raids from Spanish troops . Spanish troops decimated his troops . His troops were decimated .
 Skirmishes between British and Spanish fleets end indecisively on a strategic level . Skirmish between Britain and Spain ends indecisive on strategic level.
 Spanish Captain-General Arsenio Martínez Campos is defeated at Peralejo . He leaves Cuba in January 1887 .
 Upon Menocal's reelection, José Miguel Gómez and other Liberals launch a revolt known as the Chambelona War . Menocal was reelected to President Menocal but was defeated .
 They are defeated by 14 August in military operations that include the first use of military aviation in Cuba . They were defeated by military operations .
 A provisional government is established, with Carlos Manuel de Céspedes y Quesada as president . A provisional president is also in charge of a provisional government .
 January 18 Manuel Márquez Sterling is president for a few hours, followed by Carlos Mendieta . January 18 is president of the country for the first time . January 19 is president again for a time .
 Eduardo Chibás, leader of the Ortodoxo party and mentor of Fidel Castro, commits suicide during a live radio broadcast . The party's first ambassador is Andrei Gromyko, who was the first ambassador .
 November Batista dissolves parliament and is elected constitutional president unopposed . Batista was elected as president of the Republic of Cuba in 1945 . He was the first president to be elected in Cuba .
 Brothers Fidel and Raúl Castro were introduced to Che Guegarara in Mexico City . The Castro brothers were in Mexico at the time .
 The yacht Granma sets out from Mexico to Cuba with 82 men on board, including Raúl Castro, Che Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos . Ex-president Prío exiled to Miami .
 By August, the rebels had defeated the army's advance and captured a huge amount of weaponry . The rebels had captured a large amount of weapons .
 December Guevara, William Alexander Morgan, and forces of the Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil, an organization of university students, attacked Santa Clara .
 Various urban rebels, mainly associated with Directorio, seize Havana 2 January . Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos arrive in Havana . Directorio is associated with directorio .
 The Cuban government enacts the Agrarian Reform Law, seizing large holdings of agricultural land and redistributing it to smaller land owners . The law was passed by the Cuban government in May .
 Plane carrying Camilo Cienfuegos disappears during a night flight from Camagüey to Havana . Dorticós serves until 2 December 1976 . 28 October plane with Camilo Cienfügos disappeared during night flight .
 President Eisenhower orders CIA director Allen Dulles to train Cuban exiles for a covert invasion of Cuba . President Eisenhower ordered the CIA director to train exiles to prepare for the invasion . CIA director Dulles ordered the training of exiles in Cuba .
 The scheme continues until U.S. airports are closed to Cuban flights during 1962 . The scheme continued until the end of 1962 .
 March Former rebel comandante Humberto Sorí Marin and Catholic leaders shot . March . March Former rebels fought for independence from the Catholic church .
 United States threatens to invade Cuba if the bases are not dismantled . U.S. warns that a nuclear attack launched from Cuba would be considered a Soviet attack requiring full retaliation .
 The Family Code bill establishes the official goal of equal participation in the home . The bill was passed in the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 May Fifty Cuban military personnel sent to Ethiopia . October 21 October Huber Matos was released from prison after serving out his full term . April–October The Mariel Boatlift took place .
 Cuban authorities allow up to 125,000 people to depart Cuba by boat from Mariel harbor for the United States . The Cuban and United States governments agree to halt the exodus in October .
 He praises the Varela project and criticizes the U.S. embargo . He also criticizes a U.N. embargo on Cuba .
 Hurricane Dennis causes widespread destruction in Cuba and leaves 16 people dead . Hurricane Dennis caused widespread devastation in Cuba in July .
 U.S. President Barack Obama and Raúl Castro re-establish diplomatic ties between the two countries . Fidel Castro's death of Fidel Castro is announced in November .