 First, the U.S. placed medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles at bases in Turkey, which threatened the Soviet Union . Second, the United States placed the missiles in Turkey in response to Soviet Union threats .
 Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro overthrew the pro-US government of Cuba in 1959 . Second, he overthrew Fidel Castro's government in 1959, and the U.S. government in Cuba in 1961 .
 The U.S. government backed a failed CIA invasion of Cuba in April 1961 at the Bay of Pigs . Third, the United States government backed the failed CIA operation .
 Nikita Khrushchev increased Soviet military support to Cuba to place pressure on the U.S. After the debacle at the Bay of Pigs, the Soviet Union increased military support there . The Soviet Union was upset by the presence of nuclear missiles in Turkey .
 In August 1962 Khrushchev sought to equalize the strategic balance by building intermediate range and medium range ballistic missile sites in Cuba . In addition to bolstering the Castro regime, in August 1962, in Cuba, the sites were also built .
 Once the missile sites are operational they could strike almost any major city in the continental U.S. and Canada . With that country located only 90 miles from Florida, the sites could strike anywhere in the United States .
 When U.S. intelligence agencies became aware of the construction activity, confirmation was needed . The construction was confirmed by the United States intelligence .
 Strategic Air Command tasked two officers from the 4080th Strategic Wing to fly U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba to verify the presence of the missile sites .
 The two aircraft flew over Cuba on October 14 and 15, 1962, and photographs taken from the flights confirmed their construction . The aircraft were built in Cuba .
 On October 21, 1962, the 363d Tactical Reconnaissance Wing deployed RF-101 and RB-66 aircraft to MacDill AFB, Florida, from Shaw AFB, South Carolina . The 363d tactical reconnaissance wing deployed the aircraft from Shaw Air Force Shaw AFB in South Carolina.
 On October 26, the 363d flew its first low-level reconnaissance missions . The 363d was the first unit to fly a reconnaissance mission .
 The wing gathered significant intelligence on the sites over the next three weeks . The wing uncovered the location of IL-28 Soviet bombers and air-to-air and surface to-air missile sites .
 SAC maintained nearly sixty nuclear-armed heavy bombers on airborne alert, and placed all of its available intercontinental ballistic missiles on alert to launch at any moment . SAC continued U-2 missions to gather more information .
 The command also moved its medium and heavy bombers from the southeast United States . Tactical Air Command fighter aircraft such as F-100s and F-105s were also moved .
 The Continental Air Defense Command increased the number of air defense sorties flown along the Gulf Coast . In addition, the Continental Air Defence Command increased sorties .
 Over a two-day period the USAF airlifted approximately 2,000 marines and 1,400 tons of equipment to Naval Air Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba .
 The U.S. imposed a naval blockade on all military equipment shipped to Cuba . The blockade was designed to prepare for a possible aerial attack against Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and their diplomatic and political advisors maneuvered to resolve the crisis . President Kennedy and his colleagues were able to do so to end the Korean crisis .
 Kennedy did support a conventional air attack and invasion of Cuba if the Soviets fail to remove the missiles . Kennedy did not believe a nuclear strike against Cuba was likely because of Soviet retaliation .
 Khrushchev promised to remove the missiles if the U.S. lifted the blockade and pledged not to invade Cuba . The world hovered on the brink of nuclear war for nearly two weeks . The United States lifted a blockade on Cuba and promised to lift a Cuban blockade .
 He then demanded the U.S. remove its nuclear-armed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles from Turkey . He then raised the stakes by demanding the United States remove the missiles .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and promised to remove the missiles from Turkey . After much debate, Robert F. Kennedy agreed to remove missiles .
 The Soviets accepted the offer and soon began shipping the missiles back to the Soviet Union . The crisis was brought to an end, bringing the crisis to a close .
 Within a week the USAF had quickly shifted from peacetime status to full combat alert . As he noted, within a week, the USAF has quickly shifted .
 The Lockheed U-2 photographed the secret placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba in 1962 . The U.2 aircraft photographed the missile placement in Cuba .
 Reconnaissance missions flown by the U-2 monitored movement of Soviet ships and the dismantling of the intermediate range ballistic missiles . The U.2 was the first aircraft to fly over the Soviet Union .