 The Cold War Divides the World . Third World, Middle East, Third World and Third World are at warring sides .
 The first was the industrialized capitalist nations, including the U.S. and its allies . The second was the industrialized capitalist nations . The United States and allies were the first industrialized nations .
 The Third World consisted of developing nations, often newly independent, who were not aligned with either superpower . Developed nations were often aligned with neither superpower .
 These nonaligned countries provided yet another arena for competition between the Cold War superpowers . The nonaligned nations provided another arena of competition .
 The Third World nations were located in Latin America, Asia, and Africa . Use a chart to list main ideas .
 They points about Third World were economically poor and politically unstable . Third World was economically poor, politically unstable and economically poor . They were also politically unstable, they said .
 They also suffered from ethnic conflicts and lack of technology and education, they say . They say they suffered from lack of education, ethnic conflicts, and ethnic conflicts .
 Each needed a political and economic system around Country Conflict which to build its society . Each needed to have a political system around country conflict to build their society .
 Soviet-style communism and U.S.-style free-market Cuba democracy were the main choices in Cuba . The Cuban government was elected by the U.N. to replace the Soviet Union with Cuba .
 The United States, the Soviet Union, and, some cases, China, used a variety of techniques to gain influence in the Third World . U.S. and Soviet Union used various methods to gain control of the world .
 U.S. and Soviet intelligence agencies engaged in covert activities . CIA and KGB engaged in various covert, or secret, activities, ranging from spying to assassination attempts .
 The United States also gave military aid, built schools, set up programs to combat poverty, and sent volunteer workers to many developing nations .
 The Soviets offered military and technical assistance, mainly to India and Egypt . It was mainly offered to help India, Egypt and the rest of Europe .
 Association of Nonaligned Nations also needed assistance . Other developing nations also needed help .
 They were important players in the Cold War competition between the United States, the Soviet Union, and later, China . They became important players during Cold War .
 Not all Third World countries wished to play a role in the Cold War . The Cold War was a Cold War between the U.S. and Russia .
 Indonesia, a populous island nation in Southeast Asia, also struggled to stay uninvolved . Indonesia is one of the most populous countries in the region .
 In 1955, it hosted many leaders from Asia and Africa at the Bandung Conference . The country hosted the conference in Bandung .
 They met to form what they called a “third force” of independent countries, or nonaligned nations . They met in the 1980s to form a "third force" of independent nations . Nonaligned nations are nonaligned countries or independent countries .
 Some nations, such as India and Indonesia, were able to maintain neutrality .
 Others took sides with the superpowers or played competing sides against each other . But others took sides or played sides with each other in the war .
 What differentiated the Cold War from other 20th century conflicts was that the two enemies did not engage in a shooting war . The Cold War was the first time the U.S. and its enemies engaged in shooting war in the 50 years .
 Using strategies shown below, the teams pursued their rivalry by using strategies . The strategies are shown below .
 Each side spied on the both the Soviet Union and the United States . The two superpowers tried to win allies by giving financial aid to other nations .
 Two Soviet Union to build the Aswan High Soviet downing of a U.S. U-2 spy plane examples of this were NATO and the Dam . in 1960 .
 The word surrogate means substitute to try to win support overseas . Both superpowers used propaganda to try and win support abroad .
 Although the United States and the example, Radio Free Europe had to back down . The U.S. went to the brink of war to make the U.K. go to war .
 Communist-led control after bloody pilot Francis Gary rebels wars in Korea Powers in 1960 . Communists retain or gain control of U.S. U.2 .
 The United States SOVIET UNION GERMANY and the Soviet Union N O RT H bring the world to ASIA AMERICA the brink of nuclear war during the Cuban NORTH 40°N UNITED missile crisis in 1962 .
 KOREA TURKEY STATES GREECE CHINA IRAN SOUTH ATLANTI C OCE A N KORE A N . EGYPT PACI FI C CUBA Tropic of Cancer . OCEAN PACIFI C AFRICA O CEAN VI
 Britain helps MALAYSIA aid anticolonial Indonesia repress a 0° Equator struggles in Congo CONGO Communist uprising SOUTH , Mozambique in 1965 . Britain helped MALaySIA help repress an Indonesian uprising in Congo . Britain also helped repress the
 After World War II, rapid industrialization, population growth, and a lingering gap between the rich and the poor led Latin American nations to seek aid from both superpowers . Confrontations in Latin America led to the rise of industrialization and rapid population growth .
 Many of these countries alternated between shortlived democracy and harsh military rule . At the same time, many of these nations alternated with short-lived democracy .
 American businesses backed leaders who protected U.S. interests but also often oppressed their people . American businesses back leaders who often often oppressed people .
 After the war, communism and nationalistic feelings inspired revolutionary movements . Communism and nationalist feelings inspired nationalistic movements . The Soviet Union was defeated in 1945 .
 The U.S. provided military and economic assistance to anti-Communist dictators . In response, the United States provided military assistance to dictators .
 In the 1950s, Cuba was ruled by an unpopular dictator, Fulgencio Batista, who had U.S. support . Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution was born in 1959 . The Cuban revolution was Fidel Castro's first in Cuba .
 Cuban resentment led to a popular revolution, which overthrew Batista in January 1959 . The revolution led to the overthrow of the Batista .
 At first, many people praised Castro for bringing social reforms to Cuba and improving the economy . Castro's reforms were brought in by the Cuban government in 1959 .
 He suspended elections, jailed CUBA or executed his opponents, and tightly controlled the press . He also suspended elections and jailed his opponents . He closed elections, suspended elections or executed opponents .
 When Castro nationalized the Cuban economy, he took over U.S.-owned sugar mills and refineries . He nationalized Cuba's economy and nationalized its own sugar industry .
 Eisenhower ordered an embargo on all trade with Cuba . In response, Eisenhower ordered the embargo .
 Castro’s forces easily defeated the invaders, humiliating the U.S. The United States was humiliated by the invasion of Cuba . Castro's forces were easily defeated by the invaders .
 Khrushchev secretly began to build 42 missile sites in Cuba in July 1962 . The sites were built by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy declared that missiles so close to the U.S. mainFidel Castro land were a threat . Fidel Castro land was a threat to the United States . President Kennedy declared .
 Cuba did not and does not intend to be in the middle of a conflict between the East and the West, Cuban President Castro Castro says . Castro: Cuba does not want to be part of the conflict between East and West .
 I am not interested in all one of national sovereignty. Our problem is above . Personally, I . am not . interested in the issue of sovereignty . Our problem was above .
 Cuba does not mean to get power nor do I envisage assuming involved in the Cold War it at any time. Cuba is not interested in getting power nor getting involved in Cold War .
 Fidel Castro and Cuba were deeply involved in the Cuban revolution . Castro was deeply involved with the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 The United States and the Soviet Union are on a collision course . Despite this declaration, Castro has demand for the removal of Soviet missiles put the United ruled Cuba as a dictator .
 Soviet aid to Cuba, however, ended abruptly with the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 . The Soviet Union broke up with Cuba in 1991, ending aid to the country .
 Castro refused to adopt economic reforms or give up power . But the aging Castro refused an economic or political reform . Castro was forced to step down as Cuba's leader .
 The U.S. had funded the Nicaraguan dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza and his family since 1933 . The United States had supported Batista in Cuba .
 The Sandinistas, however, gave assistance to other Marxist rebels in nearby El Salvador . Sandinista's government gave aid to Marxist rebels .
 The U.S. supported Nicaraguan anti-Communist forces . To help El Salvadoran govern, the United States supported Nicaragua . The Contras or contrarevolucionarios .
 The civil war in Nicaragua lasted more than a decade and seriously weakened port from the the the country’s economy . United States switch its sup. United States switched its focus on the country's economy .
 Oil industry wealth fueled a growing clash between traditional Islamic values and modern Western materialism . Religious and Secular values clash in Iran as oil industry wealth fuels clash .
 Iran’s leader, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, embraced Western governments and wealthy Western oil companies . After World War II, Iran embraced the West after the war and embraced it . Iran is now the world's most powerful state in the world .
 They nationalized a British-owned oil company and, in 1953, forced the shah to flee . The shah was forced to flee in 1953 . They were nationalized by the government .
 Fearing Iran might turn to the Soviets for Analyzing Motives support, the U.S. helped restore the shah to power . The shah was overthrown by the Shah in 1979 .
 The United States Supports Secular Rule . With United States support, the shah western supported the Shah . The shah ized his country .
 The shah tried to weaken the political influence of Iran’s conservative Muslim leaders, known as ayatollahs . Ayatollah leaders opposed Western influences . Shah was the prime minister of Iran's first government .
 Ayatollah Ruholla Khomeini was living in exile in Iran . He was the leader of this religious opposition, Ayatoll Ruhollah Khomeinis .
 Iranians rioted in every major city in late 1978 . Spurred by his taperecorded messages, Iranians riot in cities across the world .
 A triumphant Khomeini returned to establish an Islamic state and to export Iran’s militant form of Islam . A triumphant return to Iran, he returned to become a leader of Iran .
 Strict adherence to Islam ruled Khomeini’s domestic policies . The Ayatollahollah was assassinated by the U.S. in 1968 .
 The shah's hatred of the U.S. was at the heart of his foreign policy . The United States supported for the shah, Iran's prime minister says .
 In 1979, with the ayatollah’s blessing, young Islamic revolutionaries seized the United States embassy in Tehran . The embassy was seized in 1979 with the help of the Ayatollah's blessing .
 More than 60 Americans were taken hostage by the Taliban in 1979 . They took over 60 Americans hostage and demanded the United States force the shah to face trial . The Taliban are now known as the Taliban .
 Khomeini encouraged Muslim radicals elsewhere to overthrow their secular taking of U.S. governments . Khomeinis supported the U.K. government in the United States .
 The policy heightened tensions between Islamic Iran and its neighbor and territorial rival, Iraq . Intended to unify Muslims, this policy was aimed at unifying Muslims . Iran's policy has raised tensions between Iran and Iraq .
 Saddam Hussein militants in Tehran governed Iraq as a secular state in 1979 . A military leader, Saddam Hussein . in Tehran . in 1979, he ruled the country .
 The United States secretly gave aid to both sides because it did not want the balance of power in the region to change . The U.S. gave aid because it wanted to keep the balance in power at bay .
 The Soviet Union, on the other hand, had long been a supporter of Iraq . The U.S. had long supported Iraq .
 A million Iranians and Iraqis died in the war before the UN negotiated a ceasefire in 1988 . A million people died during the war between Iran and Iraq . The UN negotiated an end to the conflict in 1988 after a million died .
 Afghanistan maintained its independence from both the neighboring Soviet Union and the United States . The country has been in the grip of the Taliban for several years .
 In the 1950s, however, Soviet influence in the country began to increase . In the 1960s, Russia began to be more influential in the Soviet Union .
 In the late 1970s, a Muslim revolt threatened to topple Afghanistan’s Communist The Taliban regime . The Taliban was overthrown by the Taliban regime in Afghanistan .
 The Soviets expected to prop up the Afghan Communists were among the mujahideen rebels and quickly withdraw . Islamic religious students, or taliban, were students .
 The U.S. fought the Soviet occupation of Vietnam . Instead, the Soviets found themselves stuck in Vietnam .
 Various groups of Vietcong in Vietnam, rebel forces outmaneuvered a military . Students loosely organized themselves during a civil war among students . Students were students in Vietnam .
 In 1996, one of these groups, ment in Vietnam considered the Soviet invasion a threat to Middle Eastern oil called the Taliban, seized power . In what ways rebels, called mujahideen, or holy warriors, fought on . the Soviet withdrawal in 1989 were United States involve .
 President Jimmy Carter warned the Soviets established an Islamic government in Afghanistan against any attempt to gain control of the Persian Gulf . Jimmy Carter said the Soviets should not try to establish a government in the country .
 He imposed a protest the invasion, he stopped United States grain shipments to the repressive Soviet Union . He also ordered a United States boycott of the 1980 women, and failed to improve the Moscow Olympics . But they imposed a boycott, he failed to .
 Mikhail Gorbachev acknowledged the war’s devastating sanctuary to international Islamic costs . They also acknowledged the cost of the war, including the loss of life in the Middle East .
 In 2001, an anti-terrorist internal unrest and economic problems were tearing apart coalition led by the United States drove them from power . The Soviet Union itself was driven from power by the U.S. coalition .
 For either Cuba, Nicaragua, or Iran, write an annotated time line of events discussed in this section . Use this time line to chronicle the events you witnessed in these countries .
 Research the effects of the U.S. trade embargo on Cuba . Find out more about the impact of the embargo in Cuba .
 Write a two-paragraph opinion paper on whether it would be in the best interests of the United States to lift that embargo .