 On November 3, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik II, a satellite with a passenger . The Space Race continues . The space race continues .
 Other animals that have helped to “pave the way” of space travel are monkeys, chimpanzees, rats, mice, fish, ants, spiders, spider, bullfrogs, honeybees, and jellyfish .
 America and the Soviet Union were constantly trying to be the first nation to accomplish different aspects of space travel . The Space Race Continues…
 Alan Shepard, Jr., became famous for being the first American in space . Shepard was first American to go into space in 1961 . Shepard became the first person in space in 1966 .
 The space race continued on, and the Soviets and Americans were sending more and more satellites into space . Alan Shepard, John Glenn and Alan Shepard were the first Americans to enter space .
 In 1961, John F Kennedy at 43 years old became the youngest person to ever be elected as the President of the United States . Kennedy was 43 when he was elected to be president of the U.S. at 43 .
 When Kennedy became president, he jumped right in to the Cold War and the fight against communism . He jumped right into the fight . Kennedy was the 35th president .
 President Kennedy responded to this threat by setting up a blockade around Cuba . Kennedy’s response was to the threat of a Cuban uprising .
 President Kennedy told the ship to turn around, and President Khrushchev told JFK to lift the blockade . JFK would not lift the embargo until the missile site in Cuba was dismantled . JFK refused to lift blockade until missile site was dismantled in Cuba . JFK told the U.S. to
 Without any attack occurring on either side, the Soviet Union gave in and had the missile site in Cuba dismantled . All the troops were allowed to return home .
 In 1954, a new hotspot developed just after the signing of a truce between North and South Korea in 1953 . The Cold War starts to heat up in 1954 .
 Eisenhower and JFK, still held true to Truman’s doctrine to help any country struggling against a communist takeover . Truman's doctrine still holds true to the doctrine of the U.S. helping any nation struggling against communist takeover.
 Vice President Johnson was sworn into office that same day as the nation was mourning the loss of their President . President Lyndon B Johnson was assassinated .
 When Johnson became President, the Vietcong were winning the war in South Vietnam . The 36th President was the President of the United States .
 Many Americans became divided on the issue of war . Americans are divided as well as Americans as well, as well .
 Some believed we needed to keep fighting communism in S Vietnam, others felt that the Vietnamese had to settle the war themselves . Some believed that the war needed to be settled in Vietnam .
 Protests and marches against the war (and for the war) started all over the nation . Protests, marches and marches were held in support of the war .
 The division and problems that the War in Vietnam was causing in America was enough to convince President Johnson to not run for a second term of presidency . Johnson was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 President Nixon tried to end the war quickly by bombing North Vietnam more heavily than before . Nixon also sent soldiers to the neighboring country of Cambodia .