 The myth of "plausible deniability" was the caveat that determined the CIA would be the principal implementing arm for the anti-Castro effort . Policy makers feared censure by the United Nations and/or the Organization of American States .
 This volume describes the Agency's organization designed to accomplish the assigned task . It records the relationship between the Agency and other government components (State and the military in particular) between the agency and the White House .
 Emphasis also is focused on the drastic change in the concept, of the operation between the spring and fall off I960 . Emphasis is also on the dramatic change of the concept .
 Records of policy level meetings which considered such items as funding the operation, possible use of United States personnel in combat roles, the use of U.S. bases for training or for operations . Corporate interests played an active {sometimes overactive) role in support of the anti-Castro
 The reader of this volume should gain some insights to the character of various of the principal actors — Agency and non-Agency — who were involved most closely with the Government's anti-Castro policy during the period from its inception through the close of the Eisenhower administration .
 The author was in no way associated with the operation or the Directorate of Plans . He hopes that the presentation of the evidence has been as free from bias as possible .
 The author wishes to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the other two members of the CIA History Staff . The author also acknowledges the contributions of Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Johnson .
 Without their unfailing willingness to perform either the ""substantive research or the grimly mechanical tasks required in preparing a volume such as this, the task could have been interminable," says the author .
 For any errors of fact or questionable interpretations, the author alone is responsible for the author of this article .
 By early 1960 the USG officially adopted a covert action program designed to remove the Castro government from control of the island of Cuba . The U.S. officially adopted the program in early 1960 .
 The nature of the Agency's interest in' answers to these questions is reflected in various of the records for the period beginning in the mid19 50' s when it appeared that the Agency depended in considerable part on the reporting from the American Embassy offices .
 The SIM report is nothing more than a summary of allegations and accusations made against Fidel Castro during the period 1948-1950 . NAR A CJF-O DAT E %'gfiti'h TOP OCCRCT, The SIM Report .
 This summary has apparently been slanted in an effort to make Castro a ""Rojo,"" but the result is a rather poor one .
 Agency funds also were used to support the efforts of an anti-Communist organization engaged principally in propaganda activities . Agency funds were used in support of anti-communist organizations .
 McLean suggested that Kirkpatrick helped organize BRAC, but the present author has not confirmed this story . McLean suggests Kirkpatrick may have helped organize the organization .
 This would have to be done covertly, and any results achieved not ever publicly announced or certainly not advertised until after the election . Any results achieved either not ever public announced or not advertised .
 Any public attempt to bring peace would be foredoomed to failure by each side . Each side probably indicating exorbitant demands and then being unable to withdraw from its announced position . Any public peace attempt would be likely to fail by both sides .
 We are responsible for keeping order in the hemisphere quite aside from the proprieties, and a bolder policy in that regard seems indicated . But we are responsible .
 At least two agents were successfully placed in PSP ranks, and in March 1958, one Agency officer managed to join the Castro forces in the mountains for a period of two weeks .
 In both instances, the Agency representatives returned unharmed; and both reported on the ""radical"" and anti-American nature of the Castro movement .
 According to one source, Wiecha found ""definite communist overtones"" among the Raul Castro forces . According to a source, one source said there were 'definite Communist overtones' among the forces .
 Whether Castro's contingent was communist oriented or not, others such as Adolf Berle and his friends (both in and out of State Department) continued to reflect their concern about the possible ways to combat the growing strength of the Castro movement .
 Agency's fears about the Castro movement were increasing at the time of the CIA's fears .
 Alfred Cox suggested that perhaps the wisest move for the Agency would be to join Castro . Cox suggested the Agency should join the Castro government .
 Cox: It was apparent that since Batista was on the way out, we should now try to remedy Castro's hostile attitude toward the U.S. Cox: Castro's attitude was because of our efforts to prop up Batista . Cox: Since Batista's departure, U.
 A practical way to protect United States interests in this matter would be to make secret contact with Castro, assure him of the United States sympathy withysome of his objectives, and offer him support .
 Obviously, the support must be given covertly so as not to endanger U.S. relations with Batista . The support must not be given to the Batista government so not to jeopardize relations with the country .
 The most effective means of help to Castro would be arms and ammunition . The Castro regime would be the most effective way to help the Castro regime .
 Air dropping of top nr.cn rr NAR A CJ^O DATE. ne National Arcnivej IUF ShLRhl.hl .
 Allowing a shipload of equipment manned by a Cuban crew to evade our Coast Guard would probably be a better method . Allowing Cuba to evade the U.S. Coast Guard is probably a better way .
 The most secure means of help would be giving the money to Castro, who could then purchase his own arms . Castro could then be given the cash to buy his own weapons .
 Three Catholic priests have joined Fidel Castro forces in the Sierra Maestra . One has joined Raul Castro and his troops in Sierra Cristal . Another has joined the forces in Sierra Marrovia .
 The rebel forces under the Castros, therefore, have four chaplains, while the entire Cuban Army does not have a single chaplain .
 OCCRCT traveling to Miami with William Snow, an Assistant Secretary of State, and Henry Holland, formerly a Deputy Assistant Secretary . State, Col. Col. Henry Holland and William Snow .
 Pawley was a long-time acquaintance and friend of Batista from the days when Pawley had been running the Cubana Airline . Pawley and Batista had been friends for years .
 In return for Batista's support for a friendly military junta, the Department of State and Agency agreed that Batista should be provided safety for himself, his friends, and his close cronies . The junta was nominally to be responsible for his ouster .
 Batista also was to be provided protection for his personal assets in Cuba . Batista was also to be protected by the government of Cuba .
 Pawley did undertake the mission to see Batista in Cuba . Following the meeting in Miami, Pawley went to Cuba to meet Batista .
 Cuban Foreign Minister strongly supported the proposals Pawley indicated he was going to make . Arriving in Havana on 8 December, he had a series of preliminary meetings with the Cuban foreign minister .
 The Foreign Minister told Pawley that it was unlikely that Batista would accept the proposals . Unfortunately, however, Pawley was told that it would be unlikely to accept .
 Batista agreed with much of Pawley' s analysis of situation, but said he could not take the junta way out . Batista made no promises, and went through the reasons why he couldn't possibly give up the office .
 A representative of the Archbishop of Havana, Father Bez Chebebe, approached the American Consul in Santiago to float some proposals for resolving the differences between the two countries .
 Both Fidel Castro and United States interests had important stake in sugar crop . Both undoubtedly wish to resolve problems caused by present situation . U.S. interests have important stake of sugar crop and both undoubtedly wish resolve .
 There are matters now mostly minor on both sides which have been sources mutual irritation and misunderstanding and that these should be eliminated soonest . Father considers future relations between the two parties inevitable .
 Operation this nature could pay big future dividends if fully qualified person could be found for job and dispatched quickly . Operation this kind of operation will pay big dividends if properly qualified person is found and dispatched .
 Castro and his movement will be important political forces for a long time to come . Regardless how we may feel about Castro or his movement, both will be an important political force in the U.S.
 Perhaps candidate could be found through National Catholic Welfare Organization . Perhaps candidate should be found by National Catholic Worker Organization .
 WH hoped to get anti-Batista and anti-Castro dissidents armed in time to prevent Castro from taking over the government if Batista should suddenly resign or decide to flee the country .
 The President apparently indicated that he had not been fully aware of the positions of State and CIA . He suggested that meetings of the Special Group under NSC 5412/2 should be held on a weekly basis with Cuba to be a regular subject for discussion .
 Gordon Gray and Allen Dulles had some differences of opinion concerning the advisability of reading other individuals into the act . The two men disagreed on whether to read people into their acts .
 The President's Board of Consultants (later the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board) was made party to the discussions . But Dulles strongly suggested that there was a significant difference between the discussions which were intended for the Special Group * 5412 on Covert Operations, and the PFIA
 Dulles made the point that if the Board of Consultants was going to get involved in the details of planned covert operations, they were then in a position of reviewing U.S. foreign policy . Dulles said that if they were involved in covert operations they would then be in a
 The discussxon also seems to have verged on the right of Congress to attempt to oversee covert operations . Eisenhower expressed himself very strongly, noting that such action by Congress would be an infringement of his prerogative as President .
 At 3:40 on the afternoon of 31 December 1958, there was another high level meeting attended by Messrs. Inaj NAR A CJ&O D ATE_3 .
 Herter, Murphy, and Rubottom, Department of State; Irwin, Defense; Burke, CNO; General Cabell, DDCI; and Gordon Gray at which the Cuban situation was again discussed .
 Even as the meeting was in progress, Batista was preparing to flee Cuba . Possible United States action, including direct intervention by United States Marines, was among the topics discussed .
 There also was some suggestion that the United States take the responsibility for naming members to a junta to succeed Batista .
 Central Intelligence Agency suggested for the firgfc time that a Castro victory might ‘not be in the best interests of the U.S. of the United States .
 Intelligence experts backed and filled for a number of months, events were gradually driving them to the conclusion that with the coming' of Castro, Communism had penetrated this hemisphere . Though our intelligence experts filled and filled, they were eventually convinced that Communism had infiltrated this hemisphere, they said .
 The Station seemed assured that it was cognizant of all of Castro's movements, especially on the developing military capabilities .
 The U.S. Army suggested that the Station provide support for the Army's covert collection of military intelligence under commercial cover in Havana . COS took strong exception to the proposals, emphasizing its own capabilities .
 COS was overruled by Headquarters, however, General Cabell assured the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence of the Army that while he was aware that Havana had objected, the COS nonetheless had been ""instructed"" to cooperate .
 General Erskine (Army Special Forces) believed that a ""color bar"" did exist in the Caribbean area . In a memorandum to the Chief ,VWes tern Hemisphere Division, Al Cox, Chief, Paramilitary Division, reported — without ever using the term ""black""
 Many serious observers feel his regime will collapse within a matter of months . Unless he gets a strong helping hand from the United States, many serious observers say his regime is likely to collapse .
 Students, and the masses in America to support his revolution. A^i; Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A Cje-O .
 COS emphasized that Headquarters should make nd mistake that the Castro. Castro. Headquarters should not make a mistake that Castro. headquarters should make . a mistake .
 The Cuban Government was heavily infiltrated with Communists . There was little question about who would control the Cuban Government .
 It would be unwise to assume from the minor indications to date that Fidel has undergone a serious change of heart as a result of his visit .
 Despite Castro's apparent simplicity, sincerity, and eagerness to reassure the U.S. public, there is little KAR A Cj&O *'"" DA TCTffizft 3 3 *3f J>BCKbl .
 The Cuban president has gained a valuable knowledge of American public reaction . From his experience, he has gained valuable knowledge about American reaction .
 With all his appearance of naivete"", unsophistication, and ignorance on many matters, he is clearly a strong personality and a born leader of great personal courage and conviction, he says .
 Castro remains an enigma, and we should await his decisions on specific matters before assuming a more optimistic view than heretofore about the possibility of developing a relationship with him and his government . While we certainly know him better than before, we should wait for him to make a decision .
 The demonstrations obviously welcome, but possibly most significant aspect is demonstration once again, enormous power Castro had . Castro, who with few words made antiCommunism popular position. With few words, he made anti-Communist position .
 Critics speculating that current stand is sop intended to make it more difficult for U.S. interests . By same token he could reverse trend at any time .
 Vice-President Nixon had told Castro that unless he broke his alliance with the Communists, the U.S. would cut off economic aid to Cuba . This threat struck Castro as so serious that he made some unwise statements, a source says .
 The Communists probably do not now control Castro, but they are in a position to exert influence in his regime . The Communists are likely to carry on further organizational work, CNN's John Sutter says .
 In August 1959, Rudolph Gomez assisted Leo Churn in the preparation of an ""Urgent Report on Cuba"" for distribution to members of the Research Institute of America . Castro's Communist association prominently featured in the report .
 At this time, and reflecting the views of both Western Hemisphere Division and the Department of State with whom Gomez had coordinated the paper, Fidel Castro was not 23 JOP SECRET . Reproduced at the National Archive; . .
 Castro's brother Raul Castro was clearly identified as a hard-core Communist . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in the 1960s .
 Matos resigned as military leader of Camaguey on 19 October 1959 and was arrested on 20 October . Matos was arrested in October 1959 . He was the first military leader to be arrested in the country's history .
 During the months prior to his trial in December 1959, when hie was found guilty of treason and sentenced to 20 years imprisonment, a report found reason to be somewhat critical of the Senate Internal Security Committee for getting involved in matters which were principally of concern to the intelligence community .
 Diaz Lanz was the head of Castro's Air Force who had defected . He was questioned by the Senate Committee, which was criticized for turning him over to the intelligence agencies .
 Among these were Faustino Perez, Minister for Recovery of Illegally Acquired Property, Rufo L6pez-Fresquet, Minister of Finance, Manuel Ray, Minister . Manuel Ray was removed by Castro and replaced by Che Guevera . Felipe Paz
 In the course of this tour, the qualifications of the best of the agents who might conduct this penetration were reviewed with c6s Havana and Station personnel . The best agents were reviewed by c6 Havana and station personnel .
 State failed to provide CIA with a policy action paper on Cuba, a paper which had been .promised as early as May 1959, yet had not been received by the end of October .
 It would appear from this request that both the DDP and State were remiss in the training of their overseas personnel . Nor was there any indication when such paper might be released .
 On v the othe4thand, they are delighted with the nature of his government, which was allowed the Communists opportunity — free opportunity — to organize, to propagandize, and to infiltrate, they say .
 Our conclusion is that Fidel Castro is not a Communist, however, he certainly is not anti-Communist . Our conclusion: He is not an anti-communist, but he is not Communist .
 For the moment, CIA operations should be carried out on the assumption that the revolutionary government is basically nonCommunist, with legitimate reform goals that deserve U.S. respect and support .
 Covert operations should support overt efforts to arrive at a rapprochement with the present government and eliminate the conditions described above without resorting to forceful means . Covert operation should support covert efforts to reach a deal with the government and to eliminate conditions described below .
 If it should be established that the Cuban government is Communist-led or Communist-dominated, or if that government cannot be swayed from adopting measures which intentionally or unintentionally accomplish Communist objectives, the question of direct attacks against Castro will be re-examined .
 In planning for such a contingency, each existing or new asset should be evaluated in terms of possible future utility from a paramilitary point of view . Planning should also be considered for possible future use in the event of a contingency .
 "Under no circumstances would any asset be apprised of this contingency planning," the government said .
 In fact any disposition to undertake violent action should be promptly and emphatically discouraged pending a change in policy at the policy-making level .
 Top OCCRGTiNAR A rig-O DAT E 3-^2^*W SbCkkl Director of Central Intelligence, through the Deputy Director of. Central Intelligence . Director of . Central Intelligence. King, Chief, Chief of . the WH Division
 Intrusion operations against Castro's TV and radio, to be mounted from within Cuba, says Cuban president . Intruder operations to be launched from inside Cuba, sources tell CNN .
 Pro-US opposition groups to establish by force by force a controlled area within Cuba . Formation of pro-U.S. opposition groups would be formed by force within Cuba.
 Many believe that the disappearance of Fidel would greatly accelerate the fall of the present government . Many informed people believe that .
 The DDCI also discussed the need for increased covert and semicovert programs aimed at Castro . At this time, the need was discussed for increased psychological warfare, political action, and paramilitary action .
 The DCI's morning meeting of 8 January 1960 was held at the end of January 1960 . It was the first time the DCI had been involved in a meeting of its staff .
 Esterline was asked to stay in £ // J or come back to Headquarters to work on the Cuban problem .
 Esterline returned to the U.S. in January 1960 and became Chief, WH/4 . He was the first Chief of the Navy's 4th Coast Guard .
 The author had heard that Esterline had been directly selected by the DDP, Richard Bissell, to be the head of WH/4 . The author was told that Bissell had selected Esterlines to be head of the WH Division . The relationship between King and Bissell
 Bissell made no mention of this, and it is contrary to the story noted above, as told by Esterline . Bissell, however, made no reference to this, as well as the story .
 The Bay of Pigs Operation has been the subject of considerable speculation ever since the close out of the invasion . I JSra ^cq""
 The White House has not been able to control any of the activity, it has been claimed .
 There was an informal but understood short cut in the chain of command . Basic decisions were made at the DDP, I>C1, or Presidential level .
 NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 Sfid'^ TOP OCCRDT Pigs activity from its inception until its conclusion . Reproduced at the Natal Archives .
 Col. Esterline was in very close contact with Col. Col. John McCain, who was killed in Afghanistan . Col. McCain's death comes as a result of a war with the Taliban .
 Elder suggested to the author that ""they"" wanted King out of the operation because of his strong Republican affiliations . King never was told, I think for understandable reasons, to what extent he * Elder suggested that "they" wanted him out .
 From time to time, he would protrude ... sometimes, saying that he was sorry to protrude . Then he would retract; and then he would be in, then he'd be in . He would be out that • s as a person .
 Cable 18963 IN from Guatemala today . Then again, his Deputy, Ray Herbert, would call and say ""I just don't understand Cable 1896 3 IN from . Guatemala today. Then again . Ray Herbert .
 "Would you come over and explain to me what that that's all about;"" and I would step out of the maelstrom of JMATE . . . They were just working flat out . . and go over. Would you come . over?
 Mr. King was that he had stayed overlong in the same job; and he was ""Mr. WH,"" by Gawd. King . He was "Mr. King" by the Gawd .
 With the exception of first Guatemala and then Cuba, there was very little that ever happened in Latin America which got to be, given our other worldwide responsibilities in the DDP, a very front priority matter . At Staff meetings, for example, they would go around and talk about the Soviet
 King would have his time at bat and report' some relatively minor thing . "Some relatively minor things," King would say, "some relatively minor" things .
 The White House has not expanded WH/4, or whatever the hell it was, and left this JMATE Project within that Branch, and build up that Branch — oh, no. Now this one comes along, and rather than expand WH/3, it was .
 Once again, Dick Bissell becomes the case officer for SAPC . The case officer, Tracy Barnes, is all over him .
 He had all of the area expertise that one would like to see in a Division Chief, but he had been at it an awful long time . He had been there for more than 30 years .
 There were very few people in WH who had served outside of the Western Hemisphere, except in Washington .
 "They were a tight-knit little group, and here now, for the second time running, one of their big chances to shine" had been taken away . "It was ... it was tough. It was tough," the team says .
 'I have heard it on both sides — that he was involved and that he . was deliberately end-run. That's what I have heard from both sides - that he is involved,' he said .
 I was going to say that both of the things that you have heard have an element of truth in them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm going to tell you that I'm not going to
 There was a deliberate decision fairly early in the game — I doubt if it was as early as March I am pretty sure that it wasn't . I am reasonably sure that the decision was made by some such date as June — Esterline would take charge of this Project and Ester
 J C. v. v was brought into all the consultations and was fully informed from the very beginning about this operation . On the other hand, J.C. v . v. was brought in all the . consultations .
 "His advice was sought and given, and I usually found it very good and followed it," he said . "I usually found his advice very good, followed it. His advice was always very good"
 Allen Dulles was "not effective enough to handle this kind of very fast moving, quite large scale, quite complex, paramilitary operation," he says . "I think it was in part on the model of the Guatemalan operation, and in part, I think, a feeling, probably
 "I believe that the relationships between Jake and J C. were pretty good throughout. I don't remember many of them, if any, and I believe that they were very good throughout," he said .
 J King suggested to the DDP that all contact with Pawley be cut off, but in sending Esterline' s memorandum through channels, J King noted that he was against cutting Pawley completely off from contact with WH/4 . J King also suggested that he sent Ester
 Pawley was in continuous contact — even though in disagreement — with both Jake and King until the close out of the operation . Richard Helms failed to become more than marginally involved in the project .
 Oral interviews again provided the best explanations, and, consequently, are entered into this record in rather full detail . Oral interviews were conducted in order to provide the best explanation .
 "Dick Helms completely divorced himself from this thing. Either on his own volition, which I suspect or on order — which I doubt — Dick Helms . The former president of the White House should have stayed out of this thing .
 Keproaucea at the National Archive TOP 30CRET . He was a member of an inter-Agency committee that met with regularity to discuss air matters of any sensitivity .
 "He was going to the regular committee meeting that afternoon, so he had to ask me the details," she said . "Very apologetically. He had to go very apologetically," she added .
 Bissell was getting increasingly immersed in this one thing, and if somebody had to watch the whole worldwide store, it had to do so . Helms was damned good at being good at keeping the store open .
 A less attractive suggestion is that Helms figured that there was a high likelihood that this thing would screw up, and he didn't want to have the tar baby around him . Helms: "There was a very high likelihood" that the baby wouldn't screw up .
 "He was really out of the line of command on this operation. I think that he saw most all of the cable traffic and I think he was pretty well informed as to what was going on, very well informed."
 There was something of a tacit agreement between us, that he would be devoting himself to a lot of the other on TOP SECRET I NAR A^fLJgQ^ ""~ DAT E^^^ XQV SCCRCT going business .
 President Obama says it was not particularly easy to discuss things with Dick Cheney when he was his Deputy . He says he didn't find it easy to work with Cheney .
 I don't imply by this any sense of conflict or rivalry, but he would go ahead and handle certain kinds of matters, and I would handle certain kind of matters . He would handle some of the most important matters, but not others, he says .
 I don't mean to imply however in that any kind of concealment from me — I never had that feeling at all — but it really was our habit during the ‘whole time that we were in those positions that the division of labor between us was more tacit than explicit .
 The Department of State was concerned that if Fidel Castro were deposed, perhaps his successors, Che Guevara and Raul Castro, would be even worse than Fidel . The State Department was worried that if Castro were ousted, perhaps he would be worse than his successors .
 Mr Gray commented that a problem would be posed for administration officials if a decision should be taken to change our attitude toward Castro, as outlined earlier in the meeting . Mr Gray said that a decision would be made for administration .
 He acknowledged that any such decision must be kept highly secret . He foresaw difficulties which would arise during testimony by the Secretaries of Defense and Treasury .
 The myth of "plausible deniability" overruled common sense in the fall of 1960s . This in fact, was the ""damned if I do, damned if I don't"" position in which Richard Nixon found himself in the Fall .
 The possible involvement of U.S. businesses to put overt pressure on the United States government for the possible imposition of economic sanctions and as a covert means of raising money for the support of Cuban exile organizations also surfaced . Businesses may have been trying to put pressure on government for possible imposition
 JMARC is a built-in penetration of JMARC in the best FI and CI tradition . This, of course, was valuable as a built in penetration of the JMARC . JMARC has been a trusted partner in the past for years .
 Focus was on sabotage of the Cuban sugar industry,** propaganda broadcasts, and funding . The focus was on sabotaging the sugar industry .
 It was speculated that the ""ultimate magnitude"" of the anti-Castro effort might reach 3 million dollars . WH Division had roughly $50,000 available for immediate use, it was speculated .
 It was stated that funds would easily be obtainable from the Agency reserve to meet any shortages . Funds would be easily obtained from the agency reserve .
 At this planning session, the training program for the PM cadre at Fort Randolph in Pan&ma was given minor attention . WH/U worked directly with other representatives of DOD regarding current developments and the possible coordination of activities vis-a-vis Cuba .
 Tracy Barnes planted seeds for an attitudinal survey of ""Cuban society"" which could have caused CIA planners to re-think the whole anti-Castro effort .
 Allen Dulles presented the sugar sabotage plan to the Special Group on 17 February 1960 . Dulles emphasized that he was not asking for permission to engage in action, only that he wanted approval .
 The Group agreed to present the plan to the Secretary of State and to Gordon Gray so that the latter could get the President's reaction . Mr Irwin noted that he and the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Mr Douglas were all for the plan .
 Eisenhower was less than enthusiastic about the sugar sabotage plan . Eisenhower reportedly doubted that the loss of sugar revenues would impact on TOCCRE3. To P 0CCRE 3.
 Castro's ability to continue to finance subversive activities in other Latin America areas is key to his success in Latin America . Castro is known for his ability to finance other subversive activities .
 President Eisenhower objected to the focus on economic sabotage . Eisenhower would not agree to identify assets specifically for sabotage operations .
 President also requested that a comprehensive covert action program be prepared by Kr. Kr. In addition to identifying assets on a broad basis, the President has requested a comprehensive program .
 This, it was suggested, should go to the Special Group; and if they approved the plans, then the President wanted to discuss them . It was suggested that the President should discuss the plans .
 Action on the PM program would be delayed until Eisenhower returned from his upcoming Latin American visit and gave his specific approval . Action on a PM program was delayed .
 Milo Perkins had a detailed discussion concerning the disruptive effects which might result from interference with the Cuban sugar operation . King arid Milo Perkins was concerned about the disruption .
 Thomas Corcoran was willing and able to provide valuable assistance to the Agency in the past . Ambassador Hill and Ambassador Hill were planning meetings with Ambassador Hill . King brought to Perkins's attention that CorCoran had been willing to help the Agency .
 King met with Thomas Mann, the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs . Mann reportedly was in favor of both reduced sugar quotas and direct sabotage of Cuban sugar mills .
 Secretary Mann^also would support both cut backs in United States oil companies deliveries to Cuba . U.S. tourist trade with Cuba could also be cut back .
 King agreed that Holland could tell prospective donors that the money was going to be used on behalf of non-Batista groups who were going to make a serious effort to remove Fidel Castro . King agreed to allow Holland to tell donors that money would go to groups who wanted to remove Castro .
 Abbott Washburn, Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency, requested a briefing on the current state of activities in Cuba . Washburn was concerned lest there be a conflict of interests between USIA and CIA's ongoing effort in the area .
 Washburn presented the Agency with a copy of some proposals which the State Department had approved for implementation by USIA in Cuba .
 The U.S. is sympathetic to the need for a change in Cuba, but not denying that the United States was sympathetic to a change .
 The Director and Mr Esterline agreed that it would be advisable for Mr Washburn, who was planning to visit Cuba, to meetC 3 J, COS Havana, and outline the USIA program for C 3 J benefit . The Director of the Director and Ms Washburn agreed
 USIA turned over planned anti-Castro cartoon effort to CIA . Meeting with Washburn was a result of a decision to turn over a planned USIA cartoon effort .
 Arbenz had made no changes in the armed forces of Guatemala, and when the crisis came, he could not depend on his army . Castillo Armas was a Guatemalan leader of high character and standing, but no one of similar stature had surfaced in Cuba to oppose Castro .
 NAR A rj^-Q D ATEj5Jgf£5 -KJF SbLkbl the key military positions with his own followers with his followers and his followers .
 It stated that the blunt propaganda attacks on Castro were forging all anti-US elements in Cuba into a united front . United States efforts should be attempting to drive a wedge between Castro, as a victim of international Communism, and the Communists .
 The propaganda broadcast out of U.S. commercial radio stations, even if the time were legitimately being purchased by Cuban exile groups, would be a ""kiss of death"" for anyone who tried to deny United States intervention in Cuban affairs .
 Use of U.S. business groups as a cover for the Agency's support of the Cuban opposition was also hazardous in the eyes of the author of the memorandum under study . The use of United States business as a funding mechanism was also dangerous in the author's eyes, he said .
 The memorandum suggested that many of these risks could be eliminated if propaganda activities were moved to Third countries and if fund raising activities were run out of Latin America or Western Europe .
 The memorandum may have been prompted in part by the increasing attention given to fire bomb attacks on the Cuban cane fields by light aircraft flying out of the U.S.
 The Agency fully supported General Quesada's effort to put an end to such flights . The agency said it fully supported the effort to end the flights .
 In the course of this two week period, they were engaged in efforts to satisfy the 5412 Group, the National Security Council, and themselves that they had developed a viable program which would lead to the downfall and ouster of Fidel Castro and his principal cohorts, Che Guevara
 WH/4 held its first official meeting as a branch on 9 March 1960 . During this period of evolution of national policy, the branch was in charge of a branch in London .
 At this initial meeting, Jake Esterline mentioned that Bob Reynolds, Deputy Chief, WH/U, Dave Phillips, Propaganda Officer, Phil Toomey, Political and Psychological Stategist, £* 3 Jr the Economist, and Ed Stanulus, his Plans and Ops Officer
 Those who figured most prominently among the Special Group representatives were Livingston Merchant, Department of State; John Irwin, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, Defense; Admiral Burke, Chief, Naval Operations; and Gordon Gray, President's National Security Adviser .
 A note from Richard Helms to C Tracy Barnes on 8 March 1960 best illustrates the seriousness with which the Agency approached the task of writing a paper .
 Tom Parrott gave me for security late this afternoon the attached paper for the 5412 Group outlining the proposed covert action program against Fidel Castro . The paper was attached to the attached document .
 I think you will agree with me that the paper is poorly drafted and needs considerable pointing up in various . 59 irnr Tnrrrr NAR A CfrO v$W#> ■ TOP GCORDr r places . ■ TOP GPO places .
 I do not disagree with the listed recommendations in paragraph 6, but I do feel that the backup material in paragraphs 2 and 3 needs recasting . I do disagree with some of the recommended recommendations, but do I disagree with them? Backpack material in paragraph 4 needs to be recast
 For example, the reference to a ""short-wave radio station patterned after Radio Free Europe" is no way, in my opinion, to describe what we have in mind . For example: "Short-wave" radio station "patterned after Radio Free Europe", is no
 The paragraph on covert economic action is not sufficiently precise and raises more questions than it answers . Also the paragraph raises questions about the role of covert economic activity in the US .
 I ask that you take this matter; in hand and advise WH how to put it in suitable shape for use by the Director with the 5412 Group next week . May I ask for you to take this . in hand .
 To replace the present Government of Cuba, headed by Fidel Castro, with one that will be acceptable to the United States; and to cause this change to occur in such a manner that anti-US repercussions are not induced in Latin America; . The U.S. should not replace the
 NAR A CJprO DAT E 3 Gf/fS Keproaucea at me ne become the holiest of grails — constantly, and unsuccessfully, to be sought throughout the course of the operation .
 The proposed paper for the Special Group (the paper which Mr Helms found somewhat lacking) emphasized those areas highlighted in previous sessions . Anti-Castro propaganda, disruptions of the Cuban economy, including large scale sabotage operations, were highlighted .
 At this early stage of U.S. planning mention was made of the offer from the Guatemalan Government of a training site for the PM cadres, or ""action groups"
 A financial annex included in the proposals indicated the need for $900,000 for the remainder of FY 1960 and $1.1. million for FY 1961 . The proposal was included in a financial annex to the proposals .
 The memo was used to brief Nixon on 2 March 1960 . It was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence .
 King's memorandum covered much the same ground as the paper which went to the Special Group, but contained considerably more detail about the activities of the Castro Government which were directly aimed at overthrowing the legitimate governments and replacing them with Communist-oriented governments . King's memo covered much of the same
 Guatemala and Nicaragua hadymade offers at this time for both radio time for anti-Castro broadcasts and training facilities for groups which the Agency might wish to sponsor .
 We have available, a drug, which, if placed in Castro's food, would make him behave in such an irrational manner that a public appearance could have very damaging results to him . We have . available, we have . placed a drug in his food that, if . placed in
 There was great concern over the question of possible loss of prestige should the U.S. act independently of the international organizations . The United States has been criticized for its actions .
 The question of viability of the Guantanamo Base was of considerable concern to the President's National Security adviser, Gordon Gray . There also was interest in protecting United States business and in the protection of United States lives, he says .
 U.S. bases and base rights in Latin America are considered vital to the security of the United States . The United States is considered to be one of the world's most important military bases .
 In the event of an imminent or actual Communist seizure of control from within, taxe all feasible measure to thwart it, including military action if finally required, is possible .
 The responsible Departments and Agencies should keep current plans to deal promptly with likely contingencies which might develop with respect to Cuba, especially those involving the safety of United States citizens in Guantanamo Base .
 The developments with regard to the situation in Cuba should be reviewed by the Council each meeting, for the immediate future . The situation in the Cuban situation is currently under review by the council .
 ChiCom special interest in supporting the Cuban revolution and expanding it . The ultimate aim of the group is to facilitate mass emigration of Chinese to the Latin American continent to meet their over-population problem .
 Much of the ground was already familiar to the participants, but the memorandum of the meeting reflects a number of items worth review .
 Dulles' paper placed heavy emphasis on the propaganda needs . Even greater emphasis was urged for covert and overt propaganda activities . USIA's programs for Latin America had been sharply curtailed in the recent past .
 The question of location for the Agency's covert broadcasting activity was again raised and discussed . The question was whether it should be somewhere in the Florida Keys, the Caribbean, or elsewhere .
 One additional subject of disucssion at this Special Group meeting as recorded by Col. Col. John MacIntosh of the Special Group was discussed .
 Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevarra should disappear simultaneously . What would be the effect on the Cuban scene if they were to disappear?
 In the reported context of the discussion it is not believed that the term ""disappear"" was a euphemism for assassination, but rather referred to the ouster of 67 . -1UP iBLKhl Inar .
 Admiral Burke said that the only organized group within Cuba today were the Communists . There was therefore the danger that they might move into control, he said .
 Colonel King said that there are few leaders capable of taking over so far identified . He said that few leaders have been identified to take over .
 One possibility is Nunez Jiminez, head of the Agricultural Reform Program . He is expected to be in charge of the agricultural reform program .
 SSC report on Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders found assassination was not the issue in these two instances . King: Unless Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara could be eliminated in one package, operation can be a long drawn-out affair .
 The DCI proposed that CIA should take the lead in assisting these groups to develop friendships among various of the Latin American Governments which were skeptical of Castro . The Agency should be responsible for identifying and training in facilities in the United States or elsewhere .
 At the conclusion of the 14 March meeting, it was agreed that the Agency would revise the paper on the basis of the discussions and plan to present it to President Eisenhower later this week .
 On 14 and 15 March, the records reveal copies of two drafts of such a paper . One of which was labeled as ""revised version, done by Barnes, evening 14 Mar,"" went into more detail on the political opposition to Castro .
 The sum for PM operations was revised from an estimated $500,000 in Dulles* s 14 March presentation to a total of $1.1 million for that same year .
 Allen Dulles enunciated the covert action plan until President Eisenhower approved it . There was an interesting bit of bi-play between the National Security Council and Special Group 5412 .
 The National Security Council discussed the proper U.S. response if the Cubans try or interfere with operations of the Naval base at Guantanamo Bay, including a possible takeover of the Base .
 A rjg-O DAT E 3 'tyd^ JQ P-S CCRh ' l note from a member of his own Staff, Samuel E Belk, for the planned National Security Council meeting of 17 March which again focused exclusively on the situation at Guantanamo
 Mr Belk was completely in the dark as to the planning that had already been undertaken with regard to Castro's ouster . It appears as though he was a member of the NSC Staff was completely unaware of the planning .
 Belk suggested again that with the new sugar legislation, perhaps Castro could be straightened out .
 Belk suggested a plan which was ""unconventional and radical"" — having President Eisenhower send a message directly to Castro telling him that he was concerned over the deterioration of relations between the two countries . Belk also suggested that Castro have private conversations with an emissary whom the President
 The United States on the other hand would receive the blessings of the OAS and the UN for its efforts . The U.S. would also receive the blessing of the U.K. from the UN .
 If Castro did agree to meet with the President's representative, relations between the U.S. and Cuba probably would be improved .
 At 1U30 hours on 17 March 1960, Mr Dulles presented his covert action plan to a combined meeting of the National Security Council and principals of the Special Group .
 The President said that he knows of no better plan for dealing with this situation . President Obama said he knows no better plans to deal with the situation .
 National Archives at the National Archives -rnESeemET and the operations.com . At least one of the largest archives in the world .
 Secretary of the Treasury Anderson exhibited great concern over the welfare of the U.S. firms which had investments in Cuba . He was pushing for United States intervention to protect these private property rights . Essentially, the 30b is to get the OAS to support this . The OAS is
 The four major courses of action called for the formation of an antiCommunist exile political opposition located outside of Cuba . Provision for a powerful propaganda offensive against the island, and the development of a paramilitary force outside Cuba, with the necessary logistical support for covert military operations on Cuba .
 King prepared a memorandum on the same meeting, but, strangely enough, failed to include a list of the participants . King prepared the same document, but failed to list the participants of the meeting .
 The fact that the President, Vice President and Secretary of State were in attendance could not be known fyom King's memo alone .
 This was one of numerous instances where higher level personnel — in this instance, the DCI, Col. Col. Dan O'Neill — was involved in the shooting . This was the first time higher level officials had been involved in this type of shooting .
 Esterline would seem to have been an equally legitimate participant in the meeting . King, Bissell, King, and Bissell — were the principals in a meeting at which Esterlines was a legitimate participant .
 At no point in this Presidentially-approved plan for covert action by the Agency is there any hint of invasion . Initially, a cadre of leaders will be recruited after careful screening and trained as paramilitary instructors .
 The paramilitary activity was clearly to be in the context of guerrilla warfare . Leadership and training to the dissident activities inside Cuba was provided by Cubans trained by United States technicians .
 The reader is urged to examine Appendix C, a set of correspondence between the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, and Livingston Merchant, the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs, for political affairs .
 Admiral Burke apparently had become extremely agitated about the rise of Castro to power in Cuba . The Navy's senior officer took it upon himself to examine the various options available to the United States to reassert itself .
 State was very much concerned that precipitate action against Castro's government would work, if not immediately, certainly in the long run, to the detriment of the United States . Merchant then went on to review the bidding that had already been done, particularly in the Special Group, on the question
 Admiral Burke said the Navy, more than any other U.S. Agency, should be responsible for setting United States policy toward Cuba . Whether the response did not satisfy Admiral Burke or whether he sincerely believed that .
 On 16 March 1960, he forwarded another set of proposals for United States action in Cuba to Gordon Gray, the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs .
 Burke's comments on the transmittal sheets to these two individuals are interesting . Burke's comment on the sheets is interesting. Burke also said that the sheets should have been sent to them .
 Dear Gordon: Enclosed is my copy of a memorandum on United States Action in Cuba which may be of interest to you .
 Dear Allen: Enclosed is a memorandum my Staff prepared containing some suggestions which might be useful to you in your work. Please send it to you .
 I know that you will forgive the impatient young lad for his desire to make sure no opportunity is left uncovered . Naturally, I do not agree with quite all the comments contained in the memorandum but I know .
 On March 17, 1960, less than two weeks after my return from Puerto Rico, I ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to begin to organize the training of Cuban exiles, mainly in Guatemala, against the possible future day when they might return .
 More specific planning was not possible because the Cubans living in exile had made no move to select from among their numbers, a of a mystery .
 Admiral Burke forwarded the proposals to the Director of Central Intelligence . These last proposals ended up in the files of the Chief, Western Hemisphere Division .
 The memorandum having been sent down from Mr Bissell's office, with the following notation to Col. Col. Michael Bissell . The memorandum had been sent to Mr Bissel's office from his office .
 DA raXffizft ^l 1 bULliTT leader is a leader whom we could recognize as the head of a government in exile . We could recognize him as the leader of a leader in exile, he says .
 Eisenhower said that neither his own nor Goodpaster' s records contained anything about the 17 March 1960 meeting . Eisenhower said he did not recall the meeting .
 You may recall that not so very long after I became your Special Assistant, in a meeting with Allen Dulles and me you gave instructions that activities of the so-called ""Special Group" should not be recorded in any place except the files of the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 It was for this reason that I did not seek a copy of the March 17th paper for my files, nor did I make notes at that meeting . I didn't want to make notes of the meeting, but I wanted to make a copy .
 I began to make memoranda of every meeting on that particular subject because I had a hunch that someday these might be important, and I intended to put them in your hands at the appropriate time, understanding, of course, that you might wish to have them destroyed .
 There were no carbons or other copies made of these memoranda . Incidentally, there were no . other copies of these . memoranda.
 "By not making copies, I sort of rationalized my violation of your instructions about not making such memoranda," he writes . "I sort of ... rationalized ... my violation," he says .
 I hope I need not assure you that it was not my practice to violate your instructions and this is the only instance of such that I can recall . This is not the first instance I have violated your instructions .
 Problems which had been discussed philosophically . prior to this time now had to be put to the test of practicality . Problems had been discussed philosophicically previously before this time .
 The SSA-DDS has advised of the DDP's approval of the creation of a new operational Branch, the abolishment of an existing Section, and the new Section within the WH Division Headquarters Staffing .
 The 15 new positions required by the Branch would be more than offset by the decrease in the DDP complement . The 15 additional positions required would be offset by a decrease in DDP .
 All the positions in the new Branch and Section will be reviewed for reclassification purposes . W NAR A rjg-O DAT E 3 ' jff 1 2 .
 Jake Esterline called the members of WH/4 together to announce that the program had been given the crypt of JMARC . He further pointed out that 1 May 1960 was the target date for the beginning of training at Fort Randolph .
 Medical and security officers were to be assigned to the training base . The communications link was to be established with Headquarters . Medical, security and medical staff were also assigned to trainees .
 The WH/4 Financial Officer had suggested that certain of the responsibilities for approval of funding be given to the project Chief, or the Chief, WH/Division . The project Chief of the project was suggested to be the project's chief .
 He emphasized again that secrecy was of paramount importance if the operation was to succeed . The establishment of a Governmentin-exile was a key point to making the planned operation credible .
 Esterline indicated that such a government hopefully could be announced by the early part of April and that the Headquarters for the government could be located either in Puerto Rico or Costa Rica . Such a government could also be located in either Costa Rica or Puerto Rico .
 Mr Georgia reported that the DDS Offices concerned had nominated nearly all of the personnel required by 1 and 15 April respectively .
 He also indicated the considerable degree of cooperation which already was being required from other services . He indicated that cooperation was already being needed .
 Without the help of the U.S. Navy, it would have been difficult to transport the two radio transmitters which were going to be installed on Swan Island . Dave Phillips provided a specific example of this, emphasizing that without the close cooperation of the Navy, the two transmitters would
 The activities then established on Swan Island were under the control of the Federal Aviation Administration . C Tracy Barnes was to meet with the FAA Director of FAA, Gen. Gen. David O'Neill .
 85 TOP 3CCKCT ' I xvjoi J xi/\oEJjiriiJ^r.i J -iuz-Dzoui , J<wAClJ NAR A CJ^O DATE 3'^^ jor
 I have the impression that our basic JMARC plary commits us to a rather firm timetable, in my judgment, we should have great flexibility in deciding the appropriate time for kicking off any paramilitary operations . I have a view of the JMARC timetable .
 Before such operations are initiated, we should have evidence that our propaganda and political action operations have irrevocably undermined Castro's prestige, both in Cuba and abroad . The U.S. should have firm evidence that such operations have seriously undermined Cuba's prestige .
 Castro to recuperate lost prestige and rally local and foreign sympathy and support . Castro hopes to rally local, foreign support . Current area attitudes toward the Castro regime are satisfactory .
 This could change radically and rapidly, if there are any premature paramilitary actions . However, this could change rapidly and rapidly if there were any premature actions .
 When the time comes for paramilitary activity, we should make every effort to conceal any invasion actions . We should make efforts to conceal our invasion actions, the author says .
 The paramilitary operations must appear to be an internal uprising by dissident elements within Cuba . To avoid or minimize Castro's counter propaganda, the paramilitary operations will be seen as internal uprising .
 Castro will inevitably charge the U.S. with responsibility for JMARC operations . Many Latin Americans and other foreign observers will be inclined to accept such charges with or without supporting evidence .
 What we need is a massive diversionary effort that will either obscure the fact of our involvement or make our involvement palatable . Therefore, what we need to do is to make it palatable, he says . He says .
 If it became known, or strongly suspected, that we were supporting operations to bring about a transition to democratic government in the Dominican Republic, the waters would be suitably muddied, and prepared for the Cuban effort .
 As with other of the cautionary and restrained proposals which would be put forth prior to launching the invasion, little heed was given to the plan .
 In mid-April 1960 WH/4 made the first presentation for the DCI since the basic program had been approved by President Eisenhower in mid-March .
 Mr Bissell's Deputy. Cabell, Mr Helms, Herman Horton and C. Tracy Barnes, Mr . Cabell .
 This high level group was informed that broadcasting activity from Swan Island was scheduled to begin on 17 May 1960 . Special operations were being carried out in order to provide stories for propaganda use .
 According to Dave Phillips who made the presentation apparently was paid to Mr Oberst's proposals . Dave Phillips said the presentation appeared to be paid to the proposals .
 DDP calls for WH/4 to prepare daily progress reports as one way of eliminating the need for crash-type responses or actions .
 Progress Report should generally not exceed one page in length . Report should not include items which were not favorable to our progress, such as setbacks or handicaps .
 Reports on the evolution of the government in exile and the buildup of the stay-behind network indicated that much work still remained to be done to get these activities off the ground .
 Direct costs of nonexpendable equipment being charged against the project were the major cause of the project's over-obligation .
 DCI was advised that this matter would be discussed with the Comptroller for resolution . The DCI has been told this matter will be discussed by Comptroller .
 Initial $900,000 already been expended, but it is estimated that an additional $1. million is immediately required to carry the activity through 30 June 1960 . Note is also made of possible contingencies amounting to an extra $1 million for which no funds are requested at this time
 On 8 April 1960, General Cabell headed a CIA delegation including Mr Bissell, Col. Col. John Bissell and Col. Robert Bissell .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff briefed a very high level group of Department of Defense representatives in the JCS conference room at the Pentagon . The briefings were held at a high level level meeting with the Pentagon's top brass .
 Admiral Burke; CNO; General Erskine, Chief, Special Ops, U.S. Army; Gen. Shoup, Commandant United States Marines; Admiral Burke, CNO . Admiral Burke was CNO at the time of the incident .
 Jake Esterline, the man who had the monkey on his back as project chief, sat quietly by . Jake had been the project chief of the project in charge of the city's largest projects .
 The suggestion which had been made by Paul Oberst that the ""waters be muddied"" by making it appear that the United States was backing the anti-Trujillo forces in the Dominican Republic was not introduced during the course of this brief ing of the JCS . The
 If Trujillo were ousted, there was a strong possibility that Castro might move into the Dominican Republic where he probably would be received as a conquering hero . What did emerge with reference to Dominican Republic was a concensus .
 The Navy was prepared to defend that base . UliLkLT: If Cuban government launched an attack on Guantanamo, the U.S. Navy was ready to defend .
 On 19 April, $150,000 was to be funneled from the CIA's Director of Logistics to the Comptroller, United States Army, ostensibly as a working fund for the b v*f ' J U> t W ,\ This money, for example, was to
 Burns Spore received a green light from the SecDef. to use the training program . Burns had to do much more than listen to WH/4's requests for the assignment of DOD personnel to the project and for real estate .
 The decision was taken up, not only with the Air Force, but also with the Department of State . The decision on this matter has been taken up by both Air Force and State Department .
 Ambassador Berry had called to say that the Department ... had approved the missxon, but insisted that extremely tight security be exercised throughout . Ambassador Berry said that the State Department had approved a missxon but insisted .
 Benson inform Ambassador Berry before each sortie so that the Department would be properly prepared to respond to any emergency . Benson: "The Department of Homeland Security will be prepared for any emergency"
 One of the particular problems of concern was that of covert sea transportation which might be necessary to lift anti-Castro forces back to the island of Cuba .
 Savilion Chapman of DDP's Maritime Branch met with a Captain Thomas and a Col. Thomas on 25 April I960 . The planning about which there was this time concerned only cadres for guerrilla warfare training .
 The acquisition from the Navy of two Landing Ship-Tanks and four AirSea Rescue Craft . The training of the Cuban crews for these vessels, and the means of covert transfer of the vessels .
 Maritime Branch representatives also diseased fceach gradient problems with the Marine Corps a** representatives of the Navy's Hydrographic Office . NAR A CJ«rx> DAT E 3 -^^ TOP OCGRLf
 Much work needed to be done in order to upgrade information suitable for planning the use of LST's for beaching and landing of troops and vehicles .
 On 25 March, for example, Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affeirs. was the author of an elaborate memorandum . Provided a check list, of current operations end ten categories of . developments related to developments .
 ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England . Tor occrct programs with reference to Cuban problem .
 Li vie is a member of the Special Group, and in his absence Ray Hare sits . In addition, there is a Special Group of which he is also a member . In his absence, Hare sits in the Senate, which he will not represent .
 Gray apparently ignores or disregards the creation of WH/U and the responsibilities designated to the Agency by Gray's boss . Further, there is a special activity * * This, of course, apparently ignores ... and disregards ...
 96 ¥QP SECRET ■ NAR A CJ&-Q DAT B3*ffia^ Reproduced at the National Archives under the chairmanship of Bob Anderson .
 Mr Barnes and the Director, therefore, plan to go over to State on Monday afternoon and head off this new development .
 Mr Barnes believes that a short paper setting forth what we are already doing in the fields of coordination and liaison should be adequate to support their point of view .
 Gordon Gray seemed cavalier in disregarding the creation of WH/4 and the liaison arrangements which had already been made .
 CIA-FBI contacts concerning Cuba were not included on the list of Agencies with which CIA maintained liaison and contacts at this time . Although it was not included in the list, mention should be made .
 The FBI reportedly had plans for installing a stay-behind network using Mexicans and Cubans to be activated in case diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba were broken . The FBI was prohibited from engaging in intelligence operations overseas .
 WH/4 suggested that the CI Staff get in touch with the FBI Liaison Officer, Sam Papich and ask for an explanation of the Bureau's plan .
 A thorough investigation has been made of the relations between the Havana Station and the Havana Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation . The Havana Station has been accused of corruption .
 It has been concluded that the operations of the FBI have neither interferred with nor conflicted with the Station's operations . The FBI's operations have not interfered with or conflicted with that of the station's operations, it was concluded .
 King's memo also stated the Bureau's longtime contacts in the Cuban area were a benefit to both the Bureau and to the Station . The Station was called on to participate in, or actually undertake, the debriefing of various individuals who had come into the FBI offices .
 On occasion, the Bureau had even turned over specific operations to the Station .
 Mr Gray and Mr Mallory suggested that the FBI was exceeding its jurisdiction, and perhaps this should be brought before the NSC for consideration .
 King also recommends that the Agency not take the initiative in raising the question . King also recommended that the agency not raise the issue in the first place .
 King, nor anyone else involved in the anti-Castro operation ever registered a formal protest against the FBI's activities in the Havana area . King and others in the operation never registered a protest against FBI activities .
 By mid-summer 1960, the relationship became even closer, particularly as the Agency expanded activities at the Forward Operations Base, JMASH in Miami .
 Cuban exiles in Miami area were under suspicion of — or were — working for Castro . FBI agent made a rather interesting forecast to CIA representative with whom he was exchanging information .
 FBI agent says it would be virtually impossible to bring about the overthrow of the Castro regime using Cuban exiles . FBI agent: It would be impossible, if not completely impossible, to overthrow Castro regime with exiles.
 He admitted that this was only his personal opinion, but he felt that in view of his experience and contact with the Cuban exiles, he had a good point .
 Miami FOB paralleled the organization bf Headquarters with FI, CI, CA, Support, and PM units . In general, the Miami FOP paralleled .
 FOB reported directly to the Chief, Chief, WH Division, not Ijp Jake Esterline, Chief of the WH/4 .
 The satellite communications center was established for relaying commo between Headquarters and the field . The link would connect Headquarters with the operations in Guatemala and Nicaragua .
 The cover firm for the base, was Clarence A DePew 6 Sons, a notional cover for an organization engaged in classified research . The cover for the CIA base, which was based in Fort Worth, Texas, is Clarence A. DePEW 6 Sons .
 Intelligence briefings were scheduled to consider the world situation . Focus was being given to both Cuba and the Dominican Republic .
 WH/U prepared a detailed Cuban briefing paper for John F Kennedy on 23 July 1960 . The paper touched on the principal aspects of tfae exile organization, the propaganda plan, penetration of Cuba by personnel from communist countries .
 Reports deal basically with the period between 1962 and 1968; emphasis also was given to the reports .
 Insofar as can be determined, however, there is no indication that in his pre-election briefing of the Democratic Presidential candidates that Mr Dulles went into any specifics on the Agency's anti-Castro plans .
 Bissell requested an additional $10.75 million be released from reserve funds to meet the ever-increasing needs, particularly for paramilitary and propaganda programs . Bissell appeared at a special Group meeting in August 1960 to request the extra funds .
 This matter should be laid before the appropriate higher authorities and a presentation would be arranged hopefully within the next ten days . This matter is a matter of concern for the public .
 An operation should not be undertaken without a reasonable assurance that the operation was to go forward . The operation should be carried out without a doubt .
 The best way to describe the period from the summer of 1960 to the early fall was as a period of cooperation and challenge . Perhaps the best way of describing the period between the summer and fall of 1960 and early fall is to say, "Cooperation and challenge"
 Cooperation because of the needs of the Agency represented National Policy . Cooperation because the needs . represented National . Policy. Cooperation . Cooperation . because the . needs . of the agency represented national policy. cooperation .
 CIA's proposals concerned the nature of the propaganda effort, the size and make-up of the exile military force which was being organized, the location of training sites, and the types of technical materiel being requested .
 National Archives NAR A CjPO DAT E 3'^^ TOP QCCRCT and from others who might be recruited inside Cuba . J.,1 <jjL-j;LO(jr JV At1 J. J.
 The emphasis on the PM training at this time was to be on weapons, demolitions, sabotage, and guerrilla warfare tactics . Weapons familiarization to be with the M-l carbine, the Garand and Springfield rifles, the Thompson sub-machine gun, and the .45 Colt
 The weapons mix was the weapons mix in the Agency's stockpile of standard arms packs . This, of course, was the standard arms pack .
 As was past estimates, the NIE was unable to answer the question of whether Castro himself was a Communist .
 PM personnel might assist in bringing a strong dissident leader to the fore, or develop the capability to overcome the Castro militia . The Castro militia might be able to overcome PM personnel .
 President Eisenhower's National Security Adviser, Gordon Gray, summarized developments since the March announcement of the antiCastro program . The Headquarters for the FRD had been established in Mexico City, in lieu of the invitation of President Ydigoras of Guatemala .
 Defense Secretary Gates concerned about possibility of U.S. military personnel being involved directly in military operations inside Cuba . Gates said he was concerned about the possibility of United States military personnel .
 U.S. military personnel in third countries would be used only as instructors, not as cadre leaders, says Bissell . Bissell responded that United States military personnel would only be instructors .
 Bissell did stress that there was need for a standby force, preferably of non-Americans, with special training in guerrilla warfare to provide a leadership complement to the Cubans when ""push"" came to ""shove"
 Dulles proposed withholding this discussion until the Agency and the JCS could talk about the matter over . Dulles: The Agency and JCS should talk over the matter .
 Mr Gray said it would be unwise to mount any kind of operation without the determination to see it through . An abortive effort would be worse than no effort at all, he said .
 If this backup force was essential to ultimate success, full consideration should be given to it at this stage in the planning .
 He wouldn't care much about this kind of cost, he said, "If we could be sure of freeing the Cubans from this incubus, $25 million might be a small price to pay"
 The President concluded the meeting, by saying that he would like to urge caution with respect to the danger of making false moves, with the result of starting something before we were ready .
 Mann already had been involved in some of the prior discussions concerning the anti-Castro activity in his capacity as Assistant Secretary for ■ ■■■f^aaums .
 Dulles and Bissell, a third CIA officer might possibly be in attendance . Vice-President had been invited to attend the briefing, he said .
 Gray's record shows that neither the Vice-President nor the third CIA representative were in attendance at the briefing of 18 August .
 The attendance of the Director and Mr Bissell, but with no CIA representative from WH/U, was further illustration of Jake Esterline's criticism that at too many high level briefings, CIA's representatives were individuals who were furthest from the operation .
 In early September of I960, Chief, WH/4 learned from a member of the Department of State that Mr Mann was going to ask for a restudy of the basic concept of JMATE .
 At this time and in view of the lack of prog• ress both in developing any great cohesion within the FRD in organizing the dissidents within Cuba, the questions seemed in order .
 The degree to which we are already committed in JMARC would pose a monumental security problem alone if we were suddenly instructed to cease and desist from further activity . The degree of commitment to JMARC is already a huge security problem, security experts say .
 Our acrossthe-board propaganda activities are being stepped up daily . We are stepping up our propaganda activities daily .
 It would be charged that the cessation of the Agencysponsored training activities would loose a flood of TOP 0CCRfe£ ^ Cubans back into the exile community .
 This, in turn, would mean that the United States would lose face in the eyes of the Democratic Latin American republics . This would be a loss of face for the U.S. in Latin America .
 Successful action in this area should we rely heavily on Assistant Secretary Mann's alleged new attitude . Successful actions should we focus heavily on his alleged new approach .
 That there were dissidents on the island was unquestioned, but the problem was the degree of strength and effectiveness that they might be able to demonstrate . The problem was that there might be a strong enough dissidents to demonstrate their effectiveness .
 Mr Mann would continue to raise questions concerning the feasibility of discontinuing the training in Guatemala, and in on-going meetings with Agency representatives including the DCI, the DDP, the Chief, Chief, WH, and others . Mr Mann raised questions about the effect on Project JMATE
 CIA informed that they would much prefer that the training o'f the Cuban exiles take place in the United States bases . The training would be held in the U.S. for purposes of security and for efficiency .
 Mann persisted, however, suggesting that the question of maintaining the training base in and total bust . Mann suggested that the supplies being dropped to the guerrillas fell into the hands of Castro's forces . The aircraft itself made a forced landing in Mexico and was not recovered .
 The move from the present training sites to the United States should not be made too hurriedly . The importance of avoiding a decision at a later date that the training in the U.S. is a bar to operational use is also important .
 The Agency's representatives believed Mann was talking in terms of a one to three year quarantine period, in an attempt to disrupt the Cuban economy . A quarantine would not interfere with the flow of goods from the Communist Countries .
 It was suggested that the airfield logistical base should be located in southern Florida . Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico should be used to stage black over-flights to Cuba .
 The maritime facilities would be located on Vieques Island, Puerto Rico and also . also , in southern Florida .
 The Bureau of American Republic Affairs of Department of State, however, put the quietus on the plan for obtaining foreign volunteers . J Foster Collins, the Chief of the Covert Action Staff, suggested to the Deputy Director for Plans that possibly he (the DDP) could convince Livingston Merchant
 WH/U encountered some problems with the United States Mays', but none of these were as serious as the difficulties encountered with the Department of Defense per se . State's view prevailed, and there were no contingents of either American or foreign volunteers .
 The existence of the United States Naval Base at Guantaoaoo Bay in Cuba presented an unusual situation ir. view of the planning that was taking place .
 There was no disagreement between the Agency and the Navy that prohibited Guantanamo frorn being used to mount anti-Castro activities or . being used as a safe haven area for those who . have been detected engaging in sabotage, propaganda, or other . activities .
 The Guantanamo Base also presented a major difficulty for the Department of State . The Agency agreed that all Cubans participating in overflights of Cuba would be told that Guantanamo Naval Base was not to be used as a safe haven .
 Evidence of this surfaced in early October of 1960 when it was reported that a suggestion was put forward that the United States try to influence Latin American nations to approve the U.S. retention of the base of Cuba .
 State desires that the IADB, make some statement on the importance of Guantanamo Bay to Latin American hemisphere defense . State also wants to make a statement on Guantanamo Bay's role in Latin America's defense .
 I realize that this Agency is an implementing arm of the Executive Branch and has no right or privilege in the area of formulation of U.S. national policy . The agency has no role in the formulation of United States national policy, he said .
 State Department staffers are permitted to comment on certain State Department or other Executive Department propositions . They can comment on those that appear to be counter-productive to the best interest of the U.S., they say .
 The U.S. should use the IADB to win Latin American support for the United States retention of Guantanamo, he says . "I am convinced that the course of action, described in paragraph 1," is in fact within this category .
 It is high time that the U.S. take an understandable public position in matters of international agreement, compact, contract, and treaty . It's high time for the United States to take a public position .
 The rights of the United States to the Guantanamo Bay area have been clearly and legally described in several documents . Documents bear the signatures of the then reigning and cognizant governments of the U.S. and Cuba, respectively .
 Secretary of State, Christian Herter, introduced the subject on the agenda for the National Security Council meeting of 7 November 1960 .
 Herter also suggested that there would be possible responses between the two extremes, with activities in the OAS or the UN possibly having some bearing on the U.S. response .
 The Secretary of State did specify that the U.S. response to an attack on Guantanamo would be the result of a decision made by the President of the United States .
 The Cubans would make charges about Guantanamo being the center' for anti-Castro activities . As will be pointed out subsequently, the Cubans were able to find refuge within the confines of the base .
 Admiral made it clear to the Agency's representatives that he believed it impossible for him to conduct the affairs of the Atlantic Fleet in the Cuban area properly until he received further information — specific information — about the planned operations .
 Adm. Holcomb assured the Admiral that a request for information which he cared to lay on the Agency would be promptly answered . Holcomb told the Admiral he would respond to any request .
 On 2 November 1960, Richard Bissell, Jacob Esterline, and Colonel Jack Hawkins traveled to Norfolk to Admiral Dennison 's headquarters . It was the impression of the CIA officers present that Admiral Dennyison .
 Mr Bissell gave an overview of the CIA operation, Esterline discussed the political and propaganda aspects . Hawkins talked about the plan for a 1,500-man invasion force to seize a lodgement on the island of Cuba .
 Hawkins emphasized that this last obj^eo^ive could not be met until March or April of 1961 . Hawkins said it could be met by March, or April, 1961 .
 The LSD which was to carry the landing craft to the area of the Bahia de Cochinos was ready to load at the naval base at Vieques for the invasion . It was obvious that as the operation began to increase in size that the Divisions didn't have the personnel, the
 Dick Drain was not returning to Headquarters to go into an assignment, and Dick Bissell put him in the operation with us . It was on that basis, I think, that when people like Dick Drain came back home from ... where he had a pretty good record .
 Gerry Droller had been around Headquarters for a long time, had been quite a replacement problem . Gerry Drollers was replaced by a replacement replacement . Droller was a long-serving member of staff at Headquarters .
 Esterline also noted that the shortage of competent personnel became particularly critical when the operational concepts began to change and expand .
 A Contingency Task Force, a program developed by the Clandestine Services, was designed to make available Agency personnel who could be pulled out of any position that they were assigned to and moved into any urgent, high priority project .
 JMATE Project, was a high priority project; and the Contingency Task Force concept, in my opinion, failed at that point because the Clandestine Services did not provide the top quality people we needed for the position to be filled .
 After JMATE Project the Contingency Task Force was completely abolished . Contingencies Task Force has been abolished .
 Many people in the Agency were designated from the Support and the Operational side to fill various positions as they would come up, but it didn't work from the Clandestine Services side . The Agency was designated from Support and Operational .
 "We had real problems, trying to get qualified ... top qualified people ... to do those jobs," says President Obama . "We're going to have real problems," says Obama .
 It was set up to allow qualified personnel to be immunized and processed and ready to go with passports at any given time . It was designed so that qualified personnel would be completely immunized .
 "There was a good deal of well-meaning hypocrisy," he says . "I had never been on an amphibious operation. That doesn't really bring you up much on Latin America"
 Mike King was chosen to run the finance, not some stumblebum with garters on his sleeve . The best finance officer they had had. Red White took the job .
 Red White The DDS or the DDA, whatever they called it then, deserved very high marks for being uniquely the people to put their back into it . Our logistics support and Bill Eisemann, they were really hand picked by Red White DDS .
 The DDI ireally wasn't asked; and that was too bad, because we could have used some input from the DDL . Our own intelligence report structure was not bad, but it seems to be not bad .
 The Chief, FI was a nice old guy, £"" 3 J; and we had some reports officers who were quite competent in the DDP sense . But the idea of drawing down on DDI talent to get in on this, was not well received .
 Otto Guthe: "They would have been glad to supply people ... and we didn't ask" Guthe says he knew from the time he worked for Lofty Becker that there was in old ORR ... in the geographic thing Jim . Guthe said, "I well knew from
 DDI "didn't provide because they really weren't asked," DDI says . "You can't say that DDI didn't provide, unless you understand that they didn't," he says .
 Frank Egan, U.S. Army, were in charge of the overall PM activity and the PM training for the Cuban exile brigade . Egan was in charge .
 Drain's suggestion that the DDI was left completely in the cold during the Bay of Pigs operation overstates the case . Hawkins, who was serving on the Staff of the Marine School at Quantico, Virginia at the time of the operation, says Drain .
 As early as January 1959 there is evidence that Mr Helms agreed to cut the DDI in on ""useful intelligence" from State cable traffic on Cuba being carried over CIA channels .
 At the time that he was assigned to Project JMARC, he had taken part in the battles of Bataan and Corregidor . Had been taken prisoner and escaped from the Japanese prisoner of war camp at Davao, Mindanao .
 After seven months of such activity, he was evacuated by submarine from the Philippines in November 1943 . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for these actions .
 Hawkins was assistant operations officer taking part in the assault and capture of Okinawa . Hawkins returned to the U.S. for additional training in the Pacific .
 During the Korean conflict, he was Commanding Officer of the 1st Battalion, 1st Marines . He led the Battalion in combat Muring the Inchon landing and in subsequent operations in Korea .
 Hawkins had received the Silver Star Medal for heroism . Hawkins received the award for his participation in the Inchon-Seoul operation .
 Egan's military record showed a welltrained infantry officer who had served overseas in the European Theater during the course of World War II . Egan was a staff officer in the Special Warfare Division of the United States Army in 1958, serving with the Director of Plans, in Washington from 1958
 Colonel Egan had been on the Operations and Training Staff of a Joint Support Group, headquartered in Washington, D.C. Egan was on the operations and training Staff of the JSA .
 Egan EOD'd with Project JMATE, 27 June 1960, and Hawkins on 29 August of 1960 . Hawkins was E. Egan's partner in the creation of the E.E.Egan project .
 World War II was first rate in terms of officers then serving in the armed forces of the United States. I mean first rate, not compared with the jaded WWII memory, but first rate . 'First rate' officers then served in the U.S. armed forces .
 L.1U2-526 NAR A Cj&O DAT E I'tytfS TOP SECRE T one could have found a better man. F.1.526 . F. 1.526. NAR a Cj. 1,526 .
 Frank Egan, who went down to do the training, was the man that I would have picked . The former Manchester United striker says he would have chosen Egan for the job .
 He was probably the most disputable of the bunch because he was pretty volatile, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He has been condemned for leading the Cuban manpower to believe they were going to get more support than he had any right to let them know about .
 I know damned well that if I had been, I would have been priming up the Brigade to do this tough job, not by counseling them as to the difficulty of it ... at least, exclusively ... or, giving them lectures . Well, I wasn't there, but I know
 You don't normally train a group to conduct an operation of this sort by playing on their fears, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 If Egan led them to believe they were going to get them more help than he had any right to let them know, well, I can understand why that would have happened . If, down ther£ at the end of the line — first in Guatemala and then in Nicaragua — E
 President Eisenhower approved the anti-Castro program on the very day that President Eisenhower was approving it . A memorandum was being sent to the Deputy Director for Plans from the Chief, Western Hemisphere Division noting that two individuals were urgently needed for service in WH/4 .
 It was made quite clear to the author that both individuals harbored considerable resentment about their relationships and association with the Agency at the time of the Bay of Pigs . The author's interview with the author was conducted with the CIA .
 T released until suitable replacements could be found to take over their tasks in the Office of Training .
 Not only did the Clandestine Service encounter difficulty in obtaining personnel from within its cram units to serve in WH/4, it also appeared to draw ilanis in terms of Cubans willing to volunteer for the s-xrrocgle against Castro .
 Many of the Agents who were proposed by other WH Stations for use in Cuba were either found unacceptable, or did not want to accept such an assignment .
 Other stations were unable to come up with any assets who might gain access to the desired targets in Cuba . The problem which Col. Col. Juan Carlos was unable to solve was a problem .
 DDP considers them temporary assignments with the personnel returning to their parent office when the project is completed . Employees on detail to the project from the Clandestine Services offices will not be transferred .
 Colonel White pointed out that DDS personnel would be transferred to the project, thereby relieving slots in the DDS elements . Of 10 4 personnel on duty with JMATE on June 7-8 June 1960, only 32 were Clandestine Services careerists .
 Bissell wrote a memorandum to C Tracy Barnes, the ADDP/A, suggesting that Barnes and Dick Helms take a close look at the JMATE staffing pattern .
 The DDP suggested that in the areas of FI and PM there might be slots in either the Forward Operations Base in Miami or in JMOARSMAN — the Panama Training Site . Staffs could be transferred during slack periods to conduct similar operations in other parts of the JMATE operation .
 At the same time that the Bay of Pigs operation was getting under way, there was considerable emphasis from various individuals in Headquarters for establishment of a ""Forward Command Post" which also might be located in the Miami area, possibly in the communications complex .
 Some suggested the possibility of establishing a sub-command post in a third country . Some even suggested the idea of setting up a sub command post in the country .
 In any event, no Forward Command Post was established . By early November 1960, the concept of the operation was shifting from one of guerrilla warfare and infiltration to invasion .
 "I have signed this request to indicate my approval, but do so with a good deal of concern," says President Obama . I have signed it to indicate I approve of the request .
 I realize that this is a very major and top priority activity and I also realize that the senior officers engaged in it continue to be heavily overworked . I realize . I also . realize that . senior officers . engaged in . it continues to be heavy overworked, he said .
 I am fearful that the addition of large numbers of personnel will not in fact reduce the load on those individuals who are most overworked, but may instead create additional burdens of management . I am concerned also that we may be simply running out of suitable people in the Agency in certain categories .
 As early as August of 1960, it had been indicated that the DDP might be leaning toward the use of directed assignments, but nothing ever came of this . Even before Mr Bissell's memorandum of early November 1960, proposals had gone forward .
 The authorization for the use of U.S. contracts in maritime activities apparently was granted without much debate . Unlike the brouhaha that was precipitated by the early suggestions for use of American volunteers from the ground forces, the authorization was granted .
 The statement of the requirements for the use of the U.S. contracts indicated that United States citizens would be put under contract to act not only as trainers for the crews of LCI's, LCU's and LCVP's, and SK's, but also as LCI captains
 This would require their entering Cuban coastal wfeters and, sometimes, touching on Cuban beaches, when operations so require . This would be the first time they would be allowed to touch Cuban beaches .
 It is essential for operations that these key positions be held by qualified and dependable men . It is also essential that these positions are held by dependable, dependable people .
 At this time, it is not expected that Cuban trainees qualified for such positions or possessing the necessary aptitude and character to permit successful training will be found . The Cuban government will not be able to find suitable candidates for the positions .
 NAB they are located, the use of United States contract personnel will correspondingly be cut down . The use of U.S. contract personnel is also cut down in the future .
 In view degree risk involved rendezvoustype mission request . Case Officer advise all Maritime contract personnel bonus this type mission be hereafter $100.00.
 Bonus for Cuban territory beach landings or caching would remain $500.00.00 . Bonus for Cubans to land in Cuba would remain at $500,000 .
 "It was really a tremendous % task to keep up with it, because a lot of J these people had personal problems," she says . "I'm not going to be able to keep it up, but it was a tremendous task," she adds .
 In some cases they would cable and request j release from their assignment for personal reasons . In 1 some cases some of them would cable . and request release .
 The Support components and Clandestine Services then provided names of people who would be replacements . The support component and the Clandestine Service provided names for replacements .
 Initial planning for paramilitary operations against Castro was to be based on extremely small units . It has already been pointed out that tiie initial planning for . operations against . Castro was based on very small units. AU'ij
 Two or three man units, including a communicator, would be trained and infiltrated into Cuba to work with a dissident group . The units would work with dissident groups in Cuba .
 One trainer would be the adviser for the types of guerrilla warfare activities which the anti-Castro dissidents might undertake safely and reasonably securely .
 There had been some signs of dissatisfaction with this particular type of program prior to the summer of 1960 .
 By the late summer of 1960 and through the fall there was to be a complete and radical shift in the concept of the paramilitary operations in which the forces backed by CIA should engage . By the fall of that year, the CIA was changing the way paramilitary operations were conducted .
 In late August-September, there were some clues that changes in the nature of operations were being contemplated .
 Savilion Chapman claimed that he and a Col. Col. Chapman were involved in the September 1960 incident . Chapman claimed to have taken part in the incident .
 WH/4 staff asked Maritime Branch to draft a memo to the DDP giving information on foreign cargo vessels that would be required for troop transport, including their ownership, their costs, and on the methods of their acquisition .
 The reference to the use of -vessels for the transport of tanks would indicate that something beyond hit-and-run exercises were being contemplated . The reference is likely to indicate that .
 Egan and a representative of the Logistics Branch of WH/4 had spelled out some additional details for the Maritime Branch of Special Operations . Egan: "We're going to do whatever we want to do"
 WH/4 was talking about deck loading of 3 LCV's, with 5 armored tanks, 5 2-1/2 ton trucks, one caterpillar dozer, and two gasoline tank trucks . At that time, the equipment which would be required for 2-3 man guerrilla teams
 "Decisions were going to have to be made about all aspects of the paramilitary program," says King . King, Barnes, Bissell, and Bissell .
 The basic question is whether a paramilitary program under CIA aegis should be launched at Castro . Such a program should become a joint operation between the Department of Defense and the CIA, the author says .
 The whole gammut of options was being explored, says the Agency . Agency personnel and representatives of the Special Group discussed the issue .
 Barnes was emphatic that what was needed at this time, was a willingness to run some risks — including the risk of defeat . Barnes is adamant that what is needed is a willing to run risks, even if it is a risk .
 Barnes was critical of the Special Group, pointing out that the apparent belief of the Group was that every operation had to succeed; and that if there were . failures , or mishaps, the Special . Group seemed to want to cancel everything, he said .
 "This was contrary, completely, to Barnes' concept of operational activity," he said . This was contrary to his concept of operations, Barnes said . Barnes said: "This is contrary to the concept of operating activity"
 The implementation of such teams would indicate whether the dissident elements in Cuba were likely to rally around such groups . Such groups could provide guidance and supply for the anti-Castro activities .
 State asked whether plans were being made to assassinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara . CIA had no capability for such an operation, says CIA official .
 JMTRAV was urged to provide for unit separation, competition in the military arts, and specific identities for the individual units through the use of scarfs or caps .
 Governments would recognize that the force lodged in ' Cuba' and its nominal leadership was the Provisional Government of Cuba . J. ShLRbl governments would recognize .
 There will not be internal unrest earlier believed possible, nor will the defenses permit the type strike first planned . Second concept (1,5003,000 man force to secure a beach with airstrip) is also now seen to be unachievable, except as a joint Agency /
 "Our Guatemala experience demonstrates we cannot staff nor otherwise timely create the base and lift needed. Our Guatemalan experience demonstrates that we cannot . We cannot staff or otherwise timely . We need to be able to provide the base, lift needed, to create the lift needed needed .
 Operation in March 1961 . Reproduced at the National An NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3-^^ TW 6BLKE1 Operation . L-i.UJ.-yibUtiLAL.i:
 Castro had instituted no lessening in the controls that he instituted, nor in the efficiency of the military forces and militia that he had at his command by April 1961 .
 Thomas Mann of the State Department became increasingly concerned about this situation . The discussions within the Special Group and among the concerned Agencies during the period from the middle of November until the end of November, focused very frequently on this question .
 Ydigoras Fuentes, Guatemala's * During interviews with the author of this history, Messrs. F.Ydigoras and F.F.A. had a favorable reception to Agency activities from Guatemala .
 President, State's concern that the training ""places too much strain on the government of Guatemala"" appear unrealistic . E 1 NAR A C&Q DAT EB'^^ jXiE-seeR-rr .
 Ydigoras was not interested in the removal of those military units which could most effectively guarantee his continued reign as President of Guatemala . Cubans in training for both air and ground activities .
 Esterline went strongly on record in support of the Office of Logistics engineer who had been responsible for the reconstruction of the airstrip at Retalhuleu .
 Jake noted that even though there had been a sizable cost overrun, the task had been performed on time under the most adverse weather conditions . Jake said that suggestions from Headquarters that there was gross inefficiency were unfounded .
 "In any event, they are not in my judgment worth the $1,000 per month which we have to pay them," he said .
 In closing his report on the visit to Guatemala, Esterline presented the following critical observations of the situation as he saw it . Under no circumstances would I wSrXe"" ^ns^ *"""""" ^^ ^ ™>
 At no point did the Special Group of presidential consultants ever step forward with a/firm recommendation that the U.S. assume responsibility and so admit .
 Questions concerning the Bay of Pigs Operation. A^ 1 ) Reproduced at the National Archive .
 It was stressed that there was a priority need to secure Special Force trainers from the Army, on an ASAP basis . Similarly it was stressed .
 Requirements for materiel juaped, particularly in the number of personal weapons required . Personal weapons would be required for added numbers of troops in training .
 Requests immediately came forward for trucks and jeeps to transport troops to additional training sites in Guatemala from Roberto Alejos .
 There also is evidence that at least one of the principal Agency planners, C Tracy Barnes, contributed to the November confusion .
 Barnes introduced what amounted to moral objections to the association, or to strengthening, with the Somoza Government . At one point, when serious consideration was being given to the possibility of increasing significantly the training activity that might be done in Nicaragua, Barnes said .
 Barnes emphasized that this would go down hard with the more liberal elements in Latin America . Barnes said it would go hard with some of Latin America's liberal elements .
 The field was aware that the increasing number of trainees would create problems, but at the same time, trainers were hopeful that the infiltration teams that had been developed could be held intact .
 Recent cable traffic suggests major changes in near future . COS feels it would be of great assistance to have complete story to assist in dealing with Alejos and Ydigoras .
 King made a specific attempt to obtain positive guidance through the office of the Deputy director for Plans . King made an attempt to get positive guidance from the Deputy Director of Plans .
 The entire group would later be returned to a staging area in Nicaragua for the amphibious operation . The operation took place in Nicaragua .
 Thirty-eight Special Force officers and enlisted men to be used as instructors in Guatemala or in Saipan .
 Air-lift of logistic resupply air-lift to resistance after 1 February . Air-supplied resupplies to resistance forces after February 1 .
 King then closed this memorandum to Mr Bissell by noting that if the paramilitary concept was approved, certain policy approvals would be required . King: "Certain policy approvals" would be needed .
 To use a small number of U.S. contract personnel in air and maritime operations . Use of small numbers of American civilian contract personnel is limited .
 What was now to be undertaken was an amphibious assault in strength — the strength as yet to be determined — with the concomitant requirement for heavy air support for resupply and possibly for military support .
 Jake Esterline's remarks shortly fallowing the collapse of the Bay of Pigs when he testified before the Taylor Committee were indicative of the confusion which surrounded the concept . Jake's remarks were shortly after the collapse in which he testified .
 Lt. Esterline had been informed — incorrectly — incorrectly as it turned out, that in his testimony of 1 May 1961 Lt. Lt. John Esterlines had been told that in . his testimony, he had been in the Army in May 1961 . Lt. Col. E
 Egan indicated to the committee that the strike force concept has been in being since his EOD in June I960 . Frank Egan had indicated that the . strike force . concept was in being in being . since his . Egan's EOD was in June .
 "We had no approved philosophy of the operation within the Project until well in September," Hawkins says . Hawkins says. "You will find that we had no . approved philosophy"
 The training program was directed solely toward training an instructor cadre in small unit or ""guerrilla type"" operations . Rocky Farnsworth conducted the program in Panama .
 This cadre, when it arrived in Guatemala, continued to train the first recruits in the same kind of training they had received . The cadre continued to work on building the camp with Carl Jenkins .
 PM staff had been talking about the development of a strike operation, but I, myself, was not convinced of it at the time . Another example of my positiveness that we were not, at Project level, thinking of the strike operation is the first conversation that we held in. my
 Jack Hawkins had an open mind, but "without positive study of Cuba you leaned to the concept," Hawkins said . Hawkins: "Although without positive study ... you leaned" to Cuba, Hawkins' Cuba vision was outlined .
 "It was at a somewhat later date, therefore , that we talked again vand you [Col. John] John," he said .
 Jack Hawkins] stated your conviction that Castro could not be overthrown without a major or catalytic effort being made against him . Jack Hawkins]' stated your . conviction that . Castro could . not . overthrow without a . major or catalyst effort being . made against . him . Hawkins] said
 "We then began to think in terms of expanding the force to the strength of a reinforced battalion, more or less. After deliberation, I came to the same conclusion," he said .
 General Taylor is going into very fine points in his analysis of government policy . The foregoing is important only because it is important to him .
 It is incumbent upon us, therefore, to get the record straight in this manner, and, although Lt. Lt. Gen. David Cameron has been accused of wrongdoing, it is not the first time he has been charged with murder .
 Egan may have had in his own mind the idea of a strike operation . This nevertheless was not approved Project or Agency policy until quite a few months later .
 In point of fact, as I look back over that period, I am sure during that period I found myself drifting along, devoting myself merely to creating basic capabilities in a variety of fields without any clear-cut idea of what national policy would permit us to do . I'm sure
 Esterline seems to believe that this would have been feasible . That the small team concept had been planned to be put into operation early in November of 1960 .
 The Eisenhower administration was extremely cautious about anything that might have an impact on the outcome of the election . However, the election of that year made the Eisenhower administration extremely cautious . Such delays as were incurred gave added time for the Castro's internal forces .
 By the time that the election was over, it had become apparent that the small team concept was no longer viable .
 Esterline suggested that the emphasis for the buildup m the brigade forces came from the White House . The White House has been involved in the buildup, she said .
 Gordon Gray — in various meetings of the Special Group during the period from November to the end of the . month — was in meetings with the Special . Group . But even though Gordon Gray . Gray — even though he was in the meetings of . the . group during the . period from
 There is no evidence to indicate that pressure to increase the size of the force came from the White House . The Eisenhower administration — did support the idea of increasing the force .
 It's very difficult to put a finger on the exact moment when a clear decision was made, or the circumstances, or, really, the people who made it . That decision as to the character of the operation was rather gradually modified during the late autumn (of 1960), and it's
 I remember the feeling that I was well ahead of King ... in my belief that we had to place nearly exclusive reliance for the initial phase on whatever force it was possible to land . One of the clearest impressions I have of the whole planning period and of this change in concept was that
 Qgx> DAT E 3 ^ £*> ShUkfc-l of urgency at that point about a buildup in numbers than I did . ShUkFC-l had a lot of urgency about a build-up of numbers . I'm not sure what happened .
 Hawkins felt that he had to rely on what the recruiting mechanism would turn up, which wasn't really his direct operation . Hawkins wasn't at all sure that he could get the sort of numbers that he was talking about, he said .
 During this period most of the discussion and the decisions, aside from those within CIA, were at the level of the Special Group . Most of the discussions and decisions were made by the CIA's Special Group.
 The principals involved from the Department of State were at the Under Secretary/Assistant Secretary level at the highest . At the Agency, both the Director of Central Intelligence and the Deputy Director for Plans were involved .
 The President emerged as one of the principal decision makers in the period prior to t-ie take-over by the Kennedy administration . He emerged as a key figure in the decision-making process .
 "I can't explain it . . But I will say this, it probably had a political basis. I can't . explain it," he says .
 "They realized that they had lost, and they realized they were going to have to brief a new administration along with the British on the things that had been going on," the British said .
 "I suspect that they didn't want to brief on something that would emerge that they hadn't been giving anything other than their full support," she says . "They didn't . want to want to . to be honest about what they had been giving," she adds .
 The President made it clear he wanted all done that could be done with all possible urgency and nothing less on the part of any department . The President led a discussion as to how best to organize the total United States effort .
 It was also felt desirable to use Mr Pawley's services, initially in connection with C 2 V M ' JJ assistance . It was initially in . connection with . C 2 M 'JJ assistance .
 Pawley said that two things were necessary, and I inferred that these would constitute his principal recommendations to the President . Mr Pawley: Two things are necessary to be necessary to get the President to the White House .
 The President should appoint a single experienced individual to conduct the entire covert operation, he says . The President said he was personally qualified and would be available for the job if asked .
 This could be done in five or six weeks, rather than months, according to him . This is not the first time this has been done, he says .
 I asked if he was proposing overt intervention by U.S. armed forces . I asked him if he had proposed overt intervention, he said yes .
 He said Cubans are politically unblemished in Cuba, neither pinks nor reactionary rightists . He mentioned a number of names which were unfamiliar to me of Cubans who he said are politically .
 Jake Esterline has tended to denigrate the role played by Pawley during the course of the Bay of Pigs operation . Jake was charged with maintaining close liaison with Pawley throughout the operation .
 JMATE records show numerous face-to-face meetings between Pawley and Esterline during the course of the operation . Records also reflect an amazing number of telephone conversations between the two .
 In .terms of the operational plan per se, Esterline appeared to be most cagy in handling this subject during the discussions with Pawley .
 The recorded conversations focus on the potential leadership for the FRD . Pawley's "best" leadership choices usually are far to the right .
 Solicited the Group's assistance in arriving at a concensus of views as to what exactly had been decided . XQP 0CCRCT NAR A'""cu4o""''^ DAT ET-ffiPS ^tUH SbCkhT
 The President's suggestion that a single individual should be placed in charge of the anti-Castro program was the subject of the Special Group meeting . The problem that apparently created the greatest difficulty at this . meeting was the President's suggested that a . single individual . should be put in charge
 The Special Group decided that there should be two individuals with principal responsibilities . One person would handle the overt and the other one to handle the covert activities . The two individuals will be responsible for the covert operations .
 It was recognized that these nominees would have to be checked with Mr Gray's associates . Mr Gray was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998 .
 On the covert side Dillon followed the DCI's suggestion that C Tracy Barnes should be appointed to devote full time to the direction of the Agency's program with respect to Cuba, .
 I approve of the suggestions regarding the reorganization of the government's T ^ P ^bLKEl* NAR A CJ^O D ATEjb^^) program with respect to Cuba . I think Mr Willauer should have a position directly subordinate to the Secretary of State
 There should be no doubt as to the authority of the Special Assistant to the State Department to subordinate covert and overt activities, State Dept. says .
 In their broad outline, these policies will, of course, be subject to the approval of higher authority . In the broad outline of these policies, they are subject to an approval from higher authorities .
 Thomas A. Parrott who acted as 'secretary for the Special Group meeting' had been made aware of the possibility that Eisenhower was in favor of raising the position of Willauer . The draft of Bui-les* memorandum was sent to Tracy Barnes .
 Tracy Barnes seemed to have a great deal more to say than was warranted by his knowledge and apparent understanding of the planned action . Tracy Barnes seems to have more than a lot of say than warranted .
 The proposal is a draft draft and is off the top of the head without any detailed knowledge of possible applicable regs and procedures . Lansdale's proposal is off-the-top-head, but it will help make understandable the consternation within the ranks of the Department of Defense
 The State Department drafted the political action recommendations and suggested collective action through the Organization of American States to effect the ouster of Castro . The papers were drafted toward the close of the Eisenhower administration .
 Failing in that, State outlined a unilateral political action program for the United States . State then outlined a plan to take action against the government .
 Neither the State nor the CIA paper introduced ideas that had not been thoroughly discussed . The State and CIA paper did not introduce ideas that were not thoroughly discussed.
 These recommendations were made just as if the Secretary of State, the Special Group, and the President had approved, or would approve, the President . The President would have approved the courses of action that were being outlined .
 This being the case, it was suggested that the concurrence of the President-elect should be sought .
 The militia's overall combat efficiency is low; many units are still on a part time training basis . The militia is still in need of a full-time training program .
 There appears to be emerging a nucleus of well organized, well equipped, and well trained units loyal to Castro and strongly Communist-influenced . We believe that within the next 12 months or so, these units will develop into a reasonably effective security force .
 Ambassador Willauer called a meeting with the Agency ' s principals to explain both his role and some of the problems that he anticipated the President wanted him to handle . Ambassador William Willauer was promoted to the post in December 1960 .
 Mr Willauer stated that his role, as explained to him by Secretary Herter, was that of the chairman and major shareholder of a corporate board with Mr Tracy Barnes, the executive director for operations and minority shareholder .
 King asked for clarification on this point, noting that Mr Esterline is the director for operations for CIA . He said the chain of command goes from the Director to Bissell to Col. Col. David Bissell . King: Mr Bissell is the Director for Operations for CIA with
 Mr Willauer agreed that this was the case, noting that he had used the term operations in the looser sense of overall coordination .
 There is a strong aversion to attempts to set a firm date for D-Day, Willauer says . Opponents say military planning should be deferred until it can be determined if the economic sanctions would work to Castro's disadvantage .
 Willauer pointed out to the people in State that since the Soviet Union was so strongly committed to support the Castro government, economic sanctions would have little or no impact on Castro's position .
 Willauer argued that there was going to be revolutionary activity in Cuba, whether the U.S. had a hand in it or not . He emphasized that, in any event, the United States would be blamed for it .
 Esterline also emphasized that most of the arguments urging delay of PM planning, particularly concern re the OAS, had been debated with State for months . The time had come for direct action, she said .
 The period of training for many of the Cubans had been extended and re-extended and that to hold them beyond 1 March 1961 increased the problem of maintaining high morale among the troops .
 The anti-Castro Cubans knew that the U.S. had the force to throw Castro out any time that it so desired . Esterline took the position that the training was indicative, to them, that the United States was not really interested in the welfare of the anti
 Willauer objected to the possibility of launching air strikes for three days before the invading force landed . This would give the OAS ample time to get involved in the act, he said .
 Willauer then raised the question of whether all of the tactical bombing could be done on D-Day . Willauer: "It's not a matter of whether it's possible to do all the bombing"
 Hawkins was ""no,"" but said that it could be done on D-2, if permission were given for dawn airstrikes to take out Castro's air force and military targets, with additional sorties during the course of D-l and follow-up raids prior to the landings
 Hawkins pointed out that if an attempt were made to withhold the airstrikes until D-Day, the Castro air force would have an opportunity to attack the ships which would be carrying the invasion troops .
 There was some discussion of limiting use of this base to only two or three days, but WH/4 said it was inconceivable in view of the nature of the planned air operations, that the air support operation could be in and out of Nicaragua in this period .
 It was pointed out that efforts had been made to get permission to use United States bases, or other closer bases to Cuba than Nicaragua, but without success .
 Willauer was positive that no U.S. bases would be made available for the strike against Castro . Willauer, himself was positive no United States bases were made available to Castro .
 Willauer met with Willauer during the Eisenhower-Kennedy transition . Willauer: "The transition between the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations was a very interesting time"
 It would be very difficult for State people to try to approach Mr Kennedy via Mr Rusk and Mr Bowles, says Mr Kennedy . State people would not be able to talk to Mr Kennedy, he says .
 Meeting had been called by Henry Holland, who was one of the principal fund raisers for the FRD . In attendance at this meeting were the Vice President for Latin America of Standard Oil of New Jersey .
 The tenor of the conversation was that it was time for the U.S. to get off of dead center and take some direct action against Castro . The conversation was about the United States' need to take action .
 Suggestions were made to sabotage the sugar crop — the question was whether to burn the cane or ruin the refineries . Suggestions also included to put an embargo on food, drugs, and spare parts for machinery .
 The feeling of the business group was that it was time to get tough and, hopefully, the blame for an embargo would be laid on Castro . Dulles opposed the embargo on food and drugs, but it was hoped that Castro would be blamed .
 This group of businessmen also indicated that they were going to undertake publication of specific papers on issues and programs related to the post-Castro Cuba, which would be designed to help U.S. policy planners .
 Dulles emphasized that policy planning was not his responsibility; this was the responsibility of the Department of State . Mr Dulles, of course, emphasized that .
 Standard of Jersey's Vice President for Latin America, for example, forwarded a memorandum to Col. Michael Haider . Haider, Standard's vice-president for Latin American, forwarded the memo . The Standard of . Jersey's vice president for Latin . America's Vice-President for Latin
 Manolo Ray, Aureliano Sanchez Arango, Rufo L6pez Fresquet, and Dr. King in early January 1961 identified as members of an extreme leftist group which had formed in Miami to oppose Castro . The group was formed by the Cuban exile of Castro, Man
 Mr Haider worried that unless more positive steps were taken to force the conservative Cuban exiles into a cohesive organization, any post-Castro government would automatically be in the hands of leftists .
 Lansdale forwarded to Bissell a number of suggestions which had been presented to him by an Army reservist who had put in two weeks of active duty with OSO at Lansdale' s direction researching Cuban political objectives .
 Agency devoted many months to the study of this subject, and all other aspects of the anti-Castro effort, Lansdale would have forwarded this kind of paper to Bissell .
 The members of the Special Group, however, were unwilling to buy this particular plan of action . But they did support Mr Bissell's proposals for some limited covert action operations aimed at the L & J regime .
 The latter made two points: it would be desirable to obtain the cooperation and support of individual Latin American Governments . It would also be desirable, if possible, for the United States to break relations with Cuba, in concert with other countries some time before January 20th .
 Frondizi, Prado, and others should take diplomatic initiative to get Latin American countries to take a position that they would like to remove Castro from power, he said . He said, lacking the means to do so, would like the United States to take the lead .
 The President said it was clear to him that Latin Americans must be brought to see the necessity of action . He said Latin America must see the need for action .
 He was inclined to think that it might be time"" to recognize the anti-Castro front as the Cuban Government, he said . He said: "I might be inclined to ... recognize it as a government"
 He added that he would like to see a definite move taken in this matter before January 20th . State Department should be thinking of some definite action that could be brought about before that time, he said .
 At the Special Group meeting of 29 December 1960, it was suggested by Mr Merchant that the Group's membership for discussions on Cuba be expanded to include Ambassador Willauer, Assistant Secretary Thomas Kaon and CTracy Barnes .
 Jack Hawkins who were the most knowledgeable about the status of the operation and, indeed, the whole operational plan . Jack Hawkins was the leader of the British Army in the 1980s .
 A review of the records of the Bay of Pigs Operation, indicates that a great deal of the written aaterial' is re4iititious ad nauseam, and that Barnes belabored issues which were common knowledge to the principals .
 Barnes wrote to Jake Esterline on 28 December 1960 . Barnes wrote a memorandum in which he was unhappy with the government .
 On 3 January 1961, President Eisenhower held a meeting at the White House to discuss the Cuban situation . Eisenhower was the first president to hold such a meeting in 1961 .
 Participants included the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury . General Goodpaster, General Bissell, Thomas Mann, and Tracy Barnes .
 Among principal questions was if and when the United States should break off diplomatic relations with Cuba . Before the day was over, the U.S. did break relations officially with the Cuban Government .
 Barnes 1 memorandum for the DCI in preparation for a 3 January policy meeting, rehashed the same information that Barnes had presented to Chief, WH/4, just a few days before . Similarly, Barnes 1 memo for DCI rehashes the same info that Barnes presented to
 Question raised about increasing number of trainees . Agency planning for anti-Castro activities was discussed .
 This was ruled out pending the suitability of training sites to handle additional numbers . This is not the first time this has been ruled out of the tournament .
 Training sites in the United States still were denied, in part, again, because of the fear of compromising the U.S. position in the Organization of American States or the United Nations . Training sites were still denied, part of the reason for the denial .
 Communications officer was instructed to pack up as much gear as possible and destroy that which remained . During this hectic period, the communications officer was told to destroy everything remaining .
 Last message from Havana Station — on 7 January 1961 at 1638Z — stated This last msg from HAVA Station. This last message was from Havana .
 Swiss amb placed ""Carta de Proteccion"" notices on emb doors minimizing possibility takeover of blda by GOC* 29/ y . Even as the 'debate over the breaking of diplomatic relations was taking place within the Eisenhower administration, Col. Col. Gen. Col
 Jack Hawkins addressed a memorandum to Jake Esterline, Chief, WH/4 which provided an excellent summary of the policy decisions which needed . Authorization for complete shutdown had been set for 0300Z on 7 January 1961 .
 Hawkins reiterated the need for resolution of the problem that had particularly bothered the Special Group . That was whether the Kennedy administration was interested in following through on the plans that had been made, Hawkins said .
 Hawkins suggested that considering the rapid build up of Castro's military forces the strike operations be conducted not later than 1 March 1961 . The Kennedy administration did intend to follow through on the program .
 The question of air strikes was basic to Hawkins's planning — on this he was quite firm . Hawkins was a firm believer in air strikes in his plans for Syria .
 It is axiomatic in amphibious operations that control of air and sea in v the objective area is absolutely required . Control of air, sea and land is absolutely necessary in amphibian operations .
 The Cuban Air Force and naval vessels capable of opposing our landing must be knocked out or neutralized before our amphibious shipping makes its final run in to the beach . The Cuban air force and naval ships must be destroyed before our landing, the US says .
 That any move to curtail the number of aircraft to be employed from those available be resisted . That would be firmly resisted by the government .
 That the operation be abandoned if policy does not provide for use of . adequate tactical air support . That policy should provide for . use of adequate tactical . air support. That is the policy .
 Hawkins urged authorization for the use of contract American pilots . Hawkins urged use of the airfield at Puerto Cabezas as an advance strike base . The use of air bases in the United States was also requested .
 Much of the same focus was to be given to the questions regarding air bases, the size of the invasion force, and the number of trainees who could be accommodated in the camps .
 This is an expensive program running to approximately $28 million . The cost of the program is estimated to be $28million .
 Mr Dulles discussed the radio effort and paramilitary effort in some detail . The numbers of Cubans being trained and the supply efforts and the bases .
 DDP Director for Support: Richard Helms, Chief of Operations for DDP . Emmett Echols, Director of Personnel, Emmets Echol, Director for Personnel, and John Warner, Legislative Counsel. John Warner is Legislative Counsel .
 William A Tidwell, Jr. of Amory 's office was appointed in January 1961 to be Chief of the Office of Operations in Miami . Tidwell was appointed by Amory's office in 1961 .
 "I considered that we were limited in what we could say about them. Believing that my successor might want to assist some day to assist the refugee forces to move into Cuba, I considered that . I thought that we could only say what we did about them," he said .
 Of the two candidates considered to appear before the Senate, Thomas Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs, or DCI Dulles, it was decided to send Dulles to appear .
 Eisenhower raised certain questions as to the right of a Committee to ask questions on foreign I KAR A CJ^O DA re^Sffigft policy affecting the security of the United States .
 He commented that when this is demanded as a right you are ""sunk" and wondered how much right have they got . The Constitution says that it is the responsibility of the Chief Executive .
 The conclusions were predictable — there were decisions that needed to be made, but these could not be made until the new administration became fully aware of the extent of the anti-Castro programs that had been evolving . The conclusion was predictable . There were decisions needed to make, but the new
 There is a grave danger that the December 6 plan may have to be abandoned, as an effective means of overthrowing Castro without more overt support . The only practical course o£ action for the physical overthrow of Castro, will be either: open United States war with Cuba, or a seven
 In our discussions we weighed without coming to a conclusion the advantages of a rapid, effective action by direct war in terms of getting matters over with without a long buildup of world opinion vs. the inevitability of such a build up under any seven-month program .
 Fidel Castro's virtuoso performance for the Cuban television audience on 23 April 1961 . Fidel Castro explained the invasion to them on Cuban television . Castro's performance was one of the most immediate responses to the Cuban invasion .
 "This danger always has been lurking about us and has gathered considerable support in the minds of leading circles of the U.S. United States," he says . The danger has always been lurking around us, he says.
 Covert training of exiles for any possible future operations against Castro was going forward . Covert trainings were going forward for possible future attacks against Castro .
 Units were growing steadily in strength and efficiency against the time when actual tactical planning could be undertaken . Unit strength was growing steadily against time when tactical planning was undertaken . Units were still growing in strength, efficiency .
 Cuban refugees are busily training and preparing for a return to their native land . So, to the incoming administration, we left units of Cuban refugees .
 Top SECRhl"" NAR A CJ&O DATeS'i J NAB -J&P-ttCWEr plans for a military invasion . Because they had as yet been unable to find the leader they wanted — a national leader to be both anti-
 Their hatred of Castro, their patriotism, and their readiness to sacrifice for the restoration and freedom in Cuba could not be doubted . However, their hatred of the Castro regime and their patriotism was not doubted .
 The retiring President stressed that there had been no decision as to how the Cuban forces would be used, if at all .
 Eisenhower had made . no commitments that might bind the new President in dealing with the Castro problem . Eisenhower had . made no commitments . No commitments . might bind . the new president in dealing . with the problem .
 In fact, the armed refugee group was still so small and unprepared that it could easily have been disbanded if the incoming administration considered its existence unnecessary . The refugee group is still small and relatively unprepared .
 Eisenhower felt that Kennedy shared his judgment that the new administration need not rush a decision regarding the Cubans . Eisenhower: "I Eisenhower felt ... that Kennedy ...shared his judgment" Kennedy: "The new administration needs not rush"
 The definition of a military plan, however, seems to have focused on an actual site for the landing . Gray certainly was telling the truth because no such choice had been made at the time that Eisenhower left office .
 There wasn't any military plan formulated by the Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower administration Xtfent out of office .
 Of course, the President was fully aware of and conversant with the decision to train and arm individuals, he said . "Of course, of course, [President] was aware of the decision," he added .
 "The concept was one that was sort of changing in the Eisenhower Administration. And the concept ... was one of the things that was changing in Eisenhower Administration," says CNN's John Sutter .
 First we were thinking in terms of the old infiltration of small groups . We were looking at the possibility of infiltrating small groups of people in the U.S. First, we thought of the 'old infiltration' of the small groups.
 Then they were thinking of the possibility of landing of people, unit sized groups, they said . Then they thought of the idea of landing on the ground .
 WaS. contemplated that there would be or could be a military action . WaS clearl y contemplated that . there would not be . or could . be military action. WaS .
 Kennedy inherited a plan that he couldn't change, but it's not true that Kennedy inherited it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It simply was not true" Kennedy inherited his own plan, he says .
 The planning that was done m his administration was changed. As a matter of fact, the planning that he was put in place was changed, he said .
 No planning process in Eisenhower administration had got to the point of discussing what would be the landina point . But none of that, or that, had been the subject of discussion .