 The crisis began in October 1962, with U.S. U-2 aircraft taking photographs of Cuba that showed the Soviet Union had recently placed nuclear missiles there . The U.N. was preparing them with the capacity to launch and reach targets .
 Kennedy made a television address revealing the Soviet moves, demanding that they be reversed . He announced a naval quarantine of Cuba that would permit no shipments related to missile preparations . Kennedy deliberated with his advisers .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed, to Kennedy’s satisfaction, to remove the missiles in exchange for official recognition of Fidel Castro's government in Cuba, the end of the quarantine and the removal of American nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 The crisis was defused, and the missiles left Cuba as the quarantine was lifted in November . The quarantine in Cuba was lifted, and missiles left the island .
 The roots of the crisis lay in the superpowers’ contest over Berlin that had come to a head the previous year . Berlin was the focus of the conflict between the West and the West .
 West Berlin remained an enclave of the United States and its allies within Soviet-dominated East Germany . Because of the Potsdam agreement after World War II, West Berlin was part of the U.S. and allies .
 Khrushchev appealed to Kennedy at a summit in Vienna in 1961 to permit the effective incorporation of West Berlin into East Germany . In 1961, Kennedy agreed to allow West Berlin to be incorporated into East Berlin .
 Khrushchev ordered the Berlin Wall to be built separating East and West Berlin . Kennedy refused, and in August, the Berlin wall was built . The Wall Wall was built in August 1961 .
 This stemmed the large flow of emigrants from East to West that had characterized the city since its division . The city was divided between East and West, ending its long-standing division .
 Khrushchev sought other arenas in which the Soviet Union could clearly beat the U.S. in geopolitical contests . The Soviet Union sought to use this advantage against the United States in other arenas, he says .
 Fidel Castro declared his allegiance to Marxist-Leninism and international communism in 1962 . Fidel Castro was the leader of Cuba, Fidel Castro, who declared allegiance to the cause of Marxist Leninism . Castro is the Cuban leader of the Cuban government .
 Fidel Castro led a communist revolution in Cuba and attempted to forge a relationship with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban government in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In April 1961, Castro fended off the Bay of Pigs invasion by Cuban exiles who had been supported by the United States . Castro had seized power in a coup in 1959, after seizing power in 1959 .
 Castro aspired to export revolution throughout Latin America . Emboldered by this accomplishment, Castro hoped to export the revolution .
 Castro indicated to the Soviet Union that, should it lack enthusiasm for communist expansionism in Latin America, he would court Chairman Mao’s communist China as an alternative partner . In 1962, Castro also indicated that, if it lacked enthusiasm for . expansionism, in addition to his communist
 Khrushchev decided he would submit to Castro’s pressure and make Cuba the vehicle for the geopolitical victory he sorely desired after the 1961 developments in Berlin . The Cuban leader was determined to make Cuba Cuba a vehicle for a geopolitical victory .
 In the summer of 1962, the Soviet Union increased its exports of important military materiel to Cuba . This depriving formerly favored allies such as Gamel Abdel Nasser’s Egypt in the process . The Soviet Union also increased its export of military equipment .
 The shipments included nuclear missile components that, when readied, could easily reach the U.S. When readied for use, the missiles could reach the United States, experts say .
 Khrushchev understood that in the near future, the U.S. would detect these developments, but he accepted the risk that a crisis would ensue . The crisis was likely to occur in the United States in the future, he says .
 Khrushchev wanted to give the impression he had nuclear missiles to spare . Besides building the Berlin Wall and limiting Chinese influence over Cuba, he wanted to show that he had nukes to spare.
 In 1960, Kennedy had bemoaned a “missile gap” between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . He knew the balance of these weapons actually favored the United States .
 By having missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev hoped to discredit Kennedy by showing that the missile gap had become more extreme under Kennedy . The missile gap was real, but also that it had become even more extreme, Kennedy said .
 The missiles threatened to destabilize the Cold War because they gave the Soviets first-strike capability, meaning they could strike the U.S. before it could launch a response . The missiles were launched in the early 1950s .
 By obtaining first-strike capability, the Soviets would upset the logic of mutual assured destruction, author says . MAD prevented a nuclear war only if each side could strike the other with nuclear weapons . MAD was designed to prevent nuclear war .
 Kennedy: It was “one hell of a gamble,” as Kennedy observed during the crisis that October . Kennedy: "It was one hell of gamble, as Kennedy said .
 The Soviet Politburo appears to have justified its decision by reasoning that U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey were no different from Soviet missiles so close to the United States in Cuba . The decision was justified by reasoning the U.K. was no different than the Soviet missiles in Cuba
 The United States government did not regard the two situations as comparable . However, the U.S. government did .
 On October 16, Kennedy received word from his national security staff that aerial photography definitively showed Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, with launch sites being readied .
 Kennedy met with his advisers and military leadership for six successive days debating the response to the crisis . This information remained classified as Kennedy held discussions with advisers, military leaders .
 The options included diplomatic efforts, a naval blockade, and a invasion of Cuba . The options include diplomatic efforts and an invasion .
 Kennedy feared invasion would elicit a Soviet march on Berlin that the U.S. might be powerless to oppose . The military staff heavily favored invasion, but Kennedy feared it would deliver Khrushchev exactly what he wanted . Kennedy feared that would elicit an invasion of Berlin .
 American naval vessels would only permit goods to pass into Cuba that were not associated with war materiel . This meant that U.S. ships would only allow goods to be allowed into Cuba . The embargo was imposed on Cuba during the Second World War .
 1962 aerial photograph shows the construction of a medium-range ballistic missile launch site in Cuba . The site was built in Cuba in the 1960s .
 On October 22, Kennedy addressed the nation on television explaining the crisis . It was the first time the public had heard of it and the naval quarantine . Kennedy said the quarantine was the result of a naval crisis .
 Soviet responses to Kennedy’s moves were not conciliatory . With large military forces of both superpowers gathered in and around Cuba, the world sensed that nuclear war could be imminent .
 The United States Navy was stopping and boarding ships, and a United States reconnaissance pilot was shot down . At least one Soviet submarine with nuclear weapons was harassed by American forces . The U.S. Navy stopped and boarded ships .
 On October 26, Kennedy received an otherwise-standoffish letter from Khrushchev that appeared to offer notes of conciliation and compromise . Kennedy received the letter from the Soviet Union on October 26 .
 Khrushchev issued a public statement that the Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba . Diplomats conferred, and on October 28, the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles . The missiles were removed .
 The United States confirmed that it would end the blockade when the missiles and their attending apparatus were gone . The U.S. also pledged not to invade Castro’s island .
 The Turkey concession was kept secret . The U.S. removed the missiles there the following April .
 Aboard a submarine near Cuba on October 27, Soviet officer Vasili Arkhipov cast the deciding vote against firing the vessel’s nuclear weapons . The decision was made in response to harassment from American naval forces .
 In 1962, Vasili Arkhipov was an officer on the Soviet submarine B-59, pictured here . He was a member of the Soviet Union's first sub-marine force, the Soviet-built B-60 .
 A unanimous vote among its three top officers was required to launch the sub’s nuclear weapons . The sub's top officers were required to vote for the launch of the sub .
 Arkhipov refused to assent without receiving orders from Moscow . The action likely saved the world from a nuclear holocaust . The decision saved the lives of millions .
 By provoking the missile crisis, Khrushchev had secured an ally in Cuba, but it was an ally that had pushed him around to pursue its own goals . The Cuban missile crisis was the result of the crisis in 1962 .
 He also did not secure the prize – West Berlin – that had motivated him to act in the first place .
 In 1964, weakened and embarrassed, he was relieved of his office and replaced by the hardliner Leonid Brezhnev . In 1964 he was forced to resign and was replaced by hardline hardliner .
 Kennedy basked in the glory of getting tough with the Soviets while appearing conciliatory in the cause of world peace . Kennedy, on the other hand, was emboldened by the missile crisis .
 The crisis made West Berlin a permanent entity, which Kennedy relished as another Cold War victory . The crisis led to the creation of West Berlin as a permanent West Berlin .
 The missile crisis also introduced a new sober realism to U.S.-Soviet relations . The crisis was also introduced to a sober realism in the Cold War .
 A diplomatic hotline was installed between Moscow and Washington, DC . A nuclear test ban treaty between the two powers was signed the following year . Russia and the U.S. signed a treaty banning nuclear tests in 1998 .