 The Secretary of Defence was Robert McNamara who was the former president of Ford Motor Company . McNamara was the secretary of defence during the war .
 The Secretary of State was Dean Rusk who had been the president of the Rockefeller Foundation 4.4.4 .
 JFK boosted spending on non-nuclear forces like troops, ships, and artillery . Also created the Green Berets and elite force who focused on guerilla tactics . JFK tripled nuclear capabilities .
 Fidel Castro took over American and British oil refineries and farms in Cuba to give to the landless peasants . Castro had promised democracy but he eventually took over the refineries . The revolution was fought between Fidel Castro and the dictator Fulgencio Batista .
 He was also elected by a narrow margin so he didn’t have a mandate from the American people, he said . He also said he was elected by narrow margin . The president was elected in a narrow majority of voters .
 The Department of Defense got a 20% increase in their budget . Minimum wage went up to $1.25 an hour . Extended unemployment insurance .
 Peace Corps volunteers went to developing countries to be agricultural advisors, health aides, and teachers . By 1968, 35,000 had volunteered and had served in 60 nations . Alliance for Progress offered economic and technical assistance to Latin American countries .
 In April of 1961, USSR astronaut Yuri A Gagarin became the first man in space . In less than a month the United States had done the same . Kennedy pledged to put a man on in ten years . In 1969, Neil Armstrong became first man to step on the moon .
 Universities expanded their teaching of science in a cost of $25. billion dollars in today's money it would be about $158 billion dollars . In today’s money, the cost of the project would be $158billion dollars .
 The Other American by Michael Harrington argued that poverty was rampant in the United States 50 million people lived on less than $1,000 a year . The Civil Rights Movement was also starting . JFK presented Congress with a Civil Rights Bill and a $10 billion tax cut .
 Kennedy went to Dallas to mend fences with the Republican party in that city . While driving through downtown Dallas and Kennedy was shot in the head . Lee Harvey Oswald was changed with the murder he was 24 .
 Oswald had lived in the USSR and supported Castro . While being transferred to a new jail Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby a Dallas nightclub owner .