 America’s battle for independence in 1776 spurred resentment towards the British occupation . America™s struggle for independence from the British occupied led to resentment against the British .
 Rise in economic and social status introduced new technologies and promoted capitalism . Rise in social status was introduced by social status . Rise of social status brought in new technologies, promoted capitalism, according to economist .
 Colony became increasingly dissatisfied with repressive Spanish rule and became less dependent on mother country . Colony became more dependent on Spain and became independent in 18th century . Colony was founded in 1881 . Colony's first colony was established in 1883 .
 The United States then became a leading trading partner of Cuba . Due to the weak Spanish government, the people admired the American people for their government and their sense of freedom .
 The Ten Years’ War promised the Cubans of independence, which the Spanish did not fulfill with the mobilization of troops into the island nation . However, they came to terms with the abolition of slavery . The Cuban people were promised independence .
 American influence in Cuba increased, controlling the sugar industry . American-Cuban relationship increased concentration on sugar production . American influence increased in Cuba .
 Cuba suffered greatly from the depression, leading to a revolutionary movement, headed by Jose Marti . The depression led to the revolutionary movement of the Cuban people .
 Cuba adopted American traditions such as educational system and free elections . After achieving independence, Cuba adopted free elections and educational system .
 Palma reigns a period of political instability which forces the Americans to further intervene in the government . Palma's political instability forces the U.S. to intervene further in government .
 Revolts against foreign domination leads to the rise of the liberal party in 1924 . Gerardo Machado y Morales promoted reforms such as public works and reparations .
 Fulgencio Batista Y Zaldivar comes to power in 1952 after the Revolution of 1933 . He is the first president of Cuba since the revolution in 1933 .
 As the cycle continues, revolutionary groups plotted to overthrow his reign . As the cycles of revolutions continue, the cycle of events continue .
 Fidel Castro was among the revolutionaries that attempted to bring Batista's power to an end, yet failed and was imprisoned . Castro was imprisoned for his role in the overthrow of Batista .
 Fidel Castro and his revolutionaries were pardoned as political prisoners in Cuba in May of 1955 . Castro comes to power after revolution rebel leader Fidel Castro was pardoned . Castro is the leader of Cuba's first government .
 Castro and his followers headed to Mexico to overthrow the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista Y Zaldivar . Castro's followers were overthrown by Batista, who rule was marked by unconcealed corruption .
 Castro and his 81 followers returned to eastern Cuba by sea loaded with arms and ammunition . Many refugees were able to escaped to the Sierra Maestra mountain range in Oriente province in 1956 . Castro and 81 followers were able escape Batista's forces in eastern Cuba .
 Castro carried out a guerilla campaign, unstoppable by the army or the police forces for the two proceeding years . From their mountain stronghold, he carried out the guerrilla campaign . Castro's guerillas carried out from their mountain strongholds .
 Castro's guerilla bands increased by the hundreds, raiding military facilities and kidnapping 38 American civilians in 1957 yet released them as the tensions from the U.S. government rose . Castro was released by the United States as tensions rose .
 Castro called for 'total war' against Batista's regime, and took the offensive moving out of the mountains in 1958 . Castro called it a "total war" against the Batista regime . Castro was the first Cuban to take the offensive .
 The rebels seized Santa Clara, the capital of Las Villas province, on December 31, 1958 . Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, Castro's comrade-in-arms, had captured a train loaded with weapons .
 Batista fled to the Dominican Republic on January 1, 1959, fearful of the outcome of the revolution, leaving Cuba in the hands of a three-man ruling party . Batista was forced to flee Cuba in 1959 .
 The people welcomed Castro when he led his motley columns into Havana, Cuba's capital, in the days proceeding Batista's flee . The people welcome Castro's arrival in Havana .
 The army held no oppositions against the rebel forces yet rather they welcomed them as well as the rebels . The army has no opposition to the rebels yet .
 Cuba was transformed into a communist state supported by the Soviet Union . Castro was the prime minister of the provisional government . Castro's government was supported by Soviet-backed Cuba .
 U.S. had cut off and obligated an economic embargo on the island so the Soviets would be the provider of massive oil shipment . Russia was limited overseas shipping capabilities .
 Russia orders for extra oil tankers from capitalist Italy, which angered the United States . The United States angered the U.S. upon hearing that the capitalist country would aid a communist country . Russia ordered extra tankers for Italy .
 Castro made socialist reforms such as naturalization of businesses and collectivism of agriculture . Castro instilled his fellow rebels in Cuba, which instilled him with fellow rebels .
 Cuba was dependent on military and economic aid as time progresses with the aid of the Soviet Union . Cuba is now dependent on economic and military aid from Russia .
 Russia was Cuba's trading partner, which alerted the American government of Cuba’s success to be an example of successful socialism, and model for other countries to revert to socialist forms of government and promote anti-U.S. propaganda .
 U.S. spy planes passes over Cuba over a Soviet-managed construction and spotted a wide range ballistic missiles . On October 14th, 1962, United States spy planes pass over Cuba .
 President Kennedy announced a naval blockade to prevent Russian ships carrying weapons to enter into Cuba on the 22 of October . President Kennedy meets with his cabinet, and announced the blockade .
 United States missiles were stationed in Italy, Turkey as well as West Germany, pointed towards motherland Russia . The U.S. believed installing missiles in Cuba was a great defense . The United States believed it was a good defense .
 The Cuban missiles were not capable of being neutralized to prevent U.S. invasions . They were not able to be neutralized by the United States to prevent invasion .
 President Kennedy was pressured to use force against Cuba . President Kennedy felt threatened of being overthrown by his own military .
 The Untied States demanded the Soviet Union to dismantle the missiles, which the Russian agreed under the condition that the United States promised not to invade Cuba . The United States also demanded that the Soviets dismantle missiles .
 American U-2 spy plane was shot down under the orders of Castro during the inspection which spurred negative propaganda towards the Cubans and the Soviets .
 Castro viewed the dismantling of the missiles as a lost for the Soviet Union . Relations with Cuba and Russia began to worsen for Castro . Castro viewed it as a loss for Russia and Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote Castro expressing that Cuba was now a safe socialist country post with no such threats of invasion . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Castro then focused on revamping the agricultural system in Cuba, which suffered greatly due to the blockade . Castro then aimed to dominate the international sugar market with modern machinery and technology . Castro: "I want Cuba to dominate its sugar market"
 The Cuban missile crisis served as an example of the possibility of a nuclear war . It also allowed interaction between opposing systems of government that were both seeking to expand their influence on third world countries .
 The people of the United States saw this as their own victory with the removal of the nuclear threat . Cuba is free from invasions whereas the people of Cuba are free from invasion . The U.S. is free of invasions, but Cuba is not free of invasion .
 After the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, the government took a more critical look at the socio-economic and political system that has prevailed in Cuba for more than thirty-five years .
 Interview conducted with Sandinista, leader Tomas Borgre, and Castro criticized Stalin on a number of things including invasion of Finland and the Stalin-Hitler Pact . Thirty-eight years later an interview was conducted with the Sandinistas .
 Many of the people that live on the left tended to write about Cuba purely in national and sometimes in Latin American or Third World terms without addressing the strong systemic similarities between Cuban, Asian and Eastern European Communism . Now many of the writers on Cuba have written about Cuba in national terms .
 The Radical Cuban nationalism did not have anything to say about how to reorganize and restructure a capitalist area into a socialist society . The radical Cuban nationalism had nothing to say on how to rebuild a capitalist society .
 For one thing, the authoritarian caudillismo of Castro, but also the scarcity of alternatives to both stylistic distinctiveness and Communism . For one reason, there are no alternatives to the dictatorship of the Castro regime .
 Joseph Montville Monteville has many philosophies about human behavior . Monteville and Cuba are the subject of many of his philosophies . He has been married for more than 50 years .
 He believed that peace among each other would only be accomplished through acknowledgement and forgiveness .
 His theory of contrition can be applied as a resolution technique to help Cuba deal with their problems regarding foreign relations . Cuba's problems with foreign relations can be solved by using contrition .
 Cuba was previously influenced by foreign capitalistic countries . Castro believed that the influence was a threat to preserving their cultural values . Cuba was ruled out of Cuba by the Communist Party of Cuba .
 Castro must admit to his faults of distrust for capitalistic countries, only then can Cuba function with other countries . Castro must also admit his faults for his distrust of capitalistic nations . Only then, Cuba will be able to work with other nations, he says .