 This publication has been reviewed and approved by competent personnel of the authenticating command in accordance with current directives on essentiality and propriety . This publication was reviewed and . approved by . competent personnel .
 Although the bulk of the references pertain to the post-1960 period, many are to earlier materials .
 The user will find that emphasis is given to economic, political, and historical topics . Consultation of the “ Contents’ and the ‘Subject Index’ will reveal the great variety of other topics also included .
 From the beginning, the compiler has hoped that through this volume he would be able to direct the user to numerous items that heretofore have remained “buried,” either because they have not been included in existing bibliographies, or because they appear in unjnd
 Use this article to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the text to help you understand the content of this article . At the bottom of the page, please share your thoughts with the author .
 The CONTENTS are arranged alphabetically by title within the different subject classifications shown in the CONTENTS . They should also note that entries are arranged by title . Index references are to item numbers .
 A brief study of the geography, people, politics, history, and foreign relations of Argentina . Argentina's history of the country . Argentina .
 Primarily, a study of forces that have influenced Argentine political and economic development in the 20th century . Primarily . Study of forces influencing Argentine political, economic development .
 Volume focusses attention on 19th century growth of the nation and its capital . Volume focuses on the growth of 19th Century growth of nation and capital .
 History, economy, society, influence of Perdu, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy. Perdu . Perdu is a member of the Perdu family, a former president of Peru .
 Frondizi's economic reforms and conflicts with the military . Influence of political fragmentation and rabid nationalism . Influenced by political fragmentation, nationalism and economic fragmentation .
 A history covering the period from the end of the Rosas regime in 1833 to the revolution of June 4, 1943 . A history of the revolution in Cuba .
 Volume I of the ‘Inter-American Historical Series’ of translations of histories of the various Latin American nations . Volume I is a translation of the histories of various Latin America nations .
 An elementary review of significant events in Argentine history . In Argentine history and of local customs and geography . In Argentina . Argentina .
 The United States Ambassador to Argentina, 1947-1949, presents a ""picture of the Argentine people,"" and shows why people often are In disagreement with their government .
 A report, based on a year’s study in Argentina, of three types of rural communities . The report was based on the study of three rural communities in the country .
 A review of the growth of the Argentine idea of an economic union of southern South American states after 1943 . The idea was first conceived in the Argentine Republic in 1943 .
 Development of economic policy in the first six months of the Onganfa administration . Onganfao administration .
 An official survey of various economic topics was prepared for the British Board of Trade .
 An outline of the Frondizi-Frigerio strategy of economic development and the author's conclusions as to the reasons for the failure of the economic program based on that strategy . Author concludes that the strategy failed to achieve its intended objectives .
 An historical approach to a study of the formation of the Argentine economy . The Argentine economy has been a key part of the country's history .
 An analysis of the scope and influence of various economic controls instituted by the Argentina government after 4 June 1943 . Analysis of the impact of the economic controls on Argentina .
 A brief review of certain aspect* of the preliminary ver*k*k>n of the National Development Flan for 19G5-I9W in Argentina . The review was conducted in the context of the World Cup . The World Cup will be held in Buenos Aires, Argentina,
 Githor :imic' th.it under certain condition, the automobile, producing iudu.tr.tr> will help to ""accelerate Argentine development"" and uni. to justify government encouragememem of the industry through protective tariffs .
 Economic issues played in the political snuggles for power in the first three decades of Argentine independence . A scholarly examination of Ihc Rancr that economic issues played .
 A comparison of the economic growth of the two nations in several periods since 1900 has been compared since 1900 . The comparison is based on economic growth between 1900 and 1900 .
 An inquiry into the economic justification for the establishment of the iron and steel industry in Argentina by the H ria governrreit. An inquiry .
 A detailed study ot the causes for the drvliar in the pruductusn and »ale of cattle for slaughter in Argentina in early 1930's . Included aie mdis -turns of the rrlause infharmrr of drought, gosernment price restrictions
 Notes t juso of the rfo »th of the Arcvnttiv ovicKim m*t*t*.t rnnhs^ls uwd to coUrrr the flnrt. fleet %i*t, um] Dwt 'rpi
 British entrepreneurs and capital costs of construction, routes, gauges. mi leapt, earning*, dividends 36.6 million .
 The story ot the construction ot Argentine railways, largely by British interests, and of the rvk of the railways . In unifying the nation, the railways unify the nation .
 A revised versioo ol the author's Master’s ihesis writ te n in MIT's School of Inveiririnl Manspemeat . A revised version of this article has been published by MIT .
 Cames ot A rgenti n a 's post-WW II ba l anc e at pnymnts problem*. msunotui bmmmmb 41. Cames Ot A rgti n 's . A rgeri n . A 's
 Author has had to d epend lararty on US. p to wno c archtvaa h a ta ma of ki failure to gain access to Argnumt diptmnatic at c his ec 43 . Author has been forced to use a different version of the
 The author* pro fessors in Salvador Uaivoethy. " preseaa an Arnenrine gu tva m e a f ot lha conduct of foreign r a tal m m m during tfcn* rraacgl dteadtr in n u ad
 Index. l iterally, a day-hy-day recounting of developments from January 5 . Index.literally, an iterative recount of events from that day .
 A story of Na/i efforts in Argentina before and during the early years of WWI If If . If. If is a story of the war in Argentina .
 A memorandum of the U.S. government < issued in February 194A) outlining evidence at Alls opetalums in Argentina during WWI . It was issued by the United States government in 194A .
 How Prro« made rt imptnxMc fo* the Unwed is a dnired 59-year-old .
 Volume ""iMciMioiui »xpr\i» of the dor)""' » »h*h loft lhaa half oI thr paff* arc dooted to thr Prtuo period sad to prafaciKMu of poa
 A lengthy resicw at U J ami AreetHille positions im im im (he qwcuion of HMersemion. tntfnstuer. a uwdy at relations between the two natrons during WW It. It. was a lengthy res
 How Perm won thr supfvwt of sanosrs e lement s >f thr poputarum and I hr udluence ho tenure has had on pokiKs umr hrs.r hrs overthrow Si. Si. How perm won’t
 Heed, and ‘xiai .. shtsuu otdsinrsf dr •vesest hy fSmwc who me nutated hts power parnaSi tferouch a nauot prufreredr < ympeign 55. Heed
 Juan end F.ncamacidn Rosas and Juan and Eva Perdn. Rosas have political and personal parallels in their lives . Rosas is married to Perdn.' Rosas was a member of the Rosas family; Rosas died in 2008 .
 An assessment of the accomnUshmtnts and failures of Ptfdn’t IKc-Veur flan, announced in October 1944 . The assessment was published in 1944 .
 Brief reviews of Spanrsh-language books and pamphlets dealing with various aspects of Peton's -IC1 worship, including the ute r' nn with the Chur.n .
 Most were published in Argentina after the overthrow of Perdn; a few published in Uruguay or Chile before Perrin's fan and were reprinted in Argentina . Most of the books were published after Perdn was overthrown .
 An analysis of the influence of Perdn on Ar-wnttna’s traditional claim lo leadership in Latin American cultural, economic, and iMaeil affairs . An analysis o> the influence on Perdn .
 A »lu»h ol AfgrBt ar totrf B R HW an M t^vfllrd uadet Nf^ tk . The muaN k tv rsciuht of a ytat \ rrodrac* t* A
 The statu* Arerotmj't rcc mry from the effect* of Ptrootsm. pirn pirn ipallt untier IV administration of PrrsJm FroOdui after Mas l .
 Nature and depth of the political division ttuu divides Ateeniinr political panics, oreaaiai/ed lahtr. ine military, tbt Prntnixt. and the rrtuluat effect on Artentine politics .
 A description of the ten' ilivtu-a in iefms of ponies, issues, tes cot. and portent for the future. A description . of the . ten' Ilivtu, a description of . ponies in the . future. and a description
 Notes. thnnrslic and Iomen probtrnn of the admuustration of Ptts*drat tltia 74 .
 The wasting at Prrsadent rail and (he dnatioa of uantl Oneanu to the perudency has meant to Argentina. What the wasting of the rail and Oneanu have meant to the country .
 Aa anemia to dneremm %hy the 'Pefontst Mov em ent"" remaintstst the -ttuaarst potaual tense Ms Arpmuaa tea .
 Social Democracy or Social Authoritarianism'*"" Robert E ScottWestern Political Quarterly. Social Democracy . Social Democracy. Social Authoritarism .
 How the revolution wai accomplished—leaders, pta/ioing propaganda. events. events . How do you know what happened? Share your photos with CNN iReport .
 President of Argentina Anuro Froodtd, 83, is 83 . Argentina's president is the son of Anurofahmeab, who died in 2009 .
 Author traces origin, education and influence of political ideas la Arteotini in the ‘cotoaiat."" the “creote,"" and the "atluviai"" eras . Author traces origins, education, influence of ideas la. Arteiotini in
 An examination of the use by the Artentine governmer, 4 the right to intervene in the internal affairs of provincial g overnments . An examination . of the . right to . intervene in provincial affairs .
 Some of the political thought of some of the ks4n of the R ev o l ution of WtJ as revealed in their speeches aad writings. A« e x a min at ion of the . political thought .
 Argentine reaction to ike until ary seizure of power in September test 89 . President of Argentina took control of country in September 1989 .
 American Universities Field Stuff Reports Service Service, West Coast South America Series, Voi. Service . Service is based in the United States .
 American Universities Field Staff Reports Service . Service, East Coast South America Series. Service. Service .
 Woe*, uad Deeds-"" trace the unmeet of the guseramem of General Oagaufa from hs e ee w m p tioe of power on 2* fear so end of October IMA 91. Woe*.
 Asher N Christensen, pp 86107, in Political, Economic, and Social Prob lem s of Political Science . Christensen was the author of a book on the subject of Political Studies . Christensen's book is published by Asher Christensen .
 A lengthy review of the nature of the relationvhip eii'ting between President Illia and the military . A suggestion of the likelihood of the military's intervention against the Illia presidential administration .
 Author finds that many of Argentina's economic and social problems originated not with Per on (who often endorsed popular beliefs), but in the decades that antedated Per on's rise to power . The author finds that Ihc sour.--, of many of the country's economic problems,
 Economic and political highlights of the Onganfa administration . and a prognosis as to Ongania's future course. Ongania administration . Ongania has been in power for more than two decades . Onganna administration is currently in charge of the country's largest economy .
 Roof* of uni varum m*nlfcM was the roof of the university's roof . Roof of the political and ccoaomk erbo prevail!
 It not an understandtog. of Argentine customs—economic, political, social, and others . It is not an understandingtog of Argentina customs, it is of its customs .
 "The Peopte of Bolivia" and "So-UI Institutions" have been published in 193 pages . "Levels and Standards of Living" is one of the world's most popular books .
 A brief hist,ir> of rffocis 10 delinrai the boundary m Bolivia's eastern jungle 194.m. The boundary of the jungle is the boundary of Bolivia .
 Description of climate, people, land tenure practices in (ha two countries and politi c al developments in Peru in April 1*42.42.
 A report on progress in opening and settling :hne etnas at the loot of the Andes . Bolivia. Bolivia .
 Programs ftu settling fmgos at Aho Brwi and C v >IHrtwith sa nhsam of cans a mi atenthdagau 6 (’ohm sirs 114.6)
 Report of the Permanent Subcommiitoo on Investigations on Investigations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations . Report: Report of . Investigations of . investigations of the . Senate committee on investigations .
 I'D; developments, including a brief review of the types and amount of U S aid furnished to the MNR government of Presidents Par and Siles . I’D: "I'D"
 Orvuni/atton of anti recommendations by the U.N.-sponsored kcenlcvi'tc Mission to Bolivia . Mission to Bolivian: "Orvuni'atton"
 International assistance efforts in Bolivia after 1950s were largely limited to Bolivia . Bolivia was one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 U.S. supplied financial assistance to Bolivia in the 1950s and 1960s . Bolivia was one of the world's most impoverished countries . The United States supplied financial aid to Bolivia .
 An inquire into the use by Bolivia of United States aid to meet national obligations to holders of Bolivian bonds or other evidences of indebtedness . Bolivians may be able to use the use of U.S. aid .
 The history of the operation of the Standard Oil Company in Bolivia from the early 1920's until ihe seizure of Standard's holdings in 1937 . The company was seized by the government of Bolivia in the early 1930s .
 A brief report on then-current economic conditions, prepared for the British Board of Trade . The report was published by the British board of trade .
 T-& An analysis of the economic effect of Bolivia's soda] frtrohs* non that began in 19J2.
 An advanced text of an ECLA study requested by the Bolivian government . 127.5% of Bolivians have signed on to the ECLA .
 A tracing of the steps by which social mobility was accelerated in Bolivia . A demonstration of how the low level of economic development has acted as a brake on the movement for social mobility .
 Bolivia has a tin industry and a balance of payments problem . Bolivia's tin industry is one of the most important industries in the world . Bolivian tin industry has been protected by the government .
 Forces, Influences, and leaders in the MNR government of Bolivia, Bolivia, and various interpretations of the role of the U.S. aid in supporting that government .
 History, the Revolution, role of the MNR, economy, political processes, governmental institutions, government institutions, national policy . MNR was founded in 1903 .
 An evaluation of Bolivian accomplishments under the MNR tfter 1952, based on the author's tour of several regions . The evaluation was based on a tour of Bolivia's regions .
 Much of the information Ik derived from knowledge gained by the author on six trips to Bolivia between 1947 and 1937 . Ik visited Bolivia six times in the 1940s and 1950s .
 A Bolivian journalist outlines the steps by which the MNR-lcd revolution deteriorated under the leadership of President Paz to end as a totalitarian dictatorship honeycombed with fraud and corruption . Bolivians have been in power for decades .
 A description of the recent political hi-tory of Bolivia precedes a discussion of the work of the U.N. technical assistance team in Bolivia, beginning in 1932, begins in 1932 . A discussion of Bolivian politics precedes the discussion of work of a United Nations technical
 General Busch was president of the United States from 1937 to 1939 . He ruled the country from 1937-1939 . Busch ruled the U.S. from 1937 until 1939 .
 An analysis of the ideology of the MNR (Movlmirnto Sadonallsta Rtvoluclonario ) and a discussion of the events influencing the formulation of that ideology prior to the party's seizing power in the revolution of 1952 .
 The role of President Victor Paz Estenssoro in the MNR and the effect on his decision to seek a third presidential term . The role is the role of the President and the impact of his third term will be seen in the country .
 The influence of other MNR leaders and of U.S. aid are also discussed . The influence is also discussed in the book .
 MNR reforms are underway in Kenya's capital, the country's capital . The country has been in the throes of a crisis in recent years . MNR reform is underway in the wake of an earthquake .
 The Bolivian military acted to presetve its bold on the go ve rnm ent, end a brief review of pioblems confronting the Be la unde government In Peru .
 President Paz Estenssoro, Vice President Lcchfn, and others. Conversations of the author .
 Constructive Change in Latin America (Pittsburgh, Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, 1968), 309.18/C758.18.18: Latin America .
 An examination of significant aspects of the gaining of power by the MNR and of its failure to accomplish its program . The MNR failed to achieve its program and failed to accomplish it .
 Events of the MNR Revolution of 1952 and causes and results of the “Revolution of Restoration” of 1964 in which Vice President Rent Barrientos replaced President Victor Paz Estenssoro . The events of the 1952 and 1964 events follow .
 The five goals of the MNR in 1952 and the relative success or failure of them in attaining them . The MNR was founded in 1952 .
 A review of changes within the MNR organization and an indication of how they affect the governing of Bolivia . Bolivia . Bolivian President Evianna Evianne Bolivians are the first country to enter into the country's political system .
 An examination of the actions of the constitutional convention that incorporated new socio-economic rights into the Constitution of 1938 . The convention was held in 1938 in New York .
 A Soviet view of the problems of the land-locked South American nation . The Soviet view is a view of South America .
 A Brazilian writer compare* the growth of Brazil with that of the Untied State* from settlement to mid-twentieth century . Brazil is now the most populous country in the world .
 Reasons for construction of, unforeseen construction problems, influence on highway construction, future prospects for highway construction . Construction problems and future prospects of construction .
 A collection of 28 chapters on various aspects of Brazilian history, society, culture, education, economics, diplomacy, and politics . The book includes 28 chapters .
 Vargas is a former president of Mexico . Vargas was elected to the presidency of the Republic of Mexico in 1973 . He was assassinated by the Revolutionary Revolutionary Revolutionary Party in 1944 . He is the son of former President Hugo Hugo Hugo Chavez .
 Lesson includes an overall view of Brazilian developments as an introduction to an inquiry into (he role of coffee in the economy, the peculiarities of Brazilian politics, and a critique of U.S.-Brazilian relations . Lesson also includes an examination of the role of Brazilian coffee in
 People met , scene* glimpsed, glimpsed and places visited by famous writer on trips to Brazil after 1948 .
 A collection of 19 essays on various aspects of Brazilian history and culture . Includes 19 essays about Brazilian history .
 W Thomas, “Brazilian Liter*' ire”; and Gerrit de Jong, Jr. Freitas Marcondes, ""Social Legislation in Brazil’s"" social legislation in Brazil .
 Volume's five parts are devoted to the nation’s history, the constitution of the Estado Novo, the Vargas regime, public opinion and public opinion under Vargas . Volume includes an estimate of Vargas’ contributions to 1942 .
 A volume devoted to presenting "some of the hard political facts that went into the planning, maneuvering and execution of the successful 1930 revolt"
 The author's goal is to furnish an understanding and an explanation of his native land . The author of this article is to provide an explanation for his native country .
 A history of the Braganza Empire designed for the general reader . ft is expanded from a series of eight lectures delivered in 1955 under the auspices of (he Lowell Institute)
 Observations culled from books by 21 non-CatholIc British and US. visitors on topics of reiliion, social customs, and . political and economic conditions .
 The story of the growth of a tiny village, founded in 1554 by the Jesuits, to the giant Industrial city of the 1950’s . The town was founded by Jesuits and is now a tourist destination .
 Population growth, urban explosion, problems of slums, conflictsi aspiration and standard of living . Chronic problem of shortages of things needed in an Industrialized society . Population growth and urban explosion of urban explosion .
 A scholarly study of settlement, people, agriculture, mining, missionary activity, and foreign interventions in Brazil in the period covered . The period covered includes the periods covered .
 An outstanding history translated into English as the third volume of the translation program undertaker, in the InterAmerican Historical Series . The third volume in the series is published in English .
 The 4th edition of Bello’s Htstdria da RtpubUca with the addition of Chapter 25 by Poppino. A translation of the 4th . edition .
 The first four chapters cover the story of Brazil to the end of the Empire . The other 21 treat the Republic, the other four treat the Brazilian Republic .
 Economic conditions and social practices prevailed at the height of the Amazonian rubber boom . The rubber boom was a major source of revenue for the rubber industry .
 A famous Brazilian author explains how Brazilians came to think and act as they do . He says Brazilians come to think, act and create their own way .
 Reports by various authorities on Brazil’s history, politics, foreign policy, industrialization, economics, population, religion, language, and capital. Reports by different authorities .
 This revised version of a 1945 study, reviews Brazil's history, racial composition, society, civilization, foreign policy, influence of Slavery and monarchy, literature and architecture .
 The status of U.S.-BrazlIlan relations is sketchily described . Economic, educational, military, political, and Communist problems are sketched out .
 The story of the Canudos “rebellion” in the interior of northern Brazil in 1896-1897 . The Canudos "rebellions" were the result of a revolt against the government of Brazil .
 An opinion, by one of Brazil's foremost students, of the roles played by slavery and monarchy in shaping modem Brazil . An opinion of the role of slavery in shaping the country .
 A review of recent interpretations which emphasize “diversity” and “unity,” author's conclusion that institutions, history, and psychology were determined by accidents . Author's conclusion is that institutions and history, . and psychology was determined by . accidents .
 A report on the author's observations of economic conditions and political affairs in Brazil’s newest state . The author of the report: Brazil's newest state.
 Antdnio Francisco Lisboa's works adorn churches in Congonhas do Campo and in Ouro Preto in the State of Minas Cierais .
 Lending agencies, types of credit, interest rates, national agrarian financing . Lending agency: "Lending agencies" and "interest rates" among the most important lenders in the world .
 Primarily a review of recent trends In agricultural production in southern Brazil . Primarily an agricultural review of agricultural production .
 Proposals for Increasing the production and movement of the two commodities to big-city markets . Proposalals for increasing the production .
 A study of the life and agricultural practices of the lowest echelon ol Brazilian farmars, the subsistence producers . The subsistence producers are known as "farmers" in Brazil .
 A Brazilian examination of underproductivity, wasteful use of land, wide areas of uncultivated land, low level of farm existence, and dissipation of earnings through rents . The study was conducted by Brazilian farmers in Brazil .
 Analysis is accompanied by a series of indexes and other data on production . Analysis of the data is published in the weekly weekly Newsquiz .
 An appraisal of Brazil's agrarian problems and prospects for their solution . The country's agriarchy is one of the world's most populous countries .
 An indication of the role of land policy, commodity institutes, price policy, credit policy, and international trade in the development of Brazilian agriculture . An indication .
 A survey ot the sugar industry—problems, proposals for Improvement and prospects. and prospects for the industry. A survey of sugar industry.
 The author’s report on personal observation of the proceeds of land registration as conducted by I.B R A (Inslituto Brasileira de Reforma Agriria) in rural Brazil as a basis for inaugurating a scries of land reforms .
 A comparison of the results of surveys of the attitudes toward work of Brazilians and of residents of the U.S. The results of the surveys are shown in Brazil and the United States .
 An analysis designed to determine the advantages and disadvantages of l AFTA was created by the treaty signed in Montevideo in February 19*0.0.
 Volume is the product of a 1947-1948 survey of the Brazilian economy by the author as head of a team commissioned by the Twentieth Century Fund . The team surveyed and reported on (he economy as a whole, income and employment, agricultural production, food supply problems, manufacturing
 A review ot present plans for Improving roads, ports, railways, and telecommunications systems in the Immediate future (19681970), and over an extended period (1970s) A review of plans for improving roads and ports .
 In Brazil’s economy, significant events in political history, and international relations of Brazil with the U.S. and with Communist nations . Brazil is one of the most populous countries in the world and has a long history .
 A brief history of the planning, financing, construction, and operation of Brazil's great industrial complex . Brazil's industrial complex is one of the world's largest industrial hubs .
 Brazilian economist suggests actions to guide Brazil's economic and political developments . A Brazilian economist says the country needs to take action to protect its own interests . Brazil's economy has been hit hard by political and economic turmoil .
 An appraisal of the roles of the Brazilian National Development Bank and the recently created Inter-American Development Bank in the development of Brazilian public and private enterprises . The appraisal will focus on the role of the two banks .
 The economic problems of the Brazilian Northeast are studied in terms of the history of the area, influences that have shaped the region, the national and international attempts to solve the area's economic problems, and the prospects for the future .
 A survey of certain economic phenomena and economic indicators of conditions in the under-developed area of Northeast Brazil . The Northeast Brazil is an area of the country that is underdeveloped .
 An introductory text to the economic history of Brazil from the colonial period to the 1960's . The book is based on Brazil's economic history from colonial period through 1960s .
 An attempt to present the salient features of economic policy evolution in Brazil in the period 1948-1962 . An attempt . to present ""the salient features . of economic . policy evolve in Brazil"" in the . period 1948 to 1962 .
 A brief survey of Amazonian forest resources and a plea for a program to prevent their unplanned exploitation . A very brief survey . A plea for . a program for the . Amazonian forests .
 The Economic Relations of Portuguese and Indians in the Settlement of Brazil . Portuguese and Indian Indians in Brazil in the settlement .
 A study of the problems arising from the substitution of homemanufactured goods for imported goods . The study was published in 2009 .
 Many of the recommendations for improving Brazilian railway operations are still valid, for the inadequacies indicated still cxiai. Although written a decade and a half ago, many of the . recommendations for . improving Brazilian rail operations still valid .
 An attempt to estimate national income m different periods, •he source and role of savings, and the nature and amount of pri.nic Investment Investment Investment .
 Volume’s attention is focused on Brazilian industrialization in the period 1947-1961 . Volume's attention focused on Brazil's industrialization during that period of 1947-61 .
 A description of the types and functions of the various or ganizations involved . A description . of the functions and functions involved . Includes a description of . the types of the . various or functions of each of these .
 Author establishes a model in which “inflation Is inevitable and beneficial up to a certain limit,” and then examines the Brazilian case in order to determine the appropriateness of the model . Author examines the case in Brazil to determine whether the model is appropriate .
 Economic cycles in Brazilian history have been the product of dependence on a single product such as brazilwood, sugar, cacao, gold, tobacco, cotton, rubber, and coffee .
 A volume designed to acquaint the international execuUve with opportunities for doing business in Brazil and to alert him to the problems he will face . The volume is designed to educate the international executive about the opportunities in Brazil .
 An analysis of the sources or revenue of municipalities, including those received from local imports and taxes, will be published . The results will be based on the revenue received by municipalities .
 Causes of high interest rates, roles of financial agencies in creation of inierest rate structure, and influence of the demand for credit .
 Economic facts of life in the Brazilian Northeast and questions a\ to the future development of the region . Brazil's Northeast .
 Theoretical explanations for the existence of differential regional growth rales precede an examination of regional imbalance in Brazil, particulart> between the impoverished Northeast and Ihe industrialized Center-South .
 A contrast of traditional and modern systems of labor organization in rural Minas Gerais . A contrast between traditional labor organizations and modern labor organizations .
 An analysis of the factors involved in the Brazilian decision not to raise transportation rates, but to subsidize the railways with government funds . The decision was made by the Brazilian government .
 Volume is based on information gained in interviews with representatives of 36 U.S. manufacturing companies and 7 United States non-manufacturing companies . Volume of this volume is based upon information gained from interviews with 36 manufacturing companies .
 Interviews were designed to determine the impact of various Brazilian governmental policies on the investment decisions and business operations of these companies . Interviews designed to examine the impact on various Brazilian government policies on investments .
 A description of the Amazon and its tributaries and histones of the nations in its drainage area . The Amazon is the largest river system in the world .
 Regional surveys of the various areas of Brazil by a leading student and teacher of Latin American geography .
 The author, a poet and ten years a resident of Brazil, writes the tent to accompany a fine collection of photos depicting life in the country .
 A typical alioi.nl photo story of a 10,000-mile tour of Brazil's principal cities and of the interior .
 Volume is a history designed lor the ""general .easier "" frontier by An. An. 259. Volume . Volume is the first volume of the history series . Volume was designed to chronicle the general frontier .
 A brief pictorial story of the building of the road from BeKm to Brasilia . The earth-surfaced road was built in the 1970s .
 An examination of climate, soils, vegetation, and people of the Brazilian Amazon . The Amazon is the birthplace of the world's largest city .
 Area studied Includes states of Guanabara, SJo Paulo, ParanA, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul . Area studied includes states of Rio, Rio, Sao Paulo, and ParanA . Area of study includes Rio, Paraná and Rio .
 A statement of and defense of Brazilian foreign policy prepared by the President shortly before he dramatically resigned the Presidency in August 1961 after seven months in office .
 Berle’s report of his conference with President Quadros of Brazil is contrasted with the widely variant stories of that meeting carried by international wire services and U.S. and Brazilian newspapers .
 Grants, loans, and other cor tributions by foundations, religious groups and other non-governmental organizations .
 A review of Brazil’s foreign policy under ihe Empire and under republican government to the mid-l950s . A discussion of the agencies that formulate and execute foreign policy . Brazil's foreign policy since the Empire .
 A survey covering ihc guiding principles of newly independent Brazil . The survey also covers Bra/ilian relations with European and Latin American nations and with the U.S.
 The nature of the 1958 drought in Northeast Brazil and the position of the U.S. government toward the situation . The Bra/ilian government refused to ask for United States agricultural food available under United States Public Law 480 .
 A review of Brazil’s foreign policy from the time of the Baron de Rio Branco until the present . Brazil's foreign policy has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 Biographical studies of the life and works of Jos6 Lins do Rego, Jorge Amado, Cracilano Ramos, and Rachel de Queiroz have been published . The works include biographies and biographies .
 The Development of Philosophy in Brazil and the Evolution of National History . The development of philosophy in Brazil is the result of a nationalistic revolution .
 Author describes the “changes which foreign philosophical currents” underwent in Brazil and “the curious meanings they have acquired in the evolution."" of Brazilian history . Author describes ‘curious meanings’ of Brazilian . history .
 Die anthology contains works of some 20 writers and poets who address themselves to various Brazilian themes . Die anthology is a collection of works by 20 Brazilian writers .
 Background to the development of modernism in Brazilian culture, influence of the 1922 Modern Art Week Exhibition . Examine the influence of Brazil's most significant modernist artists .
 An Attempt to Give a Sociological Interpretation to the Brazilian Coup d'Etut of April I, 1964, . Sergio Maturana. An Attempt . to Give A Sociological . Interpretation of the Brazilian coup d'etut . of April 1964, Sergio M
 A brief attempt to interpret events from facts presented in the Brazilian and U.S. press . A brief interpretation of events presented in Brazil and the United States .
 Goals and accomplishments of the Cestelo Branco administration In its first three years In office told against the background of the revolution of 1964 . Cestelao Branco was the first president of the country to be elected .
 Provisions of decree legislation controlling elections, role of the military in politics, new political parties . New political parties will be allowed to enter the political arena .
 In Brazilian politics and in naUon’s commercial and industrial growth, and national economic policies, are key individuals . Key individuals in Brazilian politics, and in Brazilian economic policies .
 A sympathetic treatment of the Brazilian Army and its efforts to prevent Brazil from falling prey to a dictatorship of either the right or the left . The Army is seen as an important military force in Brazil .
 A brief review of administrative reforms instituted in the Brazilian government by the Vargas regime after 1930, and especially in the 193S-I943 period . The Vargas administration was one of the most successful in Brazil's history .
 A left-wing Mexican journalist’s interpretation of Brazilian developments . Left-wing Brazilian journalist: "Brazilian politics is a mess"
 A brief description of political processes and of the political parties in existence in the late 1930’s. A brief . description of . political processes . and of political parties . in existence .
 An attempt to measure the influence of ‘he struggle between public and private authority on contemporary local institutions in Brazil . An attempt >o measure the impact of ’he struggle . between . public and . private authority’ on Brazilian institutions in . Brazil .
 Historical background of Brazilian developments to the overthrow of Goulart in March 1964 . Review of the accomplishments of the Castelo Branco admlnjttration Countries 14 295 .
 A re-examination of widely-held notions that Brasil was the most peaceful and peace-toeing of Latin American nations . The country was once considered a peace-footinging nation .
 The search for political stability since the coup of March IMS, the influence of populist leaders since Vargas, policies of the Castelo Branco administration, and the new economic reforms instituted. IMS .
 Report on Brazilian economic and political conditions on the eve of the assumption of the presidency by the quixotic Janio Qusdrot. who was to resign for no clearly defined season within the first year .
 Origin, development, and influence of federalism in Brazil from colonial times to the |930's . Federalism began in Brazil in 18th century .
 An examination of the p ro b lems arising in the “litres tile ns s tonal renovation"" underway in the mid-1950's in Brazil's ccunompolitics, and social structure, in Brazil .
 The UNE iVnUo Sat tonal dot f i r ti d n m er; and an examination of the thought and the operations of left-wing Cubobcs fas Brazil . Aftermath » .
 Political crises since 1961. inflationary problems, rote in LAFTA. and foreign policy arc each discussed . LAFTA will be broadcast on Sunday at 8.30pm .
 Oetullo Vargas Imposed a new constitution on Brazil in 1937 . The new constitution was created by the then-governor of Brazil .
 A review of the actioas taken by the dvBian leader of the State of Sio Paulo in the early 1I90‘« ""to ease the armed forces out of direct political cootrol"" of the BraiilUa gov ern m
 It consists m major pan of traswlations of writings by seat of Brad's premtoeat poUtkai iMahsn. It consists of . traswades of writings .
 In and the ov tt t hre w of Presides* Goatees, and the “New Reform*"" initiated iheenafter by the an » »ra ment of Marshal Casmto Branco .
 Knit of the nubiae* a Braokaa poUtscv nymtKSs . Knit is the role of potaKal parens, and goisucal power of KuMuchnk.
 Doctrine, hydro. smtor of h th tve r v and tnftorsvce of Beaeshaa Spirants . Spirants. toOnnen of fcardaosen—a dnetrsar geeanut gated ongma .
 Ushmati of Brazil'i Government Development Agency (or the Northeast which m created in 1*39.39.50) Accompompompo is a member of the Brazilian government's Northeast .
 Aa analysis at the results at the 1950 election at . October 1950 which returned GetuBo Verge, to the Presidency, to . The results .
 IPES (Imthuto de Pesgubaa e Ewudiot Sociab—Imthute at Social Raiearch asd Studies) organized the opposition to the Goulart Adadabiiatloa at the tad at March I *44. soam 311
 Brant, in the period, tune-September l*4S, by a party at social anthro potogbts headed by the author. Brant .
 A socioiopkaJ study of Brant incorporated in a textbook lor social science study . Brant was incorporated into a cortege textbook .
 A comprehewsm socrotogacel and demographic study o( Branliaa people sad the tmtMutiows they (uactsoa under 324) A study found that people under 324 live in the United States .
 A Bredhaa L X*I at hn fellow couatryasra and describes their Inttr habits. gsutl<. aad custom"" ia aa rflor . To eaakc dear the psychology si chmau of the
 Author lisus nutreuuest aad a pbnseiaaa. waneruty teacher, and pohuctaa. and re ssdwa u nih u Pacts Stare HM.
 A stvds of the SoethraucMi rri»w of taw somcege of com. asm ) desTfcgu u tm . sad of prospects ho aud btcdies toes. sad of prospect . Sad of prospects . sad . of
 A tracing of the robs of the family, marriage, aad divorce ia BradUaa history . A tracing . of the . robs  of the  family, marriage and aad divorce . Brad Uaa history. A tracing the . history of the
 A so ci ologi ca l study of the rob gad gad iafkacncc of the F ortu gueae colonizer, the Indian. Aad the Negro fat the shaping ef Brazilian society. Aaad the black .
 A mama Valley lacladid are Harry W. Has chiasm . Marria Harris. Marria has chiasm.
 A brief Ml. at several i ndi cators ef Branban attitudes toward race 338. 338. A brief . Ml at several of the i.Ndi cator's views toward race . 338.
 A nrsese Of lhr process by which racial aud cuhural fuaiea oc <wrtJ ts Irml 339.372.372 .
 Wtf Ilfs bit 348 . A devotee** <d thr people aad ol bwag condemn* ia the »Wtf Wtf WTF IlfS bit 348. A devoteee** <D thr people  aad  ia .
 I Ultimo Olid nonunion l ife in Northeastern It. flam flam W. Hutchinson . W Hutchinson . Hutchinson .
 Results of a field study conducted by the author in 1950-1951 in Vila Keedneavo . In the Brazilian Slate of Bahia .
 Latin American problems of Latin American nations and colonial possessions in the area . Economic and political problems of the area include economic and political issues .
 A wcll-wrillcn early study of the region by a leading U.S. authority, 359.5, was published by the U.N. agency .
 Students of American affairs will be interested in the chapters on Cuba . Students of Latin American affairs are interested in these chapters .
 Ihe Dominican Rci blic amt (he final six chapters devoted lo general topics of economics, population, education, agriculture, nationalism, and foreign Influences) Ihe .
 pirate operations against the Spanish in the Caribbean area . A popular treatment. p( interest to the general reader .
 The student of I alio American history will find much of interest in this most readable story of the settlement and rule of Islands and mainland areas that surround the Caribbean Sea .
 A general survey of happenings in the area from 1492 to WW II of loitrcsi to the genrral reader . A survey of what happened to happen to the area .
 An outline and an interpretation of the historical geography of Tima Firme as revealed in the first .10 years of Spam h exploration and conquest .
 A reprint of a 1911 publication containing much that is of inlcrest to the student of Latin American history for it' story . The story of the successful encroachment of an area the Spanish claimed by discovery .
 Volume h ""to >how forth war of the thief jxpetii of Spemli Kolnoiat rwlt in Amerada ami lo fixpby the nature of Ion* conflict with her principal in the Umh bordertn* on the Caribbean Sea and
 The Untied States extended its political power from the mainland into the Caribbean islands and Central America . A study of the development of U.S. foreign policy in the decades in which the Untied State extended its power .
 USA-USSR in Cuba in 1962. Confrontation of USA-Ursrs. in Cuba . historical fear of USA of toman dominance of Caribbean, and inception and acceptance of hemisphere security concept .
 Nicaragua, and Central America A lout-parr Appendix coatains II documents related to the subject . Appendix coatain II documents .
 Tstm-ui papers on the srsgrvl eotmtitts and lataows asgwets of t rati at Amrteca. gve-ented by me mb ers of the tundtj of the I'asr
 Index A rr. rr»sr. vS thr troftfiri. ptx^W. htuor> pofaiRa' tHrUduiMUM. ntXMRK infkirhrtu. utd luk l
 A study of recent attempts to promote a reunification of the five nations of Central America . Central America is one of the largest economies in the world . Central American nations are five countries .
 The first four chapters discuss the eeoo^raphy. people, and government oi the region under in in . . people . People . and government . people in . the region . under in .
 Spanish, followed b> studies of tl:* five individual nations, and a wind-up chapter on political developments in the period just prior to publication of the book .
 A scholarly presentation in which the author's design is *’to provide the first survey in English of all of the known attempts to combine the Centra states, from the lime of independence until the present .
 Their Political and Economic Development and Their Relations with the United States. Their political and economic development and relations with the U.S. Their Political, Economic Development .
 This volume, the result of two years’ residence in the different countries, is designed to furnish a ""better and more sympathetic understanding of the ideals and conditions of life"" in the Central American area .
 Analysis of recent developments in and the search for stability by countries in the Central American area . Analysis of Central American countries in search of stability .
 Henry Wells, ""the Dominican Search for Stability*'; Mario Rodrigue/. ""Guatemala in Perspective*’"" Dwight S. Brothers. Henry Wells . Henry Wells,. ""The Dominican . Search for stability*'''"" is a search for stability .
 A brief introductory volume of interest to a prospective . prospective . visitor to the five Central Amcrication nations . A brief . introduction .
 Racial composition of the five nations; development under Spain and in the struggle for independence, and under a confederation 388. 388.
 Index. \ tracing of the ""lifeline of a culture"" us understood hy .mhropoiogistv Described are the geography, biology, languages, vulture, and growth of Middle America . Described as the geography .
 Study is designed to answer question of the future of economic integration of small nations . Study was designed to ask question of future economic integration with small nations.
 A brief siuvcy of the accomplishments of the Central American Common Market . A brief assessment of the achievements of the Common Market. A brief overview of the program .
 Central American Economic Integration Program is better known as the Central American Common Market . Details of the agreements and achievements to date of writing can be found here .
 Central American Common Market preliminary successes, future economic and political problems. and social obstacles to future progress. and future economic . progress.
 A survey of the factors involved—ideals, cultural influences, costs, costs and foreign influences . The survey was conducted by CNN iReport.com .
 An aitcmpt io identify and describe the factors that influenced Costa Rican and Panamanian participation in Central American Economic Integration . An answer to five questions will be answered by the answers to five general questions .
 Program for development of a common market and economic integration based on the PrCBisclt-ECLA thesis . Program for . development of the common . market and . economic integration .
 Considerable information on the CACM can be found in (his comparative analysis of economic integration efforts in the two areas) Considerable info can be seen in (His comparative analysis)
 An attempt to “isolate and analyse briefly some significant economic factors likHy to have a determining impact on the course of regionalism ’ in Ventral America’ in the U.S.
 ECLA analysis examines the subject by country and by type of export commodity . ECLA: Examine country's exports by country, type of commodity .
 A review of agricultural production in the Pacific littoral (hat extends south from the Mexican border to Ihc Gulf of Nicoya in Costa Rica)
 A demographic study shows the relationship of the population growth rate and economic development . Economic development is a key factor in population growth rates .
 An inquiry into the differences in “behavior and values of residents of private dwellings” as opposed to residents of public housing in the per capita] cities of Costa Rica and El Salvador .
 A review of the factors responsible for the existence of the . existence of ""strong” executives in Centra] America and of the influence of such executives . ie the several countries .
 Author probes economic and social development policies advocated by the Liberacidn National party in Costa Rica, by the PRUP movement of El Salvador, and by. the administration of President Castillo Armas in Guatemala . Author probes the policies of Costa Rica and El Salvador . Author also probes the
 U.S. contributed to the building of this highway through Central America after 1930 . The highway was built in the 1930s .
 A review of the two-sided policy of the United States . Opening of interoceanic communication across the Isthmus and preventing of a European power gaining control over a Central American republic .
 Harding administration's position on 'hr question of confederation, 1921 -I92.1.19191918 . Harding administration had a long-held position on confederation . CounlKIES 20 rhe Harding administration was on the verge of collapse .
 History of C hilean occupation of Arica and description of recent development projects in the region . Describes the history of the region and the development of the area .
 A brief ttencral survey devotes attention to the land, people, history, politics, economic and social conditions, and foreign relations of Chile .
 The land, people, history, and current political and economic problems are described . The land is described in this week's Daily Discussion .
 A lengthy, illustrated story of the geography, people, industry, and agriculture of Chile . Chile . A lengthy illustrated story .
 Society, economy, history, political processes, governmental institutions, socio-economic problems, public policy . Society, . governments, . governmental institutions and governmental institutions . Issues of society, economy and politics .
 A brief survey of Ctcle’s geography, people, history, politics, politics and economy, society, and of its place in the modern world . Ctcle is a city in the heart of the U.S.
 The fourth volume in the ‘Inter-American Historical Series’ translations of histories of different I.atin American nations .
 A general survey of conditions in Iatin America precedes specific study of C hilean problems, including the role of C'hiistian Democracy, and U.S. relations, is published in the United States .
 In the revision he limits his discussion to the causes of, events of, and the subsequent effects of the student-initiated strikes of April 1957 . In the revised version he only discusses the causes and events of the strikes .
 American Universities Field Staff Reports Service, West Coast South America Series Vol. 2, published by American Universities. Service . The West Coast University of California Series, Vol. 3, published in October 2013 .
 An analysis of Chilean economic, social, and political development, and speculation as to Chile’s future . The Chilean economy, social and political developments, are discussed in Chile .
 Evidence from on-the-spot checking of colonization efforts is presented in an effort to show the nature of the connection, if any, between agrarian reform and agricultural development .
 Land tenure pattern and cultivation and pasturing practices in the northern desert highlands and in the far southern sector of the Araucanian Indians .
 Background history of patterns of land ownership and of land reform efforts, and future prospects for land reform programs . Land reform efforts in the U.S. have been successful in recent years .
 Problems of LAFTA and their influence on Chilean enthusiasm for the creation of an Andean regional market group .
 A theoretical analysis of development theory and strategy as applied to the Chilean economy . Chile has had a 1 percent per capita per annum growth rate for 50 years .
 The Board of Trade is a British trade publication published by the British Trade Council . It is published by The Board Of Trade .
 A review of production, exports and imports, and governmental planning, will take place . The country's production and exports will be reviewed by government officials .
 Frei administration's economic accomplishments in 1966 . A brief recapitulation of the Frei Administration's economic achievements .
 A cursory survey of Chile's economy on the eve of the 1964 election . A guestlmate of what the future held for U.S. corporations doing business in Chile .
 Faclors responsible for or contributing to the Chilean inflationary spiral of the early 1950’s .
 Chile employed its foreign exchange policy to influence the rate of its economic growth . The process of determining the quantities of resources produced and fixing capital formation is the key to Chile's success .
 A Washington firm of economic consultants employed by ihe Chilean government from 1955 to June 1958 to advise on actions to control inflation . The Klein and Saks mission was a Washington-based economic consultants .
 Hearings of the House Subcommittee on International Organizations and Movements of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . 1st sess. Hearings on international organizations and movements . Committee on foreign affairs . First sess of the first sess .
 Chile and the United States.80-1962 The Emergence of Chile's Social Crisis and the Challenge to United States Diplomacy. 80-2062: Chile's social crisis and the challenge to U.S. Diplomacy .
 Ambassador under three Presidents of the U.S. and four Chilean presidents . Ambassador under four Presidents of Chile and three presidents .
 A well-documented exploration of four causes of U.S.-Latin American divergence as they apply specifically to U .S.-Chilean relations . The study looks at the causes of American and Latin American divergence .
 Author describes the history and influence of the Chilean socialist movement . Author describes history and Influence of Chilean Socialist Party .
 An analysis of the election returns of 1964 and what they mean in terms of the future of existing political parties and the governing of Chile . The results of the 1964 Chilean elections will be studied in the future .
 A study of the role of the classes in Chilean politics and economics . especially, of the tendency of the middle class to join the upper class on political issues. and. especially .
 An analysis of the characteristics, the dynamics, and the timela te of reform management as revealed by PDC rule in Chile since 1964 . An analysis . of the dynamics of reform . management as . revealed by the PDC .
 Historical, geographical, and mincralogical features of Chile are discussed as a preface to descriptions of the big city slums (catlamptu> and political party orginu-.ion, strength, and campaign activities since WW It. It.
 An intertMin# account of Chilean political development* on the eve of the (treat Deprevvion) of Chile . An inter-minister account of Chile's political development .
 Author** intent i* to provide a *unrt> of the ""rceent political evolution of Chile" with an interpretative convideratton of thove *social and *con*»mu factor* which have influenced thu evolution */ 474.474.
 Geography, history, people, recent political developments, role of President Frel . Relations with the U.S. and other countries and International organizations . Geography and history .
 A brief review of 20th Century Chilean political history precedes speculation about the relative chances of presidential candidates in the upcoming elections . The Chilean presidential elections are set to be held in November .
 The Chilean Communists and the FRAP coalition they helped to shape are characterized as the “patriotic and progressive” forces . Not unexpectedly, the United States is pictured as the villain . The United States and Chilean Communists are portrayed as the villains .
 Problems confronting President Frei in his efforts to implement Christian Democratic program . Frei won election in 1964 on Christian Democratic platform .
 President Eduardo Frei Frei Montatva's accomplishments, politically and economically . President of Brazil's first state-run state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, has been in power since 2003 .
 Socialist and FRAP leader criticizes U.S. goals for Chile arid Latin America . He reveals his own Ideas for solving Latin American problems .
 This insight into Chilean life is the product of a two-year assignment of the author In Latin America as a correspondent for Look .
 A description of the changing political environment, an identification of the issues, and an interpretation of the voting patterns . A description . of the . changing political . environment, identification of issues and a interpretation of voting patterns.
 This article is one of the early English-language studies on the subject . It furnishes a good background for an understanding of more recent developments in Chilean politics .
 Carlos Ibdfiez del Campo was elected to the Presidency of Chile in 1932 . Peronism was reflected in the political doctrine of Carlos Ibdez delcampo .
 A very brief report on the political influence of the leaders of Chile’s estimated 3,000 citizens of Arab origin .
 A study of the role of Marmaduke Grove Vallejo in the overthrow of the Moritern government and the establishment of the so-called Socialist Republic of Chile in June 1932 . The study was published in 1932 .
 Analysis of the 1964 U.S.-Cbilean election . Analysis of what the new leadership may mean to U.N. relations. Analysis of 1964 presidential election and what it may mean .
 Society, economy, history, history and civil and gue/illa warfare, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy. Civil warfare, warfare, government institutions and public policy .
 Volume, based in considerable part on a series of newsletters written by the author from Bogota to the Institute of Current World Affairs in 1961-1962 . Volume is based in part on the topics of geography, people, history, politics and agriculture .
 Volume two in the “Inter-American Historical Series" of translations of histories of Latin American nations . Volume two of the series of translations . Of Latin America's history of nations .
 Historical and geographic influences, political realities, onomic problems, social unrest, and agrarian reform problems are briefly reviewed . Historical and . social realities, political . realities, and social . unrest problems, are reviewed .
 Case study of agrarian reform focused on the Agrarian Reform Law of 1961 . The law's antecedents, its provisions, its implementation. Its implementation.
 Colombian experience in land reform since 1961, with references to some previous efforts . Land reform has been in Colombia since 1961 .
 An examination of the accomplishments of the Social Agrarian Reform Law of December 1961 which created INCORA (Instituto Colombiano de la Reforma Agraria) will examine its financing, its settlement and resettlement achievements .
 A study of landholding patterns, agricultural practices, and agrarian reform programs . Study of their relationship to settlement patterns, community development, and social class structure .
 The author attempts to answer two questions he poses as to the existence of a land problem in Colombia . The author also asks what U.S. policy should he in respect to a land issue in Colombia in the future .
 An examination of statistics on landholding compiled by INCORA and a critical examination of the validity of the statistics . The study of landholding statistics was conducted in the UK .
 Results of subdividing a commercial coffee plantation among 98 settlers . Results were sub-divided by the settlers .
 A study of the relationship of education to the solution of Colombia's agricultural problems . Ihere is a need for more people from rural backgrounds to participate in agricultural education programs. A study .
 Author suggests a typology for the classification of minlfundlg In Latin America . Author selects one of these types, the dependent, and uses Colombian examples to describe Colombian examples of several types of dependent mlnlfundla .
 INCORA is a case study of title problems in the Eastern Plains area . IncorA provides a look at the nature and extent of the title problems, approach lo the problems .
 A paper recounting experience in Contadero, Colombia, to show the role of research programs in influencing change . The paper recounts experience .
 Colombia has levied four different types of taxes on coffee during the last decade . A revelation of the reasons why the different taxes were levied and what they were levied .
 An economist's experiences and impressions, the result of residence in Colombia from August 1958 to August 1960 . An economist’s experiences and impression, the . result of . residence in . Colombia from 1958 to 1960 .
 Colombian valorization tax is better known in English-language countries as a betterment tax . Valorization is known as a tax in Colombia, better known as "valorization"
 Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador are joint owners of the merchant marine company . The company is jointly owned by the three countries . It is based in Venezuela and Colombia and Ecuador .
 An economic study of such subjects as taxation and expenditures and of fiscal policy and goals . Economic study of taxation, expenditures, and fiscal policy .
 A brief report on the evidence obtained in interviews with 61 indiiidtial executives heading the personnel hierarchies in their firms .
 IBRD refused to approve initial loan for Colombia’s national steel plant . Colombia borrowed capital from European bankers after the decision to borrow from European banks . Colombia's steel plant will be built with capital borrowed from European lenders .
 Interviews with heads of 11 institutions as to courses, teachers, students, and salaries . Results of interviews with heads from 11 institutions . Interviews were conducted by head of schools and universities .
 Factors influencing la vioiencia —background to, Liberal-Conservative conflict, Rojas diclatorship, Communist activities, student involvement—and prospects for the future . Factors influencing the future: Student involvement and prospects for future .
 An inquiry into the causes of reactions to and implications of the disorders that characterize. and . characterize. disorders . The inquiry will focus on the causes and consequences of these disorders, such as anxiety and depression .
 Colombian life after 1948 is collectively known as ""la vioiencia "" 535 . Life after 1948 collectively known collectively as "La Viovencia 535"
 The civil war that began in i?""! and the guerilla war that followed to the year 1961 cost the lives of 200,uOO to 300,000 Colombians . The war was the first civil war in the country .
 A review of Colombian history after 19.10 introduces a study of the various phases through which the pos -1946 civil war and insurtection passed in Colombia .
 CEAS (Centro de Estudio y Accidn Sociales) is a nonpolitical pressure group of big businessmen in Colombia . CEAS is non-partisan pressure group, non-political pressure groups .
 An examination of the influence of dictatorship and civil and guerrilla warfare on political institutions and processes . Includes examination of influence of dictators and civil warfare on institutions .
 CEAS (Centro de Estudio y Accidn Sociales) is a centre of left-wing opposition to the government . CEAS was founded in 1950s and 1960s . It was the first centre of its kind .
 A scholarly study of political institutions and administration, of the tragedy of la vioiencia, and of the role of the elite in the post-WW It era In Colombia .
 Author served from 1957 to 1960 on the U.S. Embassy staff in Bogota . Author served in Colombia from 1957 until 1960 . Author continued research on a summer's visit to Colombia in 1961 .
 Military Rule and the Social Revolution in Colombia, 1930-1956, Vernon L Fluharty. Military rule and the social revolution in Colombia . The Social Revolution was the result of a revolution in the country .
 Liberal and Conservative parties in Colombia and of AD, COPEI, and UUI) in Venezuela . History, organization, programs, and accomplishments of Liberal, Conservative parties .
 An analysis of the campaigns and votes in the congressional elections of 20 March 1966 and the presidential election of 1 May 1966 . The results are based on the results of both the 1966 and 1966 presidential elections .
 An analysis of the election returns for the above-mentioned .'ears and what the returns mean for Colombia’s political future . An analysis .
 Reasons lor weakness of the agreement of 1957 for the sharing of power between the Liberals and Conservatives lolu against the background of Colombian political history . With a concluding summary of United States support for the Colombian economy .
 Colombia's ‘env. of political instability” of the administrative organization which reduces the government's effectiveness, of administrative and economic studies of Colombia's governmental affairs, and of the prospects for administrative reform .
 Orography, people, history, politieil processes, governmental institutions, public policy. Orographicy.il processes .
 Influence of volcanic eruption on national economy, status of U.S.-Costa Kican relations, role hi Central American Common Market, economic problems, and political parties and leaders .
 A report of an investigation committee 11950-511 on the tlcpiec of Costa Rican economic development anti on types of assistance that might be useful in promoting improvements in the economic picture . A report on the type of assistance available to Costa Rica's economy .
 History of development of the Industry from IK7K to 1951, with discussions of cultivation practices of United Fruit Company . History of . development of . the industry from I .K.7K . to 1951 .
 Costa Rican plan designed to make the worker an owner of capital . Costa Rica's plan is designed to help workers become owners of capital.
 A statistical study of leadership characteristics in the Costa Rican village of I’ejivalle . The study looked at leadership characteristics of a village in Costa Rica . The results of the study show that leadership characteristics are important in the community .
 An analysis of demographic, geographic, and regional characteristics of the electorate . IV44 has. without exception, refused to name the incumbent party's candidate to the presidency .
 A comparison and a contrast of the political histories of neighboring Central American nations . i 559. i 560. i Compare and Contrast the political history of Central American countries . i
 A use of the reputational method of determining the constituents of a local power structure . A further check on the degree of communications linking the elements in the power structuie.
 A review of political parties and of Ihe recent political history of Costa Rica . Costa Rica. Costa Rica has a long political history .
 Historical patterns of scttlemrm, density of population, and concentration of races, are shown . Census data shows that the population is growing in the United States .
 A collection of 25 writing on winoiis aspect* of Cuban life. Knopf, mb. The book is based on a study of life in Cuba .
 A mixture of hi*tor> and tin* aull»*r\ experience^ in postAVW II Cuba . A mix of hi-tor>/tinn* experience^ .
 The Mory of the last years of Batista's rule and of Ihe revolutionary activities of Fidel Castro from December I 1956 to January I, Ivjv, by a longtime resident and New York Times correspondent .
 The first authoritative English-language history of Cuba, by an eminent Latin Americanist who devoted three years to the research .
 An attempt to discover why the attempt by Cuban exile* to invt*ide Cuba In April 1962 ended In failure . An attempt by Cuba exile** to invade Cuba ended in failure in 1962 .
 An indictment of the CIA for its role in the episode and an attempt to diagnose the plans for the operation . Notes: Indictment of CIA and an indictment of its role .
 Manuel Artlme, Jose Ptrer San Romin, Erneldo Oliva, and Enrique Rulz-Willlams. i 581.581. 583.5 .
 A study of newspaper reporting of the Bay of Pigs episode written In 1961-1962 and not revised since 1962 . Study of the incident was written in 1961-1960s .
 A reporter attempts to determine why the Bay of Pigs invasion plans were altered and who suggested the alteration . A reporter tries to determine the reason for the alteration of plans .
 A very brirf examination of Castro’s attempts to spread his Ideas and his influence in Latin America . Castro's attempts to reach out to Latin America in the 1950s and 1960s .
 An examination of Castro’s policy of encouraging revolutions in Lalin America . How it may be affected by the death of Guevara and the collapse of his movement in Bolivia in 1967 .
 Castro tried to spread his cult in Latin American nations . Castro was behind the rise of the Castro cult in the region .
 An analysis of the problems raised for the U.S. and the Inter-American community by the rise to power of Fidel Castro . In 19S9, 593. Fidel Castro was the Cuban dictator of Cuba .
 A report on the prngiam of the liieontincntal t onyress hehl in Havana m January l%h. of Castro's attack on Von Sosa Header of Guatemala's MR-1 movement). The ousting of Guevara, the o
 Use hy Castro ami his representatives of the United Nations as a forum for his propaganda and drawing Cuba away from the t atin American block . Use the U.N. to draw Cuba from the American block.
 OAS, Special Consultative Committee on Security. 1st sess., 1963. OAS was Special Consultation Committee of Security. Committee .
 A brief OAS report on how Cuba is used as a training ground for subversion in the Western Hemisphere . Cuba used to be used as an 'training ground' for subverts in the West .
 The American Conference for National Sovereignty anil Economic Emancipation and Peace . Impli. cations for the United States of thealin American Conference of National sovereignty .
 Thorning Thorning. Thorning . Thorning: The conference was held in Mexico City, Mexico City . The conference is the first of its kind in the history of the world .
 An attempt to describe Cuban development* their origins, and their consequence* for Latin America . An attempt at describing Cuban development, their origins and consequences for America .
 Russianborn and (icrman-ediicatcd. speak* from a background, first a Socialist anil later as a Communist in (jetmany) and still later a non-Marxist in Cuba .
 Cuba'* rule in maintenance of S.mct system of spies and saboteurs in Western Hemisphere . Cuba has been accused of using Cuba as a cover-up for espionage in the past .
 Castro** threefold program for encouraging revolution in I atin America . The training of goierritl.i*. the use of piopaeanda, and the export of financial assistance and weapons. Castro** .
 An analvsis of the factors ili.it contributed to the . of the Castro movement . An analysis of the . factors involved in the Castro . movement .
 IQ67, IQ67: Anil reports on Cuban Communist Parly strength anil photos of Its leaders, and mush other information on guerrilla aclivilics in Venezuela . IQ67 is IQ67. IQ67 .
 An attempt to determine the influence of Cuba on American political, social, and economic institutions . Cuba is a major source of influence in American politics, social and economic .
 Outlines of Castro's ideology and of Guevara’s doctrine and of lion they arc exported anil employed . Castro was the Cuban leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 An assessment of what Fidelismo’s impact would be on alin Anict can institutions . An analysis of the impact of Fidelismo would have on institutions .
 Castro’s revolutionary program foratin America differs from that of Soviet-backed Communists in the area . The uniqueness of Castro's revolution and his revolutionary program differs from those in the region .
 Castro’s efforts to develop a special role for Cuban Communism in the international Communist movement, particularly as it relates to the Communist Party of America . Castro's efforts to have a role in Cuba's role in the world's Communist Party movement .
 The Tricontinental Conference of African, Asian, and American Peoples was held in 1964 . The conference was attended by African, American, and Asian Peoples .
 A staff study was prepared by a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 89th Cong.. 2d sess., 1966 . The study was a staff study prepared by the committee .
 66.66. Purpose of. pattieipants in, and accomplishments of the conference held in Havana held in January .
 Influences on Communist iloctiine for I atin America of the Havana Confluences of 1964 anil 1966 and U.S. intervention in the Uom'nlcan Republic in 1965 . Influences in the Cuban Revolution in 1965 and the Cuban revolution in 1966 .
 A French view of Cuba's relations with other powers will) other powers, translated from tin tie i/e /V/euic/fioji.i .
 The role of the Affiance lor Prop res* res* <17.17.5 . Effect of United States “consumers' revolution” on social chilil in I aiin America, how Castro pained tower, and his relations with Mexico, and
 Castro, Castro, Cuba and Justice. In the process they examine thrae stapes of iraaae deveiopmeot and vansformation <lt, Castro . Castro and Justice .
 A pro-Castro jou raa Ha tk account of the revolution that overthrew the Batista pov em m en <19.19. This is a look at the Cuban revolution in which Castro was overthrown .
 A view of Cuban institutions as an extemsoe of Castro’s desi.t for power and fear to re li nq uish control of any aspect of political <tt.uish control . Cuban institutions are an example of Castro's fear to control any aspect
 An analysis of conditions in Cubs st nud-yest IW and an attempt to predict Cuba’s political future . Cuba's political future. Cuba's future.
 An American Journalists Inside Look at Today's Cuba . An American journalist interviewed Cuba's Castro Castro . Castro's Cuba, Cuba's Fidel Castro, is Cuba's first president .
 Author attempts to make a ‘fair’ assessment of Castro’s Rcvotuiron and what it has meant to Cuba . The black-and-white photo coverapc. which ton*Mutes a major portion of the volume, it ncrllrm
 Ulus, AMbne's olhctsjt.e>s -.'f the r'-dfruf ntmenc ftustraitop and failure on a ihree week tom ot the oland 624. Ulus is a failure on the
 An aslre-re-‘petumalns in the tight o| roe roe etemem* el ch-tesmatu nature [S-List. d lMas Weber]
 A study of Castro's use of violence, of the factors which led to Castro’s seintre ot power, and a number of yenerallntions and hypotheses useful in studying guerrilla warfare . In study ini guerrilla warfare's nature and functions . Study of Castro�
 Instead have produced a typical Marxist iaterprpr. at km in this rather ""oey-sided"" piece of reporting . Reeders win ttnd hat the authors win . Instead of winning, the authors produce an 'oey' report .
 Included ere the lot lowing Robert J Alexander, ""Castro's Challenge to America” ; Samuel Shapiro . Samuel Shapiro. Robert J. Alexander .
 Cedric letfrape: "The Nature of Cuban Socialism " <31.31. Cuban Socialist or Totahtariaar Cedric . Cedric: "Cedric, Cedric, letfrap"
 The authors write that ihe-r volume ’’rndravors to understand the revolution ol 1*5* as a Cuban phenomenon . They have also been concerned wish “she putlent of political leadership—Ms values, goals, and techniques .
 Internal %cart.h tot a viable political order .-ad a viable poitttcal party muk*fc. economic problem-^ reiattom with thr USSR, internal Mvvrih. foreign poik>. and refuge* problem* Cuba, thr Economic a
 A t htiean rvunoont. lv » coatributo a (Kgptn titled ‘The Economic and Social Backer mind’
 PoIiihuI Systems ot taiiin Amenta.64 1520.9* NJ75p). kossrtv rsi-noeu. history, influence* .*f Rxims *nd Cmiru. ruinxxl processes. tos
 Castro's dreamf reshaping Unban society to attain “an ideal of social perfection"" »s doomed to fa.lure. Reasons wav Castro's dreams of reshaping society are doomed to fail .
 Castro's Cuba us us It Really Is—an Eyewitness Account by an American Reporter . Castro's Castro us It really Is, an Eyewitness account from an American reporter . Castro was Castro's Cuban President . Castro is Castro's first president .
 India, workintt as a teporter for the Scripps Howard Newspaper Alliance, reports his impressions of Cuba as a tourist in 1964 .
 An interpretation of the events leading to the overthrow of Batista and of the rule of Castro by a U.S. journalist .
 Author, a longtime Sew York Times correspondent, here relates his role in publicizing the Castro story . Castro story from 1957 to 1961 .
 A typically Communist condemnation of the U.S. and an overly optimistic fori***%t of Cuba's economic production . The United States is a major source of Cuban exports .
 A 'iuioloyK.il siuil.v in determine whether an individual's employment experience influenced hi.v's attitude toward the Castro revolution . The 'Iiioloy' is a reference to a person's work experience in Cuba .
 The author, a Brill'll journalist, reports his Cuban observations made on la visits to Havana in the period 1939-1965, 648 .
 A scholarly assessment of the rains ami failures ot Cuba from 1939 to 1964 . Cuba's rains were largely due to the failure of rains in Cuba .
 Author's analysis of events that transpired during his service as Ambassador fo Cuba from 1937 to 1939 . Author: Analysis of events during his time as Ambassador to Cuba .
 Account is written by one who witnessed five actions >n November-December 1938 as a reporter for the Reader’s Digest .
 A biased narrative by a former tclev'ion reporter '.vho faccording to Victor Franco. A biased . narrative .
 An uncomplimentary report on Castro's Cub* as the writer . Castro* was the leader of Cuba prior to 1963 .
 A rambling, disjointed story of the author’s conversations in Cuba on several trips beginning in December 1960 .
 Influences of low wages, unemployment, reliance on sugar, weakness of conservative forces . Trade unions, trade unions, civil iervice organizations, and revolutionary tradition, influence .
 A use of sociological methodology to determine the political reactions of different age groups to their historical experiences and the response of different generations to the Castro revolution . Different generations to Cuba's revolution . A sociological study of the Cuban revolution .
 Writer finds only words of praise for Castro and his efforts in Cuba . Only condemnation for U.S. relations with Cuba before and after Castro .
 A reprint of a 5 August I960 State Department Press Release of a 2 August memorandum submitted to the Inter*American Peace Committee . The State Dept. submitted the memorandum to the Peace Committee on 2 August .
 A sociological study based on interviews in 1961 and 1962 with workers in 21 factories scattered throughout Cuba . Interviews were conducted in Cuba in 1961-62 .
 Background causes of Cuban revolution, roles of Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara, shifts of movement in direction of USSR and Communist China, and defects of the revolution .
 Author thowi how ihe Cuban Army failed to fight effectively against Castro’s guerrillas . Author: ‘I’m not surprised that the Cuban Army didn’t do enough to defeat the rebels .
 He also points out certain lessons reobserved in the course of the wer . Indicates the problems faced by the anti-Castro guerrillas .
 A lengthy inquiry into Castro’s relationship with the rest of the Communist world . Castro was one of the leaders of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 In the appendix, titled “Senator Fulbright and United States Policy,” the author examines and refutes positions taken by Senator Fulbright in a Senate speech of March 25. 1964 . The author also refutes the positions taken in a number of meetings on Cuba and Castro .
 A supporter of Castro in the overthrow of the Batista regime and an office holder under Castro until his defection in 1961 has written this volume “to show how a communist minority under the guise of nationalism and social reform takes over a country against the will of its people 676.
 Author searches through available literature to identify the ideology of Fioel Castro and show how he betrayed the revolution he claimed to have fathered . Author searches for information to show how Castro betrayed his own revolution . Author finds out what Castro's ideology was to blame for his actions .
 Author's comments on ro-Castro writings he analyzes . Article is of interest for the author of the author's comments .
 A survey of the extent of Communist control and influence in Cuba was conducted in 1964 . The Cuban Communist Party was heavily involved in the Cuban Revolution .
 A tracing of Castro’' relation' with Communists from the early ■lays of (he revolution in the Sierra Maestra through 1966 through 1966 . Castro'' relation to Communists was a tracing of his relationship with the Communist Party .
 U.S. policy toward Cuba, Cuban dependence on Soviet Russia’s and Communist China's financial support, Castro's shift to a closer alignment with Communist Chins, the goal of the Alliance for Progress, and United States policy in Latin America . United States. policy .
 The writer, who earlier resided on the Island from 1951 to 1959, spent four weeks in the U.S. in Cube .
 Castro has given Cuban foreign policy a belligerent lone that has largely estranged the Cuban Communist party from Com munist parties in other countries . A search for the reasons why Castro has become more militant and why he has .
 Full text of the report of the General Secretary of the Cuban PSP to the orny congress held in August i960 .
 Report is of interest for its evidence of an early linking of the Cuban Comtmunists and Castro . Report of interest . Report is important for evidence of the early links of the Comtims and Castro in Cuba .
 London Sews Chronicle reporter on a 1964 visit to Cuba . Observations of a London correspondent in Cuba .
 An indictment of Castro for his conversion of Cuba to Communism, told in terms of the author's per*»on;il involvement us ( usiro’s handpicked President of Cuba from January 1959 until Castro ousted him in July 1959 .
 A journalist's uncomplimentary review of Castro’s actions from January 1959 to 1964 . A criticism of the failure of the U.S. to take proper actions to halt Castro's extension ot power or to insure his overthrow .
 A sketchy tracing of the process by which Castro joined the Communists . A prediction that Communism under Castro in Cuba would not follow the program of traditional old-line Communism . Castro joined a group of Cuban Communists .
 Volume is based on interviews with large number of Cuban refugees in the U.S. and other countries . Volume of interviews with Cuban refugees .
 Volume purports to be the ""exact"" speech delivered by Castro October 16. 1953, to the Court in Santiago, Chile . Castro delivered the speech to the court in Santiago .
 Cuba, Cuba, on the occasion of his trial for his role in the attack on the Moncada Barracks . Cuba was on the verge of being executed for his part in the bombing .
 How the ""New Left” interprets the Castro revolution to itself and the world . How the "New Left" interprets Castro's revolution to the world. How the New Left’s interpretation of the revolution .
 The second half of the volume contains observations by the author made on a brief stopover in Havana in July 1961 .
 How Communists employed the ""Guatemalan Way" in gaining control of Cuba . Soviet economic and niiltiary support of Castro supported Castro . Use of Cuba as a base for spread of Communist subversion .
 Author, one-time Communist (member of the party cell with Alger Hiss and acquaintance of Cuba’s leading Communists) presents a strong condemnation of Castro for his leading of Cuba into the Communist orbit . Author: Castro was a member of a cell with Hiss .
 Volume is designed determine why and how the Cuban revolution turned Marxlst-Lenlnlst . Volume was designed to determine why . and how . how the revolution turned Marxist-Leninist-Lenlst.
 The author presents a five-part definition of the process of Stalinization . Castro has become Stalin-like in his rule of Cuba . The author also uses the definition to show how Castro's rule has changed in Cuba .
 A West German reporter's observations on the Cuban people’s reactions to Castroism . Castroism is a Castroist state of Cuba .
 The author, a journalist and university lecturer, writes of many aspects of the Castro revolution and the Communist takeover .
 A lengthy rambling discourse on a suggested U.S. reaction to world Communism . A lengthy discussion on a possible reaction to Communism .
 U.S. Coast Guard helps prevent raids on Cuba from United States territory . Coast Guard rescues Cubans who attempt to flee across Florida Straits .
 She later served as his Ambassador Plenipotentiary in Havana, and as Cuban delegate to the UN until she abandoned the Castro regime . She also served as the Cuban ambassador to the United Nations .
 U.S. Coast Guard participated in the movement by small boat of thousands of Cubans permitted to leave Cuba by Castro's offer announced on 28 September 1965 . Thousands of Cuban Cubans were allowed to leave the country by the offer .
 Cubans who sought to take advantage of Castro’s ‘open door’ policy on emigration, announced on 10 October 1965. to leave Cuba by small boat for the United States. Work of the Coast Guard .
 An "obituaries" section reports on the death and/or defection of many of the participants . An “obituary’s" section includes the death of many participants .
 An examination of Castro's motives in permitting relatives of Cuban exiles to join their families abroad and reorganizing the government-sponsored political party . Castro's motive was to allow relatives to join families abroad, reorganizing party .
 A personal account of the author's arrest and imprisonment for three years in Cuba, beginning in the summer of 1959 . The author was arrested and imprisoned in Cuba in 1959 .
 Volume is a revised version of his memoirs commissioned by the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace . Volume of memoirs published by Hoover Institution, Hoover Institution .
 Revision was accomplished with the assistance of Irving P and Melanie L Pflaum . Revision of this article was accomplished by Irving P. and Melanie .
 Cuba's economic problems are the result of an anti-U.S. explanation of the causes of Cuba's problems . The U.S.-Cuba relations between Cuba and the United States have been strained .
 A revealing look at the Cuban economic picture—agriculture, industry, labor, dependence on Soviet sources of supply . Cuba is dependent on Soviet supplies of food and labor .
 Soviet aid agreements and also of Eastern Europe and Communist China . Nature, amount, purpose, and achievements of various Soviet aid deals . Eastern Europe, Communist China and Soviet Russia .
 A glance at the influence on several aspects of business of Castro’s actions during his first nine months in office . Castro has been in office for nine months .
 Ernesto ""Che" Guevara to author in Montevideo after the conclusion of the Punta del Este meeting of OAS Economic and Foreign Ministers in August 1961 .
 A partial tracing of Guevara's movements from his departure from Cuba in 1965 until his death on October 9, 1967 .
 Story based on information tied in Guevara's diary and that of another guerrilla member . Story is based in part on information collected by the guerrillas .
 Why Guevara's espousal of the Chinese Communist position led to his departure from Cuba . Why he left Cuba because of his support for China?
 A lot of speculation as to the whereabouts of Che (iurvara) in the period after his disappearance from Cuban political life after 15 March 1965 . Another in a Iona lot of . speculation* as to . his whereabouts .
 The author's experiences from his landing in Cuba in December 1965 for the following right years, plus four previously written articles on various phases of the guerrilla struggle in Cuba .
 A first presentation in English of an interview with Guevara reported by two Chinese Communist reporters in April 1959 . The interview was first made in China in 1959 .
 Volume purports to he Guevara's recollection, from the departure from Mexico in November 1956 to the takeover of Havana in January 1959 . Volume claims to have taken place in Havana from November 1956 until January 1959.
 There is nothing in this edition of this edition to indicate the source from which it was translated . We are happy to return to the page you came from .
 A collection of 15 writings produced from 1956 to 1964 . plus four items dedicated to Guevara that appear in the Appendixes .
 Gents of actors in. and conclusions relevant to the development. of October 1962 involving the U.S. and . the. USSR, and Cuba . Gents . of actors . in. October 1962 .
 This article is devoted to the U.S. confrontation with the USSR over the missile installation in Cuba .
 Ol interest tor its story of the gathering and inti rpretmg of information on Sox ie' missile, and launching installation, in Cuba in 1962 735 .
 Notes. \n .thrulcdl U’Imhii is a paper Uchvtrcvl before thtr 1’iah AvjJorm of Science h> the author .
 Robert J Alexander, ""Why President Kennedy Was Right in the Cuban Crisis""; Boris Goldenherg, "Why JFK was Right in Cuba"; Boris GoldenHerg. "Why Kennedy was right in Cuba was right"
 An exhaustive case study of U.S. and Soviet foreign policies . In the ""before."" ‘‘during’ and ""after"" stages of the Cuban missile crisis .
 A review of the events and a cataloguing of lessons learned in the USA-U.S. confrontation . A catalogueuing of the lessons learned from the USA and Russia confrontation .
 A collection of 94 documents—statements, congressional resolutions. interviews, addresses, resolutions, executive orders, communiques. declarations, letters, and proclamations. They date from President Kennedy’s statement of Sep., 1962 to Secretary General U Thant's letter to First
 The author examines a number of arguments officially advanced to support the imposition of a maritime quarantine on Cuba in October 1962 . The author concludes that the United States acted skillfully to obtain the removal of the long-range missiles from Cuba .
 A Journalistic Narrative of Events in Cuba and of Cuban Relations with the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Cuba . Cuba. and Russia. and Cuba.
 A brief report on the extent of the Soviet buildup of personnel, missiles, missile sites, and aircraft In Cuba prior to October 22. 19(0), and the withdrawal of personnel and equipment .
 Report is based on testimony of the chiefs of various intelligcnce agencies of the United States government . Report is . based on . testimony of chiefs of . various intelligence . agencies .
 An examination of the law supporting (he United States action in quarantining Cuba) and analysis of some of the implications of applicable laws . An analysis of the laws supporting the U.S. action .
 The Operations of the Military Air Transport Service prior to and during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . The operations of the military air transport service were conducted during the crisis of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The Naval Interdiction of Offensive Weapons and Associated Materiel to Cuba to Cuba . The Navy has been involved in the anti-Cuban blockade of Cuba since 2003 .
 A profusely documented examination of several questions of international law that arose as a result of the U.S. proclamation of the maritime quanantine of Cuban waters in October 1962 .
 The USSR might have had some motives in deciding to position missiles in Cuba . An examination of certain suggested motives might have been behind the decision to move missiles .
 A reporter cover* the event* of October 14-2*. t%2. pertaining to the Soviet installation and removal of missile* from < < *r.i.
 An inquiry into the justification for and legality of the U.S. quarantine of Cuba during the missile crisis of Ociober-Novcmber 1962 .
 Ilow the So,let press informed the Soviet people prior to and utter the U.S. ultimatum in October IV62.62. Ilow said the United States had no intention of attacking the Soviet Union .
 Report on October 1962 crisis occasioned by Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba . Report on the October 1962 incident .
 The author seeks to demonstrate that there ho, been a ""pattern” that determined the use of military force in the nbov conations . The author also seeks to prove that there has been a pattern’s been a 'pattern’ that determined military force .
 He uses the es of United States.oi/emci,, tn Cuua and the Dominican Republic to set the stage for the bulk of his study .
 A scholarly investigation of U.S. government interest in Cuba in the prc-Civil War period . A scholarly study of United States government interests in Cuba .
 A criticism of the State Department's attitude toward Cuba in Ihe face of Cuba’s obvious efforts to promote revolution in Latin America . The State Department has been criticized for its attitude toward the Cuban regime .
 U.S. courts to give relief to victims of foreign appropriations . Tendency of United States courts to grant relief to foreign appropriations.
 A collection of three articles on various aspects of the Cuban question . The Cuban question is the subject of a series of articles .
 In “A New Approach for the U.S.” Roger Fisher I Yetc Republic, 15 Jun 1963). sets forth a suggested step-by-step proposal for United States .
 An indictment of United States relations with Cuba by a longtime critic of U.S. policy in Latin America . The U.N. has been critical of the Cuban government in recent years .
 Some new insights into the operations of the National Security Council and of the President during the Cuban Missile Episode . President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton discuss the Cuban missile program .
 In contrast to recent studies, thi* volume is sympathetic to the manner in which the U.S. handled its relation* with Cuba .
 A Soviet expose of the United States 'Imperialistic' policy towards Cuba from IfWK »o 1959. Note* A Soviet ""expose"" of the U.S. “Imperialist" policy . Note: A Soviet 'expose' of the US '
 The United States Ambassador to Cuba reviews U.S.-Cuban relations from 1K9H to 1959 . Then describes the breakdown of relations between the two nations to April 1961 . He concludes with thoughts on the future of Cuba after Castro .
 An examination of U.S. policy vis-a-vis Castro’s Cuba . An argument for the initiation of an ideological revolution to effect a change in the Cuban policy of the United States .
 The president emeritus of Princeton Theological Seminary advocates a "softer line" by the USA in its policies toward Cuba .
 Cuba, the U.S., <£ Russia, 1960-63; A Journalistic Narrative of Events in Cuba anil of Cuban Relations with the United States and the Soviet Union. Cuba, a Journalist Narrative . Cuba, anil .
 A report, generally pro-Castro and anti-U.S. in its theme and content, was published by the U.N. Cuba in 1960s and '60s .
 Castro’s promotion of guerrilla war in Latin America . Castro promoted guerrilla war against the West . Castro was one of the most successful leaders in Latin American history . Castro is one of many leaders in the world .
 An analysis of U.S. foreign policy with respect to Latin America . A discussion of the reasons for the failure of that policy . The failure of the policy is discussed .
 A review of developments of U.S. policy toward Cuba in several critical periods from the issuance of the Monroe Doctrine to the era of Fidel Castro . The Monroe Doctrine was issued in 1953 .
 A brief survey of the Castro-led revolution within the context of the Cold War . i.e. in relation to its effect on U.S. foreian policy .
 U.S. State Dept. of State for Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . Senate Committee of Foreign Relations.
 A brief outline of significant events in the last years of the Batista regime and the early years of Castro's rule . Castro's government was overthrown in 1959 .
 Hearings before the Subcommittee to Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. 87th Cong. 1st Cong., 1st scss,, April, May & Oct., 1960 and Jan.61. Hearings . Hearings
 A critical review of Senator Fnlbrighl’s ""great debate"" speech of 25 March 1964 . The speech was one of the 'great debates' of 1964 .
 Vot I covering the period 1492-1845. is subtitled ""From the Conquest of Cuba to La Escalera”; Vol. Vot . is . subtitled . From the conquest of Cuba . to LaEscalera, the period of Cuba is subt
 Author is critical of the motives of the U.S. government and of its citizens in dealings with Cuba in the pre-independence period . Author: Author critical of motives of United States government and its citizens .
 A critical examination of the ""role” of investment and of its ""effects"" on economic development in Cuba’s early national history . The study examines the role of investment in Cuba's early national development .
 An attempt to determine how the Cuban revolution will affect U.S. policy in Latin America . The Cuban revolution led to a revolution in Cuba, which has been a major source of Cuban influence .
 A very brief statement by the author of his part, as Argentine ambassador lo Cuba in January I960, in presenting to Castro a United States proposal to assist Cuba with financial assisiance in return for Castro’s halting of his insults of the United States government .
 A survey of opinions voiced in congressional hearings by congressmen and State Department personnel from 1952 . The results of the 1952 hearings were released by the State Department .
 Many of the speeches were an indictment of the Eisenhower administration for permitting the development of the situation in Cuba . The Cuban situation was the focus of the campaign .
 Presentation is of particular interest in view of subsequent developments in U.S.-Cuban relations after January 1961 . Presentation of this information is important to note that the Cuban government was overthrown in 1961 .
 Situation in Cuba, Hearing before the Senate Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services, 87th Cong., 2d sess., 1962 . Situation in Cuban Islands, Cuba, hearing on Cuba, 1962 .
 Appendixes contain a nuiubcr of documents relevant to international relations in the Western Hemisphere . Appendixes also contain a list of documents related to the region .
 Author, United States Ambassador to Cuba from 1929 to 1933, devotes most of his volume to the period 1898-1932 . Author, U.S. Ambassador to Cuban from 1929- 1933 .
 Author views critical of the role U.S. business interests played in the development of the Cuban economy and influence on relations with the island nation . Author views critically, if not unsympathetically, the role of business interests in Cuba's development .
 Ilis object in this article is to determine how United States investments i nC'uba influenced U.S. relations with Cuba during (’astro’s first years as Cuban dictator) Cuba's first years .
 An Essay on the Dynamics of Revolution and the Dissolution of Dominican 799 is published in the Dominican Republic . The Dominican Republic is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Trujillo was born in 1945 . He was the first president of the United States in 18 years . He is now the president of Mexico .
 A brief account of the nation's political instability introduces a longer report on economic development, population and settlement, and the prospects for the future . The report looks at the country's economic development and population growth .
 A casual look at the history and customs of the Caribbean nation . Includes a brief section on native foods . A casual taste of Caribbean cuisine .
 A journalistic review of the history, geography, people, and cconoim . and a touriM style description of the capital city anil tow its m the interior .
 A brief historical review of United States intervention tn Cuba from independence to 195.1. A brief review of the U.S. intervention in the country's history of the past .
 A study of the cvolvement of the policies adopted by the U.S. in its relations with Cuba and of the application of those policies . The study will look at the policies of the United States and Cuba .
 The Under Secrefary of Stale discusses the nature of the Cuban threat, lines of strategy open to the U.S., the purpose of the Alliance for Progress, and the reason for and the . nature of a program of “economic denial” directed against Cuba . The
 One of the best histories of the Dominican Republic for the period covered . Still, in spite of its age .
 Author was a career State Department official who served as American Commissioner in the country from 1922 to 1925 . Author served as Commissioner of the U.S. in the Philippines from 1922 until 1925 .
 A photo story accompanies the author's report on conditions in the Dominican Republic a year after the assassination of Dictator Trujillo . The Dominican Republic is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 President Balagucr’s efforts to restore economic and political stability have been successful . The country has been in the throes of a decade of political turmoil .
 A collection of articles that support the position of the overthrown Bosch regime . Bosch was overthrown by Bosch's regime .
 Prospects for peace on eve of June 1, including economic and social conditions . T F S role in Dominican history, and a review of economic, social conditions.
 Background to and cvrniand personalities figuring in the presidential election ol I June 1466. The election was held in 1466 .
 A report on violence in the Dominican Republic under (he Balagucr) government . A report by the government of the country's president .
 The search lor political stability since the assassination ol Trujillo, the overthrow of the Bosch administration, and the revolt. civil war, and United States intervention. The search for political stability in the country has led to the death of the country's first president .
 The author, longtime Dominican leader and President from February 1*6) to September l*u.6, tells the storv of Dominican political developments from May 1*61 when Trujillo was assassinated, to May 1.1*64 .
 An Interim Report on the Dominican Repin lie.” ibid., Vol.6. The First Nine Months . ibid, ibid and ibid says .
 I9h5 is the date of the official r%taMt*hmrat of the InterAmerican Armed Force in the Dominican Republic . The date of this year's I9H5h5h is December 31, 2015 .
 The t'entrr for Strategic Siudie* Volume tirwnhc* event* of the l'*' moll from April 24 to May 4 and m the Appemli&r* name* le> diplomat**. and military personnel and leading Communotot
 York Tumi reporter in the reporting of the new* during the . 1965 resolution in the Dominican RepuMiv 821 . Author'* personal m*ohrmrnt a* a \r» a . a . reporter .
 Ihc lK«*nm«att IXtemma"", |<dwt I f r*mr. ""fhr I'ulitRi s'l Mcttcrmvh ” 823.823. IhC lK
 Washington Post correspondent reports on the 1*65 revolution in the Dominican Republic at be taw 825.
 Volume Includes chronology tram 14*2 to tune M, IMS and 30 documents relating to U.S. relations wp the Dominican Republic . Volume Includes a chronology tranche of documents . Volume includes 30 documents related to United States relations with the country .
 Views on United States iatervemioa of April IMS end end of the future of the Dr -ninicen Republic expressed by Bosch, Reid. Views on U.S. end of April end of U.N. Republic .
 Theodora Draper in "The Do mi n i c an Crisis,"" Commemery.com commemorates the IMS Dominican rising .
 A very brief e aammae on ol several questions prrtaimng to the ""totality"" ol United States and OAS uMerventton m ihc Dom i ni can Republic Republic m April 1M3.3.
 InterAanmraa Pence Feme a the Dominican ItrroNw teasism . Tipresences at InterAAnmra a . Pence feme a . the Dominican itrro .
 An elimination of the possible damage camed to the IwerA meric an bnaft of the United Staler by iu April 1963 Intervention in the Dominican Republic . The Iwera meric meric was a meric .
 U.S.-Ecuadoran rvtauoov and the p r o b le m of achtevtag pototenl stability. US.uaoov: The U.V.S. and Ecuadorian rvt.u.a.ov and
 A brief survey of the geography, dam. people, hissoey. poke leal tauuMtom and peotewo. The onows esmutfmama, and the lai h a n proble m •49.49. people .
 Prnnnsl cuter wear. d the min and h » tarnty cm a “cbr •nrag and Whrapdmil tour of rcuadoe 854. d .nrag .
 Deputy Chief of Staff ClnClaat. describes U.S. military actions in Dominican Republic in April-May 1*65 .
 A brief review of the UA. portion vtn**ta the Trujfflo dictatorship . A very brief review . of the . UA . portion . of vtn*ta .
 U.4. and OAS react ion to the ass ass ass ina t io n of Trujillo May I960) and subsequent events . U.S. and U.J.A. responded to the Ass Ass Ass ina T io n . May May I
 OAS to US. policy, eluants to the theory and praam of acn-iaicnwMioft .
 Undid Stales wiebtogw fee military forces tram the Dnmtoiraa Republic in 1*24. A lengthy iisd waU-doc nmenie d el a mtom i o a of tevta factors prompted ih Undid to wie
 A photo Story, the result of the author's four moot ha ha of travel m tor varied terrain and climate of this e qwa to r -str i dd W i g nation .
 Society, endure, horary, pototeal protest**. i iwgav and iram political devgto gmams. iwGav, iwv.iwv, irwv and irwwv . iwav and iw
 Aa attempt to tome a program te* m ete m ma the tvtssrm |Wa deem*) cd tor agriodtural wort tone 854 .
 Kcsiilts of lcuailor's at tempts tempts .14*. foster indiisirtali/ation through the device of ""*utai initial” tariff protevtiotioti. The device of "temptioti" is a device of
 An examination of si/e of holding', land tenure, and systems of agriculture, will examine the system of agriculture . The system of holding' land tenure and land tenure is examined .
 Ecuadoran President Arosemena was overthrown in July 1963 . The overthrow of the Ecuadorian president was the overthrow of Arosemana .
 A review of Ecuador’s political history and geographical features precedes a study of political instability, political parties and elections, and of the operations of the different branches of national. provincial, . provincial, ami local government .
 A discussion of the influence of personallvmo in Ecuadoran politics, precedes a brief glimpse of internal problems, political history, border conflicts, and U.S.-Ecuadoran relations . The author also discusses internal problems and border conflicts .
 A brief report on the rote of Velasco Ibarra in recent Ecuadoran history, and a comment on the government of his successor . A very brief report . A comment on his successor.
 Conditions under the Uhico dictatorship, role of the Communivts in the government of President Arbcn/. the Arbenz pro* itram >n one municipio, problems confronting the Castillo Armas government .
 The Eastern Coast of Central America Commercial and Agricultural Company, a company, and Us efforts to establish a colony in Guatemala . Primarily, the story of the company's efforts to develop a colony .
 Although published some lime ago, it stilt contains much useful information about places and customs .
 Author's experiences in exploring ancient Maya ""urns and in contact with native peoples . Author’s experiences in . exploring ancient Mayan "urns" and in . contact with natives .
 Reaction and Revolution in Latin America, 1966 . 1 he author's ""observations on problems, persons and events'* of ithe >c.ir following the overthrow 4>f the Arbcn/ government .
 V studs ot the political history, economic development (from the soioni.il era to tutUi) and social life (from tut.ua*cinala.il) of the Italian society .
 Communist influence in political parties, governmental institutions, various policies of . various policies . Communist influence . in. political parties and governmental institutions . Communist . parties, government institutions, policies of. government .
 A history of Guatemala from colonization to I95S, with an additional chapter on British Honduras that carries the story down to 1962 . The history of Guatemalan history is told in a new book, "Guatemala"
 A brief review of the nation's history from Mayan antiquity to the present day fills the first 78 pages of this volume . The volume includes a review of Mayan extramarital history from Mayan .
 Sandwiched between the two parts arc 16 pages of photographs of a wide assortment of people, buildings, etc. The book is published in the U.S.
 Author’s reminiscences of animal and plant life and of human relations in Guatemala . —.i, r — 41 Guatemala AGRICULTURE 875.
 A review of past and present lmliun settlement, cultivation, and la nil holding patterns as a step in understanding the nature m the problems and prospects of any proposed solution of Gtiutcma‘a’a\ economic, social, and political problems .
 An attempt to determine the contributions of the Guatemalan Rural Development Program for the purpose of making recommendations for the better handling of U.S. foreign aid committed to future rural development programs .
 Recommendations in seven areas of the program were inaugurated by the Castillo Armas administration .
 An examination of employment practices, . duration of employment . and relationship of wages to productivity on coffee, cotton, and sugar farms . The study was published in October 2013 .
 A brief review of some of the steps by which Communists gained power in Guatemala under Arevalo and Arbenz . The Communists gained control of Guatemala in the 1950s .
 A detailed tracing of the steps by which a small group of Communists succeeded in gaining virtual control over the nation of .1,000.000 inhabitants, 884.000 people .
 Ninth Interim Report of Hearings before the Subcommittee on Latin America of the House Seleel Committee on Communist Aggression, 83d Cong., 2d sess., 1954 . 1954 . 1953 .
 Volume deals with Communist Inliltratiun of the government of Guatemala during the .rrdvato and Arbcnz administrations . Volume deals mainly with communist Inligratiun .
 Among those giving testimony were C&ifos Castillo Armas and John E Peurlfoy, 885 . Among them giving testimony are C&Fos Castill Armas, C&I Castillo .
 Testimony to a House Committee by the former United States Ambassador to Guatemala on the extent of Communist Involvement In llie government of President Arbcnz overthrown in mld-1954 .
 A description of Guatemalan conditions in 1944, an analysis of the goals and methods of the leaders of the 1944-1954 revolution, and thoughts on why the Indian villagers responded as they did .
 A review of the steps by which Communists gained influence in the Arbcnz administration, the overthrow of the regime, and the role of the U.S. government in the developments . 8 ri9.9.
 Ydfgoras Fuentes was President of Guatemala from March 1958 to March 1963 . He held office until March 1963, when he was assassinated .
 Threat to the Peace and Security of America and to the Sovereignty and Political Independence of Guatemala . Threat to Guatemala's sovereignty and sovereignty is a threat to U.S.
 A study based on interviews with a number of the rural supporters of President Arbenz who were arrested after his overthrow in the summer of 1954 .
 In the growth of Communist influence in Guatemala from 1944 ’0 the overthrow of the Arbenz government in 1954 . In the . growth of the Communist influence . in Guatemala . in the overthrow . of the government in . 1954 . The overthrow was a coup de Arbenz
 V u'V’oit pii'p.itVil t»v .* commission sponsored l»> the IIIKH in soopei.tCon wnh the iiiufem.inoveimnenc.il. topics surveyed .
 A ile*., option of tM l’ ""backwoods"" economv of the Indian village of I'anui.n-hcl ,n which ihe anthor lised inie nillentlv from l*U5 to 1911. A 
 Index .n analvsis id fisv.il operations |«»r the purpose of determining ht»w ihev have .n tested economic development and how the fiscal s*stun can aid u; the country's progress .
 A statistical comparison of various aspects of educational development in the two nations . The two nations are ranked at the highest level of education in the world .
 An analysis of the role of the earthquakes of 177. in the movement of the capital from Antigua and of the new leaders who developed and who played dominant roles in the future political arena of Guatemala . An analysis . of the . role of . the earthquakes in the . movement of
 The author's understanding of the motives behind U.S. support of aid proprams and a brief report on United States assistance to (juatemala's Rural Dcvelopmenl Propram)
 For Ihe first lime in the nation's history, a candidate opposed to the government's nominee succeeded in winning . A review of ihe election—parties, candidates, platforms, results, results .
 Author reviews efforts of the Castillo Armas government to stabilize conditions in Guatemala after the overthrow of the Arbenz regime . The author, a Guatemalan journalist, reviews the government's efforts .
 An inquiry into ihe “organization and functioning of the Guatemalan government" and an attempt to determine why the government functioned as it did . An inquiry Into ihe  ‘organization    government’s organization and the functioning
 A brief review of the IMS. role In Guatemala before and after Arbenz . 912.12.
 A well-documented study of U.S. policy toward the Castillo Armas-le<l invasion of Guatemala (hat caused the overthrow of the Arhinz government In 1954) o • il-—,1 ex-Haiti .
 The -tnry nt lltiti fi,mi Spanish discovery tu the ssichUravs al of the United States marines . The discovery was made in Spain in the 1930s .
 Society, economy, history, political pri>ccs>es. governmental structure, influence of Duvalier. public policy. Duvaliers' influence on public policy . History, economics, politics, social policy .
 History, geography, climate, people, agriculture, transportation industry, and agriculture . Hade of the Caribbean nation . .
 A study of the land, people, history, politics, society, and economy of the two island neighbors . A study into the relationship between the islands .
 A study of Haiti's history, religion, family life, politics, and economics . A survey of Haitian problems in the 1940’s. Haiti .
 Geography, history, government, politics, role of Duvalier, and recent relations with the Dominican Republic and the U.S. The Dominican Republic is located in the United States .
 A well-illustrated volume designed for the general reader, and, especially, for the tourist. A well illustrated volume .
 Appendix IM, titled the “Balance Sheet, is devoted wholly to tourist information . Appendix IM is devoted to the "Balance Sheet"
 A photo story of social customs and economic conditions in Haiti in 1961 . The photo story was a story of the Haitian people .
 A collection of writings in which Haitians describe the geography, history, religion, music, and folklore, education, art, literature, and outstanding men of Haiti .
 Duvalier** rule and the deterioration of U.S. relations with Haiti were among the reasons for the deterioration in relations .
 The first 96 pages give a cursory review of Haitian history to I J*7 . Duvalier gained control of Haiti in the early 1950s .
 The former head of the U.S. military mission to Haiti describes conditions under the Duvalier dictatorship . The former president of the United States describes conditions in Haiti under the dictatorship .
 A photo story of conditions in Haiti in the early years of DuvaiierN dictatorship . The photo was taken in Haiti during the dictatorship of the Haitian government .
 Tbe writer conveys the sense of hopelessness that exists under Duvalier’s rule in Haiti .
 This study surveys the influence Duvalier exerts on traditional life and institutions in Haiti . The study was originally written as a series of lectures delivered at several U.S. universities .
 A description of the Duvalier dictatorship and a revelation of the amount of U.S. assistance and of the projects supported by different assistance programs . A revelation of United States assistance .
 Hosts discuss Duvalier, opposition in exile, possible role for the OAS in Haiti . They also discuss the state of the Haitian economy . Hosts also discuss possible role in the future of the country .
 This study is of value for its information on labor and prices in Hai’i . Although written nearly 20 years ago, this study was of value to its information . The study was published in 1988 .
 A study of the roles of the mulattocs and the Negroes in Haitian society . A study into the role of mulattoans in the Haitian society.
 A study of class and caste characteristics in economic, sociooccupational, and political status groupings . The study was conducted in a bid to find out who is the best in the world .
 A study of the native beliefs and practices (generally titled Voodooism) and of their influence on the Introduction of modern medicine into Haiti . A study . of the . influence on . modern medicine in Haiti . The study .
 A statistical report on education in Haiti, United Nations ASSISTANCE TO 942. The United Nations has provided assistance to Haiti's education needs .
 UNESCO project aims to reduce illiteracy in the Marbial Valley of Haiti . A first report on the initial phases of the UNESCO project is published .
 A scholarly study of the reasons for the sending of the Marines and the failures of the occupation force . A review of the accomplishments and failures . of the . occupation force. A scholarly . study .
 Author's experience as a USMC officer assigned to the Haitian Gendarmerie in the years after 1925 . Author's experiences in Haiti .
 Twenty Years of Organization and Training by the U.S. Marine Corps. Twenty years of organization and training by the United States Marine .
 The story of the Gendarmerie d'Haiti and the U.S. Marines who served with it is told in a new book .
 The Duvalier government was the French government of the 1960s and 1970s . It was under the control of the U.S. government of Haiti, Haiti, during the Haitian government .
 Author was Financial Adviser-General Receiver of Haiti in the period 1927-1929 . Author was financial adviser-general receiver of Haiti . Author: U.S. accomplishments in Haiti by the author .
 A brief review of Haitian history and of U.S. involvement in Haitian affairs . A brief history review of United States involvement in Haiti .
 An evaluation of the accomplishments of the mission initiated in the treaty of 16 September 1915 . An evaluation . of the . accomplishments of . the mission .
 Robert M Spector. Additional Light on the Genesis of the ‘Good Neighbor Policy. ‘ ‘The Good Neighbor Policy’.
 Forbes Commission's hearings and report on President Hoover’s decision to withdraw the Marines from Haiti . An appraisal of the influence of the Forbes Commission . An assessment of the impact of the hearings .
 A comprehensive review of Honduran political and constitutional history precedes discussions of the law and the courts, political administration, party structure, election machinery, and legislative bodies . The Honduran government has been in power since 2003 .
 The influence of the United Fruit Company, program ot the Villeda Morales administration, the ouster of Villcda Morales in October 1963, the rule of Colonel Lbpea Arellano since 1963, and the role of the USA in Honduran affairs .
 Society, economy, history, political developments, governmental structure, public policy . Government structure, government structure, political structure .
 The author's search for. capture and rearing of the. the transportation of Quetzals, the fabled bird of the Aztecs, on a visit to Honduras, in the years 1937-1938 .
 Analysis of story content of one San Pedro Sula newspaper and of tour Tegucigalpa newspapers . Analysis of the story content is carried out by tour journalists .
 A survey of Honduras geography, people, transportation and communication media, extractive industries, manufacturing, tourism, labor, trade, finance and development agencies, and conclusions and recommendations . The survey also includes a survey of Honduran geography and people .
 An evaluation of Honduras' success in administering the sales tax law that went into effect on 1 January 1964 . The law was passed by Honduras in 1964 .
 A review of United States actions from 1907 to 1932 . Action governed by Central American Treaty of 1907 and AddiUonal Convention to that treaty . U.S. actions governed by the Central American treaty .
 A scholarly inquiry into President Wilson’s efforts to formulate a Latin American policy . Wilson's Latin America policy was a major focus of his Latin American efforts .
 Twenty-one papers were presented at the Fourteenth Caribbean Conference held at the Univer-iiy of Florida in December 1963 . Papers on Mexican politics, economics, society, culture, international relations, and historical writing .
 The most comprehensive account in English of the Maya opposition rule from 1848 to 1912, with a postscript covering the period to 1959 . Includes the period between 1848 and 1912 .
 A journalist's story of Mexican political developments, largely confined to the Cardenas era . A reporter's account of Mexico's political developments in the past decade .
 A revised versiori of the volume, first published in 1842, under the title Lite in Mexico During a Residence ol Two Years in That Country . covering ""Fanny’s"" residence in Mexico from 1839 to 1842 as the Scottish-born wife of the
 The original volume has been greatly supplemented by the editors with new material gleaned from Fanny’s private journals and other sources . It is profusely illustrated with contemporary prints .
 An intriguing introduction to Mexico, part history, part travelogue, part tourist guidebook, part guidebook . The book is part history and part history .
 The first uuthoritalive English-language, college-level textbook on Mexican history . The first  college textbook on Mexico .
 The author interprets Mexican history since independence . The author, after 20 years of residence In Mexico (19 as a naturalized citizen I, I, interprets history .
 Volume Is based on four visits to Mexico between 1922 and 1927 in which the author visited 24 of the 28 states . Volume is based on 4 trips to Mexico from 1922 to 1927 .
 A highly readable history of Mexico since independence by a journalist with long service in Latin America . The book is written by a Latin American journalist with a long-serving experience .
 Three-fourths of the volume:, contents arc devoted to the period since 1900 .
 A brief account of Mexico's history serves as an introduction to a study of politics, political institutions, national and state government, and public policy . The book is written in Spanish and English .
 In the process the author, with pen and brush, pictures the people, the animal life, the art. the archeology, the way of life of the residents present and past. In the . process, with . pen and . brush, the author . pictures the . people,
 Authorities describe various aspects of Mexican economic, political, and social life . Sevcntern authorities (most are Mexicans') describe various aspect of Mexican life .
 In this volume designed to prepare the visitor for what he will Ilnd In Mexico, presents the ""main currents in the ebb and flow of Mexican life . Author, a longtime student and teacher of LttlnAmerican civilization,
 Mexico is a nation of Mexico . The country's population has grown dramatically in recent years . It is now a major factor in its history .
 A photo story of Mexico’s second largest city, the capital of the State of Jalisco . Mexico's second largest City, Mexico's capital, is located in the state of Mexico .
 The story of Cortfs’ use of his Mexican-built vessels In the Battle of Tenochtittfn. In the battle, Cortfs used Mexican-made vessels in the battle .
 One of America's outstanding students of and authorities on Mexico discusses race, religion, politics, revolution, land, labor, and education .
 A brief history of the employment by President Diaz of his famous rural police force . President Diaz has been in charge of the police force since 2003 .
 A photo story of the author’s exploration of Mexico from El Paso, Texas, to Puerto Vallarta to Guadalajara to Mexico City in July 1968 . The author's Mexico exploration began in 1968 .
 A review of some of the highlights of Mexican history based largely on English-language sources . The review is based on some of Mexico's most important moments .
 Landholding systems, land use patterns, irrigation practices, and crops produced in irrigated regions of Baja California .
 Problems besetting and accomplishments of the Mexican Agrarian Reform movement . Problems beset by the movement .
 The authoritative work, at the time of its publication and for many years thereafter, on the Mexican government's attempts to settle its agrarian problem through the landholding device of the ejido. a collective holding. A collective holding .
 Slaughter and vaccination in the control of the a/iosa outbreak of 1946 . The role of the United States was the key to the control program . Slaughter, vaccination and vaccination helped control the outbreak .
 Steps in the opening up to settlement of an ejido pioject in the Mexican state of Campeche . The project is a project in the state of the state's northern region of Mexico .
 An examination of the ‘‘major features of Mexican agricultural development during the period 1925 to 1960 . An examination . of the . ‘Major features of . Mexican agricultural . development during . the . period 1925-1960 . The study was published in 2005 .
 Agrarian reform, ejido problems, and problems of the private sector of agriculture . Motivational forces in agriculture reform .
 The life stories of a father and t uir of his children told by an anthropologist . An anthropologist tells the stories of the father and his children in a new documentary .
 Mlrida, a large urban community; Dzitas, a trade center; Chan Korn, a peasant village; and Tusik, a tribal village . Tusik is one of four villages in the region .
 1959 surveys designed to determine how Indians and mestizoes interact . Resulls of 1959 surveys were designed to study how Indians interact with mestizo .
 An anthropological study of human inter-relationships in a group of villages northeast of Mexico City . The study was conducted in an area of Mexico's northern villages .
 Observations of Mexican life made in five months of visiting out-of-the-way places, the ancient Maya, Aztec, and other ruins, the village markets, the home factories, and the home .
 Determinants of Mexican character, role of machismo, the real power and influence of women, and psychoanalysts' views of national character . The real power of women in Mexico is to be seen in Mexico's culture .
 A comprehensive sociological study of rural Mexico by a U.S. trained sociologist . Ids spent much of his childhood in Northern Mexico and spent most of his life in northern Mexico .
 C'ni'Nikir* * * _ _ _ Amlixi irpml*. a* • tea-her .mil . vl'iUH. ml ('**' >"" •* s '”*’d iiju.j
 A .null n( I'll.’ statistical infmnialinn fur lliv piirpnse >'f _ dele, mining' the iclalimihip of industriali/aluiii in social mobility 1027. A . null .
 I It..mi 111.r v ails ihi.m . a ""pari of lliv biography"" of I lie Ym'.iU’C.m villaiiv* . If t hall Kmn.m.m was hall of fame . which
 IHI phrnii. amt drawings liiui.l in blin k an,I ivime) ilepienng f ihrivs anti clothing woven ami smhii by 24 giimps .
 |hv* Nalional Museum of Aniliropoliigy in Me vivo City, Mexico, is home to pre-Columbian artifacts .
 'the anihoi. one of lliv soldiers who accompanied Cories, wrote iliis accoiml al the age of S4. Cories . Cories was the son of Corys, who was killed in the Battle of the Nile .
 Wf htack and-whitiati«i ** coU »r pl,uc\ is a historv of .hi .mil architecture unique tn I atm America. he ph.ilL»Lf.H*hs i epic sen i .
 The changing role of the encomicnda as an institution for Ihe conlrol, employment, and Christianization of the Indians in Mexico after the Conquest, 1045. , 1045 . It was used as a tool for employment and employment of the Indian Indians .
 An illustrated Mory of the conquest of Mexico milking use of account of Bernal Dia/ and of A/tec pictojiraphs of events made at the time .
 The conqueror reports to the l-mperor of events in the conquest of Mexico .
 The History of the Conquest of Mexico, with a Preliminary Preliminary l few of the Ancient Civilization ami the Life of the Conqueror . A Preliminary History of Mexico .
 A classic piece of historical research anti writing was first published in 184.1.1 . It was written in the first edition of this article in 1883 .
 An undocumented stoty of Cortes’ part in the conquest of Mexico designed for (he general reauer) Cortes . Cortes was a general in the Spanish conquistador .
 An account of the growth (principally in the 17th century) of the great landholding institution that so dominated the economic and political history of colonial Mexico . An historical account .
 Volume is based on service by the author as a royal functionary in New Spain from 1SSN to 1566 . Volume is . based on . service by . the author . in New . Spain .
 This study, written in 1845, is one of the early Lnglish-tanguagc accounts of the conquest of Mexico and for long the best .
 An abridged version of Prescott’s classic siory which omits his extensive documentation and makes other changes in an clfoit to modernize the text .
 A scholarly study of Spanish expansion into the Gran Chichimcea and of the half-century struggle known as .he V*-r of the Chichime is. is. A . scholarly study . of the Spanish expansion of the Gran . Chichima .
 A look at the role of individual business and industrial leaders in Mexican development . Mexico's economy is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 A review of various aspects of Mexican economic development for the period preceding 1959 . The review of Mexico's economic development in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Mexican decision to suspend the purchase and sale of foreign exchange on 21 July 1948 devalued the peso and caused it to depreciate from 4.85 peso per dollar to about 7 pesos per dollar in the first weeks after the act .
 An analysis of the relative roles of private enterprise and the Government in Mexico’s economic development . The analysis is based on a study of Mexico's economic development.
 An examination of “questions affecting income distribution and capital formation" in relation to Mexico's rapid economigrowth in the period 1959-1950 . An examination . of ‘questions . affecting income . distribution and . capital formation"" in relation . to the . period 1959/
 Problems experienced in raising the capital to finance Mexican industrialization in the period 1941-1947 . Problems experienced by Mexican industrialists during the period .
 An analysis of the industrial revolution that received attention after 1940 . An analysis and evaluation of industrial revolution received attention in 1940s .
 Fxamptes of selling prices of various products sold by U.S. makers or retailers . Sears' experience citcu as a particular example .
 V hist,if\ *»f Mcxu'.in financial development anu an .uicmpi to 'h,i* ti,*5* the per alum of the financial system is linked to the stahiluv and growth of the Mexican economy . V
 Ihen current monetary policies and their cffcsUvcncss, and the economic outlook for Mexico . Ihen monetary policies . and their . current monetary . policies .
 An analiMs of how Mexico ha. need it. resources to effect shunges in it. .ticiely. resources . Mexico . need it to be able to make a difference .
 A San Anliinw* journalist's . revi.ed and enlarged icr.ion of .lie report tie t'lepared during a . tear 1 , residence and travel in Mexico on a Reid Foundation lellow.lnow.
 I vtmomomomu acwomplishniciits and program of the l>i.i/ Orda/ adnu nisi rat ton.i .
 The British Hoard id Irade is one of a series of British treasures . One of a senes is the largest British treasure .
 I inance. aciKulture. iiuning and petroleum. industry, labor, and communications. industry . Industry, labor and communications . industry . industry and petroleum industry .
 Slate describes area, ul economic progicw after Idol . U.S. Ambassador to the United .
 A scholarts studs of the role of national planning in Mexican economic life in the |\»»it-W.UJ period .
 Mexico* economic growth, especially in the tree enterprise agrarian sector . Reason, for Mexico*, economic growth for Mexico* .
 Oitfeiem categories fiiuulnii in balance of paxiiK’iit. and an ivalnatloii ol the handllnn of the balance of the . balance of payment, problem In Ihe 1941-1949 period 1078.
 Policies. and problems of nirriculture and Industry. 1070, Mexico's I on iyn Trade and Economic Developmerit. 1070 . 1070 .
 An analysis of Mexico's efforts to manage its external economic problems since 1940 . Mexico's economy has been hit hard by its external problems since 1950s .
 Nacional E'inancirra and Mexican Industry; A Study of the Einanciul Relationship between the Government and the Private Sector of Mexico . Study of relationship between government and private sector .
 Business groupsiheir si/e, constituency, and influence tin the Mexican political process . Business groups have influence in the Mexican government .
 Hie role of Antonio J Bermudez in the operation of Peiroleos Xtei . iitun described in a review of ills volume .
 A review of Mexican developments since I*a 17 that may have relevance to other I atin American nations as they attempt to meet the goals of the Alliance for Progress . Mexico is one of 10 nations in the United States to join the Alliance of Progress .
 Interesting observations on how a national corporation handled its bookkeeping and finances . Interesting observations about how the company handled bookkeeping .
 Volume rifslofxn “the eittci of induMnaU/atiofi of an urb»n center upon a nrarbv small c«immunityof the eftpamimim* tin of Guadalajara . Volume
 DixcfMkHb of the influence on Meaican foreign policy of the Revolutk'n of 1910 arul the po*t*WW II fcooromiv Resolution precede WW II Resolution . Mesico‘% relationships to different world areas
 F«cior.ni Mruin (orn,n policy trorn ihr first days of iatirprndeocc to the l»50’s. and forces determining present policy toward UN. ihr OAS, ihc 5o«iri
 A sketch of Mruco’i rrvctv foreign relations. particularly they prrtaia to ihc Unwed San |M6.6. The sketch was made of a sketch of foreign relations .
 The dors of Maximilian and I arkwa odd tor thr central ft a Art 1M7.7.
 The \efoliation and It.-caL. down of the Tripartite Convention of ton Jon Jon Jon. down . Jon Jon . Jon. Jon was killed in a car crash in September 2011 .
 iimanm and rweieNr 1M9 aims to examine the principles of the Mexican Resolution of 1910 1917 to determine whether they are valid and whether they should be reexamined and restated . As examination of Ihr international aims aims at examining principles of Mexican Resolution
 Fngllsh translation of a textbook widely-used in lean schools and universities . The textbook is widely used in lean lean schools .
 An examination of twentieth century philosophy and ptulosorhen in Mexico . The study of the 20th century philosophy in Mexico was published in 1968 .
 ihfs volume of the Lilt WorUt Library, a story-ami photo volume, is told by a veteran Time writer and reporter km* acquainted with Mexico . The story is told in this volume, the first of its kind .
 Mexico fothlorrrr. part tact part fiction, gathered on numerous trips to Mexico by the inewnporehtx south-western south-west .
 A careful explication of the Mexican election process, especially as it operated in the I**5 k presidential election . From the nomination of Adolfo Lope/. through the role of the PKI in the campaign, to the . inevitable victory of the . PKI candidate .
 An examination i>f the myth that Mexico functions as a federal f*'i'i»u of government mcicly because that form was provided l**r in the 1'ofisutution »>f IK24. An examination of Mexico's history of the
 Agriculture; ibl Social Services, |7i Governmental Subdivisions. i x i ('(inclusion. f 1118) Public Utilities and Public W, »iks. Relations; t4. Public Utilities. t4) Public. Relations . t4 Public Utilities
 A collection of papers on various aspects of the taw in Mexico, presented at a symposium sponsored by the liilernmcficun l egal Studies bianch of the Umvervlty of Miami .
 An examination of the age, place of birth, educational and employment grounds, and other facets of the careers of 22 members of the Mexican Cabinet . Mexico's Cabinet members are aged between 18 and 55 .
 The Constitution of I82-82 is a history of events associated with drafting of the Constitution of the Republic . The Constitution was drafted by the Republic of Ireland in 1982 .
 A reseating analysis of the role of (lie President in Mexican politics, based on personal aequuaintanev of the author with most Mexican high officials from the 1920's . The author's analysis is based on a personal analysis of Mexican politics .
 A very brief scanning of the steps in the process by which Mexico achieved a so-called one-parly democracy . Mexico's democracy is one of the world's most successful democracies .
 A cataloging of the various ways in which rightist influence reveals itself in Mexico's government and marketplace . The Mexican government and the marketplace are under fire from rightists .
 Mexican politics is dominated by a one-party system that dominates Mexican politics . Some information'on the one party system'
 A brief review of Ihc economic and so -in] accomplishments of the resolution ih.it began in |9||) and of current Mexican piold*ms m foreign relations .
 I-mire issue. f A special edition. prepared hy a host of Mexican writers, oil talions aspcsl' of Mexican history. f The I-magnificent issue .
 An analysis of Mexico’s population explosion, its i domic development, and In educational program . An analysis . of Mexico's population explosion and its i-domic development . In an educational program.
 Maps show internal migration, population density, agricultural population' illiteracy, illiteracy and percentage of teachers per 1,000 . In pre-school and primary school grades . Maps show Internal migration, . population density and agricultural population . population .
 A group of lectures delivered to the American Academy of Political and Social Science . The lectures were delivered to a group of political and social scientists .
 Alberto J Pan,. ""The Sanitary and Educational Problems of Mexico”; Juan B Kojo. Alberto J. Pan. Pan: Mexico's sanitary and educational problems of Mexico .
 An attempt to "shed new light upon the history of the remlut ion.try process in Mexico .it the pas wools level,” thiouch . sillily of che role of Oro/co in the Revolution .
 Volume ells ihc story of the Resolution from the last davs of the Ihc Diaz regime to the assassination of Modern, l-'rbruary It. Volume 7 . Volume 7.5 .
 The Mexican Revolution and I he attempts of the Cniivcminii to bring order nut of Ihc chaos that prevailed . The Cnivii were part of the Mexican Revolution .
 Lessons that the Mexican revolution of 1910-1917 holds for Latin America and the world . The revolution was the first to take place in Mexico's history .
 An npprais.it of the significant aspects of Ihc Mexican Hcvolu lion that began in 1910 . The lion was born in 1910 in Mexico and has been kept in captivity since then .
 A 'tear analysis of many aspects of the Revolution by the premier American student of the era and a friend and consultant u> mam leader* of the move mem 1152 .
 Aiitli.u l:n.lthat tlu*tc.is . the Mexican iy,„j ‘i ... largely • homy grown,"" a-..| mtly iiilluciKvd tn tlic Imi.l v
 A review of U.S. policy toward Mexico for the period ending in 1931 . A historical review of United States policy .
 A recounting of incidents of anti-American outbursts in widely scattered regions of Mexico . Anti-U.S. protests have occurred in some of Mexico's most remote regions .
 Appendix D is a roster of the commissioned officers who participated in the expedition . Appendix D lists the names of commissioned officers involved in the Expedition .
 Events leading up to the Mexican War and the campaigns and battles of Monterrey and Buena Vista are told in an entertaining style .
 Joel Roberts Poinsett, first U.S. minister to Mexico, figures prominently in a scholarly survey of the period 1825-1829 . The survey was published in 1829 .
 Daniels served as Ambassador to Mexico for nine years . Daniels' role in Mexico-U.S. relations with Mexico was a major focus of study . Daniels was ambassador to Mexico from 1996-1998 .
 A brief ""topical” survey of the causes of the war, the campaigns, the inner struggles for power by generals and politicians, and the diplomacy involved in the war from beginning to end . A brief "topical" survey .
 Volume consists of extracts from Ramirez’ diary and correspondence in the years 1845-1847 . Volume includes extracts from diary, correspondence and correspondence .
 Problems and perils, benefits and disadvantages to the United States and Mexico stemming from their sharing of a long land frontier . U.S. and Mexico have been at the center of the nation's long frontier .
 Polk was involved in Commodore Robert F Stockton’s plan to involve the United States in a war with Mexico over the question of Texas . Polk was the president of Polk's administration .
 This is a history of Mexican internal developments after 1910 . Includes a brief survey of earlier history and a continuing linkage with the U.S.
 A study of U.S.-Mcxican relations for the period 1876 -1880 that led to the recognition by the United States of the Diaz government . The Diaz government was recognized as a government in 1876 .
 A brief booklet composed of various kinds of writings (speeches, articles, letters, pamphlets, etc. etc. in four divisions . The booklet is a brief booklet of various types of writings .
 The last three to three questions seeking to determine the reasons why the war occurred are why it happened . The last question is to determine why the conflict occurred .
 A brief tracing of the historical highlights of the negotiations for rights to construct a canal through Nicaraguan territory . The canal was built through Nicaragua's territory .
 Economy, social structure, history, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy . Political processes, political institutions, government institutions and public policy.
 A very brief sketch of the political role of President Anastasio Somoza . A very laudatory sketch of his political role in the past .
 Problems of production, major export crops, other basic crops, and factors limiting agricultural development . Problems in production: Major export crops and other crops .
 A report of an IBRD special study mission created a report of a special study into Nicaragua . The report was created at the request of the Government of Nicaragua .
 Report is based on the mission's study of the problem on location in Nicaragua from July 1951 to May 1952 . Report: Mission's study was based on a study of Nicaragua .
 Covered topics as development, industry, power projects, mining, agriculture and forestry, and the fiscal system . Covered are . topics such as . development, . industry, and power projects .
 The report describes the “environmental, institutional, and economic factors affecting private industrial enterprise in Nicaragua” and makes suggestions for improving existing conditions . The report was released in March .
 The report is based in large part on the findings accumulated by a three-man survey team . It spent the months of April and May 1961 in Nicaragua .
 The story of the U.S. intervention in Nicaragua tells the story of how it shaped Latin American opinion of the United States . CNN's John Sutter talks to discuss the impact of the intervention .
 Augusto C Sandino was the leader of the Nicaraguan revolutionary forces from 1926 until his execution in 1934 . Sandino's guerrilla career spanned three decades of guerrilla warfare .
 A presentation, based on congressional records, of the background history of the U.S. commitment to build a highway for Somoza of Nicaragua in the WW II period . The presentation is based on the background of the United States commitment to building a highway .
 Another chapter in the evolution of President Wilson’s policy toward Latin America . President Wilson's policy towards Latin America has evolved since his presidency .
 This volume traces the history of man’s use of the Panamanian stream from the early Spanish explorers through the construction of the Panama Railroad and the Panama Can.xl . This volume in the “Rivers of America” scries through construction of Panama Railroad .
 An entertaining but undocumented . hiitory from Spanish dncnvery to ihe present, with thoughts on the role of nuclear ex-plosives in the construction of a new canal .
 In 1908, Pulltizer assembled documentary evidence for use by his employer to defend him against a criminal libel suit ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt . President Roosevelt ordered him to defend himself against the suit . Author In 1908 assembled documentary .
 In this volume the author uses evidence collected at that time to begin his story of U.S. involvement in the building of the Panama Canal . The author used evidence collected by that time .
 A report on various aspects of the Panamanian economy . Agriculture, manufacturing, shipping, and Canal Zone trade . Panama's economy .
 A report on the findings produced by interviews with members of Panama's elite power structure on their opinions on membership in CACOM, a new treaty with the United States, reform of the bureaucracy, and preference as to political party .
 Problems in operating the Panama Canal arise from U.S. and Panamanian positions on key issues . Look at what the future holds for Isthmian canal operations .
 Brief history of construction and operation of the Canal and a briefer description of projects within the Canal Zone . Brief history and operation .
 Col Klette onetime member of the staff of USAFSO discusses the issues and answers some of the questions involved in the construction of a future canal on the Isthmus of Panama . Klette is a former member of staff for USAFSo .
 An examination of the economic, . siratetic, *.:d technological factors to be . coniidered In selecting the route for a new isthmian canal .
 The Sixth Hammarskjoid Fotum was held in May 1964 to study the January disturbances along the boundary of the Panama Canal Zone .
 A volume which discusses the diplomatic background to the present canal, the canal's operations and administration, and the economic significance of the canal . A WW II volume . Discusses diplomatic background and operations of the Canal .
 Reprints of several speeches in Congress on Canal issues and article by Mai Gen. Gen. Hubert . Reprinted from several speeches .
 A ""new look" at the relationship of the U.S. to Panama and the Panama Canal . A possible future widening of or replacing the present canal with a larger sea-level type canal .
 Possible routs and possible construction of an isthmian canal to replace existing Panama Canal . Possible impact on the Panamanian economy if the present site were to be abandoned .
 Atomic energy could be used to excavate a new canal in Panama, Panama . Problems of fallout and cost to be resolved .
 Results of a survey of the political orientation of two widely divergent secondary school groups in the City of Panama in January 1960 .
 A study of such features as social influence, legal and extralegal patterns in government, parties and power centers, and nationalism . The study will focus on social influence and legal patterns of government .
 Results of surveys of 11th and 12th grade students in Panama City . El Instituto Nacional in Panama .
 Panamanian attitudes toward the some 50,000 West Indian residents of West Indian birth or ancestry .
 A comparison of traditions in Panama with those In the Canal Zone and how the different races react to them . The Canal Zone is the most populated area in the world .
 A brief history of the Isthmus of Panama since the early 1500's and a presentation of some of the Panamanian arguments against the continued presence of the United States in the Canal Zone . A presentation of Panamanians' views on the continued U.S. presence in the
 An up-to-date review of the issues involved in the renegotiation of the existing U.S.-Panama Treaty . The treaty is currently being renegotiated by the United States .
 U.S.-Panamanian relations, the influence of the Canal on domestic politics, political party organization and political leaders . The Canal Canal is a key part of Panama's political history .
 The authors conclude by recommending that tbe Canal be internationalized . The authors call for a ""candid reassessment of the strategic and economic arguments" for the Panama Canal .
 A brief comment on U.S.-Panamanian relations in the aftermath of the January 1964 riots . The riots occurred in Panama in the early 1960s .
 U.S. willingness to make concessions, negotiation of the revisions, and approval of the new treaty . Factors influencing Panamanian desire for treaty revision, United States willingness to . make concessions .
 A re-lew of treaty negotiations leading to the construction of the canal and subsequent revision of he U.S.-Panama Treatments . A recent ""area* of contention"" between the United States and Panama, and future prospects for the Canal and the Zone .
 United States and Panamanian views on United States rights in the Canal Zone . Status of treaty negotiations, status of negotiations, and proposals for future internationalization of canal .
 Hearings before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 84th Cong., 1st sess., 1955 . Hearings were held before the Committee of Foreign Relations in 1955 .
 A took at the issues that lay behind the bloody events of January 1964 . The events took place in the wake of the First World War .
 Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. subcommittee on inter-American affairs of the . House committee on foreign affairs .
 Report consists of a historical background to the construction and operation of the Canal, together with the Subcommittee’s findings and recommendations . Report includes historical background and recommendations from the Subcommittee .
 A review of the various revisions of the U.S.-Panama Treaty of 1903 . emphasis given to the numerous concessions made to Panama by the United States in the different revisions .
 Army and Navy otlierrs and U.S. Canal Zone officials, supple nenletf by printed statements. Army and . Navy . officials . U S Canal . Zone officials .
 A detailed examination of U.S.-Panamanlar. diplomacy . In the period eo* ;eded. In a detailed examination .
 An informal historical and economic siudy "" bv o former U.S. C'ntti.ral Affairs Officer in Paraguay .
 An und'icumcnted history of PaUioiay from prc-Sp. v. v ol* nizationtn 1948 . PaUIOiay was created in 1948 from Pa.u.nization to become Pa.iay .
 Diary kept on expeditions to Argentine and Paraguayan Chaco in 1889-1891 and 1896—1897 . Diary kept h> the anther on expedition to Argentina and Paraguay Chaco . diary kept on expedition .
 Volume is bill'd on the official records and correspondence, and the war diary and memoirs of the commander in chief of Paraguay's field army .
 Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay defeated Paraguay in 1251 . Uruguay, Argentina and Uruguay won the war .
 Origins and functions of political parties, role of the army in national life, and an assessment of President Stroessner’s rule since 1953 . Origins of parties, functions of parties and role of army in life .
 A study of Paraguay's history, ideology, organization, leaders, and operations within Paraguay and in exile . Study of the history of the Paraguayan government .
 A study of the role of the priest in Capiata, a town of 2,000 located some 12 miles east of Asuncion . The town is about 12 miles from Asuncio, some 12 hours east of the capital .
 Paraguayan citizens are subject to political restrictions and restrictions . Paraguayan economy is heavily dependent on the United States and other foreign aid . U.S. economic aid and political restrictions are restrictions on Paraguayans .
 A Peruvian writer vommuils economic and social conditions which create the setting lor a luture revolution . Peruvian social conditions are the setting for a social revolution .
 A brief look at Peru’s problems of geography racial diversity, and tension generated by the increase in und shifting of the population . Peru's problems of racial diversity and tension have been caused by increasing population growth .
 A brief summary of Peruvian **v*nt« Ta ' ***? and the U.S. reaction to the overthrow of the Prado government by the military . A ,u. t brief . summary of the Peruvian . reaction . and the . U. S. reaction
 An illustrated look at Peru’s worlds o', the mountains, desert, jungle, and the coast, and cosmopolitan Lima . Peru is one of the world's most beautiful cities .
 The classical early English-language version of the Spanish defeat of the Incas . The Incas were defeated by the Spanish at the end of the 16th century .
 Dc’criptions of the three main geographic regions and of the problems involved in incorporating the Indian into the national life of Peru .
 A look at the history, g, 'ernment, people, geography, climate, climate and agriculture, industry, and economy of Peru, with illustrative data as late as 1963 . A look into the history of Peru .
 Geography, people, economy, history, history and political parties and programs . Political parties, programs and programs, programs, and recent political developments. Geography .
 Economic, social, and foreign policy problems arc described and the 19*2 election discussed . The 19-2 election also discussed .
 Geography, society, history, politics, political processes, governmental machinery, problems of policy . Geography and history of the world .
 A discussion of factors that have contributed to Peru's success in avoiding a radical revolution such as those by Mexico . Peru has avoided radical changes by avoiding radical measures such as the death penalty .
 Types of land tenure, cultivation arrangements, sire of holdings, production, and earnings for uwners, renters, and lahorers .
 The peasant sindlcuto movement’s success in the Andes, revolutionary operations among the Indians, and the problems they pose for the Peruvian governmen’ and for United States policy toward Peru .
 A tracing of the evolution ot Peru’s present land system from pre-Inca times to the mid-twertieth century . Peru's current land system was created by the Incan people in the early 1900s .
 System of land tenure, relative size of land-holdings, agrarian reform proposals . Work of Institute of Colonization and Agrarian Reform .
 Agrarian Reform Bill passed by the Chamber of Deputies before March 1964 . A detailed examination of many sections of ihe Agrarians Reform Bill .
 Grace and Company plantation in Peru transformed an Andean Indian into a Hispanicized laborer of the coast . The Andean Indians have been transformed into Hispanicized laborers in the past .
 A review ot the attempts of the administration of President Manuel Prado to institute agrarian reform in Peru . A review of attempts of President Prado's administration of the . administration of . President . Prado .
 A review of rural development programs in the southeastern part of the Province ot Cuzco . The review is part of a review of the rural development program .
 Peruvian plan to construct the steel mill at Chimbote, 1286. An appraisal of the economic and political factors involved in the construction of the mill .
 Peru's 1U45-IU4H form of controls was developed in the 1970s . Peru has been using the controls since then to maintain control of the country's largest submarine . Peru is now using the system to control submarines .
 Notes. inflation in Peru during WAV It. its causes and influences, and Peruvian attempts to control it. Its causes and influence, and attempts to . control it .
 A review of economic prohlems and of the role of government m regulating the economy . Review of economic pros and pros and cons of government regulation .
 An examination ot Peruvian tax >tructures and revenues precedes proposals for restructuring the tax system . An examination of Peruvian taxes and revenues .
 Author describes forces at work to displace or change the structures of the Peruvian elite . Author says he secs as necessary for economic growth to occur . Author: Forces at work in order to change or displace the structure of the elite .
 Ren: A New Approach to Community Development ir Ren: "" inime f losa Larrabure. A New approach to community development ir Ren . Ren: "Inimef losa Inimef inime inimef . Laraabure"
 Operation of the village cooperation program inaugurated by President iicl.iundc with the creation of the Inter-departmental sccutive Committee on Village Cooperation . Operation began in 2007 with the formation of a village cooperation committee .
 A studyoed on census returns tor the village of San Juan Bautista and the slums ot lea. The slums are one of the worst in the country's slums .
 A Study of health problems in the Middle llualiaga Valley of the Peruvian mnntaflu. A Study . of health . problems in . the Middle . llualuaga Valley .
 For an Introduction to this two-pan u po.-t, see the author's ""A Strategy of Anthropological Research in the Nation."" tbht., Vol. 12. For more information on this article, please visit www.tbht.com .
 Program ot President Bctnunde’s ""Cooperacidn Popular” for improving the lot of the Quechua-speaking Indians of tt.s Andes of Peru .
 An examination of changes in class structure and social mobility of the masses in Peru’s slowly developing Industrial economy . Peruvian class structure is slowly developing .
 The Cornell Peru Project on the hacienda of Vicos has affected the people in the community . The project is part of a larger effort to develop the community in the area .
 A group of young Peruvians created the political doctrine of Aprismo . The doctrine was created by young Peruvian nationalists .
 A brief examination of the workings of the cabinet responsibility provisions of the Constitution of 1933 . The Constitution was passed into law in 1933 .
 APRA (Allan/a Popular Rcvolucionorla Americana), L P M 61 CM* » » » 13#5.5.
 The Old and New APRA in Pe<u Mvtb ami Reality Fredrick . Fredrick 1) Pike Inter-American Economic A/luirt. The Old . and the New . APRA .
 APRA leader and ideology in the ""old"" APRA movement. leaderand ideology in. r-iovencnt, 1924 . 1941 and “t the ""new” APRA . movement.
 Reasons for the success of the revolutionary elite led by President Betaunde . Reasons for success include the support of President Betunde and his wife .
 An evaluation of the prospective presidential candidate in the then-upcoming election . An evaluation . of the candidates .
 Future prospects for agriculture, fishing, mining, and industry, and trends in politics and the social order, will be discussed .
 A five-sided look at the manner in which violence fits into decision-making and leadership-changing processes . A look at how violence fits in leadership processes and how it fits into leadership .
 Pedro Beltran is a Peruvian businessman . He is a former president of the Peruvian government . Beltran's political career spanned four decades .
 An assessment of presidential candidates, and a report on polilicat developments under the ruling military junta, are released . The report also includes an assessment of the presidential candidates .
 Fernando Betaunde Terry and his Popular Aeltoes polllisal party m the presidential election of 9 d ine IW. which elevated him to the presidency . Fernando's popularity in the polls helped him win the presidency of the country .
 A brief description of President Belaundc's reform program and of organizations and forces that have erected roadblocks, the way of its implementation .
 A survey of governmental machinery and its functioning at the national, municipal, and communal levels . The survey is based on the national and municipal levels of government .
 A scholarly study of official U.S. diplomatic relations with Peru and of private United States business activities and aid to the nation . Peru is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 A review of charges of conflict of interest involving the Administrator of the United States aid program in Peru for the period 1955-58 . The review was conducted by the President of the U.S. Aid Program in Peru .
 A review of changes in the Uniicd States in its policy of recognition of foreign governments precedes a brief review of United States actions towards the Peruvian government following the coup of 1962 . i 1322.
 A report on port facilities, fishing vessels, employees, types of fish and other sea foods, marketing practices, consumer preferences, prices, and the government's rote In fishery development .
 Social mid economic features of political history, political processes, govtrnmenmenlnlnl Institutions, and public policy. Institutions . Institutions. and public policies.
 A brief survey of Urujiiia>'s ncu^rnphv. history. poopJv. econ* dim, foreign relations, ami culture, and culture .
 Urtigu.tv.m hie its neighbors shoulil emulate ttnvf which they should avoid.f .
 Political firoiesses, governmental institutions, economy. puhlie policy. Ilistotv.com: Politicians, government institutions, puhllie policy .
 V olume is hotli a history and a guidebook to the Uruguay of 1451 . the vear ol the author's residence Ihcre. Ih.cre. The book was published in 1451.
 Influence of lose Batlle v Ordonez on Uruguayan economic and political life, political parly structure, causes of economic st.icnntum. stifline influence of t olilical machinery, weaknesses ol the ""Welfare Stale"" system, and
 A chiotticle of the happier scats of slate socialism in Uruguay . Years in which flic influence of .lose Rattle > Ordonez was at its height .
 Notes. lmfiistrt.il production. rote of nuricuhti . Nuricusti is a Finnish language .
 A very brief attempt to ascertain how the Uruguayan economy deteriorated to the point of national bankruptcy . A very short attempt to determine how the Uruguay's economy deteriorated .
 A sociological study of the influence rf factory operations on prc-industrinl and Industrial communities . The study was conducted by a sociological group of researchers .
 An explanation of the provisions of and an argument for the adoption of the ""Basic Agreement of Tnter-American Economic Co-operation’s called for In Resolution IX of the Rio Conference of 1947 .
 Systems of land tenure, cultivation and grazing; and the place of cattle and sheep in the national economy. Systems of . land tenure and . cultivation and . grazing; . and . the place . of cattle, sheep and . sheep in . national economy .
 Uruguay replaced its single executive with a plural executive in 1952 . The plural executive form proved so impractical that the people finally voted to return to the single executive form in 1966 .
 A description of Ihe system of proportional representation employed in electing members of Uruguay’s legislative bodies . Uruguay is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 A Study of Uruguay's constitutional development, political parly history, election procedures, public administration, economy, and social welfare system . Uruguay's constitution, political history and election procedures are studied in Uruguay .
 A discussion of political parties, election procedures, pressure groups, city-country orientation, economic chaos, and of future prospects for the nation . The nation's future is in the hands of President Obama .
 P.->,neat iIstvikmS traders. causes, ami nun. of so/urr of rmcrnmrm •-» (Vtor*al Gabriel Terra. Terra. causes)
 Uruguay's abandonment of ihr oneman executive. amt the Installation of the i-(i/rel<iif(>. or government by committer. on f March 1952. Notes.
 A story of the causes and events of the AnyJo-Cicrnian bonibanlmem of Venezuela in the 1902-03 period and the position of the U.S. with regard to the issues .
 A comprehensive review of . political-and--economic developments in post-WWI Venezuela by reporters who were in Caracas at th» lime of Ihc November 1948 noire .
 Geography, economy, society, society and history, history, politiea 1 processes and ic'iitutions, governmental striiciure. public policy. Geography .
 A review of Venezuela’s history, economy, political dynamics, and international relations . A review . of Venezuela's history, . economy, . political dynamics and international . relations . The review .
 A fact-filled summary of economic and political conditions under the Betancourt administration . The country has been in a state of crisis since 2003 .
 An undocumented fvstory covetlag chronicles the period from pre-Spanish exploration to 1948 . An undocumented version of this story has never been seen before .
 The Venezuelan president describes his country, and reports on Venezuela's response to tlie Communist threat . He also reports on the role of petroleum in national life, the agrarian reform program, and the Industiial program .
 A look at many aspects of Venezuelan industrial development . Analysis of the influence of the petroleum industry on wages paid in other areas of employment .
 The overthrow of Pdrcz Jimenez was a major factor in the overthrow of Jimenez . Causes and causes of capital outflow are unknown .
 Venezuela's use of state funds to finance rural development through the Contr/o de DteneOar in the period 1948-1950 . Venezuela's state funds were used for rural development .
 Trom 188. or attempts to claim -nd mine Iron ore in Orinoco basin of eastern Venezuela . United States Sleep Corporation in develop Ccrro Bolivar deposits .
 Gonziilcz Oorrondona, “Monetary Conditions in Venezuela"; Bernardo Perrin, ""Venezuelan Agriculture”; John Illckcy, ""The Venezuelan Food Supply"; Juan Sardi. Gonzi. Sardi: Venezuela's food supply
 J Fred Hippy, ""The Venezuelan Claims Settlements of 190.5-4.5"": Mcrnin Avcndailo. With Some Applications to the Venezuelan Case’s .
 For a later report on one aspect of development, see Hcliodoro Gonzilez. For a further report on the development of the country's largest city, visit Hclodoro Gonzilesz.
 Report of a survey mission organized by the IBRD at the request of the Venezuelan government for the . purpose of recommending n long-term development program . Report was organized by . the . request of Venezuelan government .
 In depth of various aspecls of the Venezuelan economy, special emphasis given to the role of petroleum . An ECLA study in depth of Venezuelan economy .
 An examination of the amount of foreign capital invested in Venezuelan oil production . The amount of earnings generated by these fluids . iost Available Cop) rnt'NIBlFS 64 1.7(1.7) 7(1)
 Ih*i i>>kl .in.l .. the leiuumxhip otil.m.i‘ ..fi.tivnh ""balance"" > uilt-in.d tot.il irivt mom-carv polics. Notes
 Venezuela has failed to ""soil the pe l,ileum"" on national development . Venezuela is overdcpcndrtM. amt (U. I ecoiumiv; (2( that Venezuela is over-oil) Venezuela has . failed to "soil" the
 Facts relative to land tenure in Venezuela . An examination of ihe nature of the program for land reform .
 Aspects of Venezuela’s economic and political stability, with prospects for the 1968 presidential election, are discussed . Venezuela's political stability and economic stability are discussed in this article .
 A well-documented analvsis of the factors influencing Venezuelan economic growth in the indicated period . The Venezuelan economy has been experiencing a sharp decline in recent years .
 Oil revenues in Venezuela contributed to Venezuela's development from 1944 to 1951 . I he he role of oil revenues in the country's development was played by oil revenues .
 If in'* afflicting Ihe oil indtisliv in (he mid-1950s.’s. I echnical. labor, ami legal . prob If in’tislaviv in mid-50s. oil . It is not
 An ex-tmm.tlion of the economy of the . dif’crent regions ... An ex.tmm .tlion . of the economic . of . the . regions ... .
 Miit toncenune oil compans operations in \ ene/iela 1383 . Ttuil*» Het.im .
 Venezuela's sow-rheoil policy sought to develop areas of the country's economy . Areas of the economy which Venezuela, thiough its sow-oil policy, tried to develop .
 Venezuela’s reasons for employing at. and why ihe IMF endorsed ihe plan . IMF says Venezuela's plan to use the IMF to help the country's economy . IMF: Venezuela's plans to use IMF funds to bolster the economy . Venezuela has been hit by a series of
 An attempt to determine the relative roles of the caudillo and the military as political factors in a century ot Venezuelan history . An attempt . to determine . the relative role of the military and the . military in the past .
 The role of violence in Venezuelan history, the influence in modern politics of the “Generation of 1928,” political party Jrganizations and leaders, and economic problems in fields of petroleum production, agrarian reform, and industrial development .
 Venezuela is Venezuela's dominant political party . Venezuela is one of the world's most populous countries . The country has a history of political instability .
 A study of the ""evolution and application of executive power"" in a naiiun notorious for the prevalence of dictatorial rulers . Study of the evolution of the  executive power .
 Ar. Ar. attempt to show how foreign influences (principally French, U.S.., British, French, British) influence influence in French culture . Ar. attempts to show that foreign influences are important to French culture and British culture .
 Italian, Swiss, Italian, and Swiss have been reflected in Venezuelan thought, law, and culture .
 An executive decree ordered by an executive decree in 1948, Venezuela's justice system was nationalized in 1948 . Venezuela is now the only country in the world to have nationalized justice justice .
 An exploration of Venezuela'* political climate in 1952 with a view of foreseeing development* that might occur in the 1957 election . Venezuela's political climate will be explored in the view of the 1952 election .
 Political party structure, guerrilla warfare, oil production and foreign policy under President Raul Leoni .
 A brief scholarly outline of the major political parties describing their histories, leaders, and principles . The party's history and principles are outlined in this brief outline .
 A description of the ‘system’ of political decision-making prevailing in the post-1938 slums of Caracas and other large Venezuelan cities . The system is described as the "system" of political decisions .
 Several generalizations as to future political developments, based on Venezuelan experience . Venezuela has a long history of political instability .
 A study of the origin, evolution, and future of national planning, and of the role of regional plannina 1402. The study was published in the spring of 2014 .
 The role of university students in the protest against the Gomez government in 1928 and the subsequent role in national politics of the leaders of the protest . The role in the 1928 protest was the role of students in university students .
 Secretary of State's handling of United States claims against the government of Cipriano Castro in 1907 and 1908 . Notes .
 Subjects 68: A cultural study o' At-can Indians before the Spanish conquest . Subjects 68 include a cultural study of the At-Can Indians . The study was conducted in 17th century .
 Volume incorporates much archaeological evidence revealed in the po't-ie-W.W. iteriod . Volume incorporates many archaeological evidence found in the book . Volume of the book is published in October 2013 .
 A study of all aspects of Mayan life—agriculture, social customs, government, religion, education, and arts and crafts . The Mayan culture is a study of the Mayan society .
 A collection of 60 rubbings of low relief sculpture from the principal Maya centers in Guatemala and Mexico . Rubbings include 60 low relief sculptures .
 IIO was inaugurated by the IIO in 1953 for improving :heing conditions of the Indian peoples of Bolivia . A discussion of the origin, aims and accomplishments of the program .
 It is the name of the Chichimecs, the Toltecs, and the Azt ;s, and of the building of Tula, Teotihuacan, and Tenochtitlan . It is also the name "Tula" and "Tenocht
 Volume is based on an exhaustive study of primary and secondary materials related to Indians . 1458. Volume is . based on a study of . primary and . secondary materials . related to the Indians .
 An annotated translation of the Boolf of ChiUr.i Baiam of Tizimiu. written in 1593 and later years by Maya peoples of Yucatan . Anannotated translation .
 In part, it is a compilation of the history, mythology, and religion of the ancient Maya . In part it is an attempt to explain the history of the Maya .
 Experiences of the author and his family on a movie-making visit to Brazilian Indian tribes . The author's family was on a film-making trip to Brazil .
 A review ot the hlstotical evidence showing the influence of the Spanish colonial institution of the encomienda on the extermination of the native races in the Caribbean .
 A collection of 37 papers prescuu... at the September 1949 meeting of the XXIXth International Congress of Americanists . The collection was presented at the 1949 meeting .
 Changes were in part caused or influenced by the linking of the Andean highlands of Ecuador with the tropical rainforest area of the Pacific Coast by the construction of a railway .
 A Reader in the Social Anthropology of Middle and South A merit merit merit . and the Caribbean . A reader in the social anthropology of South America . and . the Caribbean.
 A hisory of tne Incas from earliest times to their conquest by Pizarro . The Spanish rule in Peru, 1530-1780, was Spanish rule of the Inca Empire and Spanish rule .
 A Study in the Development in Spanish Indian Policy in the Sixteenth Century . A Study of the Development of Spanish Indian policy in the 16th Century. A Study .
 A very brief survey of early Spanish efforts to improve the conditions of the Indians in Latin America .
 Findings of anthropologists who participated in the Viking Fund Seminar, August 28-Scptember 3, 1949 . Findings were compiled by anthropologists at Viking Fund .
 von Hagen-led Inca Highway Expedition retraced the Inca road system in Peru . Expedition from 1952 to 1954 . Von Hagen led the expedition to Peru from 1952 .
 Author seeks to fill a long-existent gap in the pre-Conquest history of the two tribal groups by . bringing together isolated bits of new evidence . Author sought to fill the gap in pre-conquest history .
 A report based on translations from the reports of early Spanish expeditions to the Yucatan Peninsula . Report based on translation from early Spanish expedition reports .
 The Inca Concept of Sovereignty and the Spanish Administration in Peru . Inca concept of sovereignty and Spanish administration in Peru.
 Volume joins in one of the two volumes that first were published separately in 1553 and 1880 . Volume joins one of two volumes published separately and published separately . Volume is published in two volumes: 1553- 1880 .
 Revolts against Spanish authority, reaction to the encomlenda . authority of corregidores dt tndios . authority . Inca practice of .tative religion and response to Roman Catholic Church .
 A new edition of Stephens* work, covering his observations of 1839-1841, was first published in 1841 . This is illustrated with the drawings of Frederick Cathcrwood .
 Chapters 17 through 25 are devoted to studies oi Indians in various sections of Latin America . Chapters 17 and 25 are dedicated to studies of Indians in Latin America.
 A collection of 87 photos by Pierre Verger described in a brief introduction by Valcarcel . The collection includes photos by Verger .
 Volume is designed as a “general, nontechnical survey of the main aboriginal cultures” of South America . Volume designed as “nontechnical survey’s’ of South American aboriginal cultures .
 This volume discusses the role of the different races in the Latin American area . Sponsored by the British Institute of Race Relations .
 A report on the role of Quechua Indians in Bolivian life, based on research conducted in 1951-1952 .
 Psychology of the Qucchua’s of Peru revealed in interviews with residents of Vicos . Psychology of Quchua's of Peru reveals in interviews .
 Story of author’s search for Inca fortress city that had remained hidden by the jungle from the early days of the Spanish conquest until his discovery of it in 1911 . Story of the author's search .
 Volume makes use oi recent information to answer questions as to social and political order of ihe Mayas, the nature of their settlements and sacred cities, and economic base of their civilization, and the subject matter of their heiroglyphic texts .
 John Lloyd Stephens and the Lost Cities of Central America and Yucatan, Victor W von Hagen. John Lloyd . Stephens . Stephens and . the Lost cities of Central . America and . Yucán .
 A fascinating story of Stephens’ explorations in 1839-1841, illustrated with copies of many of the etchings made on the spot by Frederick Cathcrwood .
 Index, The story of the ri«e and fall of Maya civilization designed for the general reader . The story has been told by the Maya .
 Ethnic and cultural features of Indian groups residing in certain territorial administrative divisions . Indian groups living in certain territories .
 Volume is designed to make readily available the significant information accumulated in the Smithsonian publication, the Handbook ot South American Indians, which appeared in six volumes between 1946 and 1950 . Volume was designed to show significant information collected by the Smithsonian .
 An annotated collection of black-and-white photographs of pre-Spanish archeological sites in Peru . The photographs were taken in the 1930s and 1940s .
 An anthropological study of a village that is a contact point for two civilizations—Indian and Spanish . An anthropologist study of the village . The village is an anthropological site of contact between the two civilizations .
 A review of Peruvian archaelogy incoiporating information on discoveries made in the period 1956-1962 . The review was published in 1962 .
 An inquiry into pre-Inca civilizations that makes much use of new discoveries revealed by archeological investigation since 1955 . The inquiry uses archeological discoveries made by archeologists since 1955.
 A collection of 2.2. writings . Includes studies of various aspects of various periods and sites . Collection of writings including studies of different aspects .
 An explanation of the manner in which change from a “political-traditional'’ to an “instrumental” society takes place . An explanation .
 A detailed presentation of the author's ideas on decipherment of certain Maya hieroglyphics . The author's idea of decipherment is presented in a book called Maya Hierography .
 A human-interest volume by one of the twentieth century’s best known explorers and writers, 1505. The volume was written by one-of-the-twin-century explorer and writer .
 A history of the Mayan peoples and detailed discussions of their customs, religion, and agriculture . The Mayan people are Mayan ancestors .
 A photographic story of the Auca Indians of Ecuador by the wife of J<m Elliot, one of the missionaries murdered by the Aucas .
 Author's observations are based on a two-year (19631965) residence in Ecuador . Author’s observations are . based on . observations based on two years (1963 1965) residence .
 Results of a year's study of human relationships in the isolated Ladino village of San Miguel Milpas Alias, Guatemala . Results of the study show that human relationships can be found in the village .
 An exhaustive study of the economic, social, and political systems of the Incas, first published in French in 1928 in 1928 .
 Findings by Wagley in a research residency of two years in the State of Maranjiao, Brazil .
 The stories of 17 archeologists who contributed to the rediscovery, unearthing, and preservation of Mayan cities in southern Mexico . The stories tell the stories of the rediscovering Mayan sites .
 Author in the course of his work in the I950's as a botanist and zoologist with the expedition studying Central Brazil under the auspices of FundapJo Brasil Central .
 Experiences of the author and his wife on expeditions in 1915, 1920, and 1936 to Indian tribes along the Venc/uclan-Colombian frontier .
 The author, a British aeronautical engineer, had just completed a 4-year contract with the Brazilian Air Ministry . He details the design features of a proposed Brazilian executive aircraft, and outlines problems confronting nations xtikit as Brazil in their efforts to develop an aviation industry .
 Legislative and treaty history of the first two decades of aviation development in Chile . Chile's aviation history includes the history of Chile .
 An early account of the first two decades of aviation development in Colombia together with presentations of different sections of aviation law . An early version of this article has been published in Colombia.
 A brief account of the accomplishments at home and in Europe o( several aviators from the two South Atneiivan nations . The two nations were at the forefront of aviation history .
 A brief survey of U.S. efforts to participate in the growth of aviation in Latin America . The survey looks at private and governmental efforts to promote aviation in the region .
 An examination of Colombian law . as interpreted by the Supreme Court and commented upon by lawyers . on the subject of the contractual liability of air earners for the death or injur'to passengers . An examination . of the law .
 A WW It study of commercial aviation oper-.tions in Latin America . Based in part on an earlier work prepared by the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs in 1940-1941 .
 Much of the information was gleaned from the operating companies by the author in visits to company headquarters .
 Alberto Santos-Dumont was a pioneer of aeronautics in France . He was also a pioneer in the aerospace industry .
 A very brief description of the operations of the International Civil Aviation Training Center in Mexico City, Mexico . The center is located in the country's capital .
 A reprint uf a Rand study reduced in various parts and without the original preface and introduction . A reprint of this article has been reduced in parts and parts of the original introduction .
 A comprehensive collection of titles of publications (books, periodical articles, etc. etc.) pertaining to industrial relations and labor laws in Talin America . The collection includes articles, books, periodicals articles, and periodicals .
 The 'General"" section of 62 pages is followed by specialized treatment of 20 Latin American nations and Puerto Rico . The 'general' section of the 'General'" section is . followed by the 'Specialties' section .
 The most complete and most complete one-volume listing of ""scholarly writings on the non-Hi-panic Caribbean published in the twentieth century"
 The volume is valuable for its references to demographic, anthropological, and other related topics . Although of limited value to students of Latin America, the volume is useful to students .
 Unannotated list-; of hooks, periodical arrielcs. and govrrnmental puhliealions I in English and other languages . arranged hv country except for a general introductory section . arranged country .
 A brief review of the works of the leading Cuban advocates of historical revisionism from 1927 to 1%2.1.2. A review of works of Cuban advocates from 1927-1958 .
 Of value for references to works appearing in the first two years of Castro’s rule, they appear in the early years of his rule .
 A comprehensive list giving author, subject field, institution, and dissertation title . The list is a comprehensive list of authors, subject fields, institutions and dissertation titles .
 A “partially" annotated bibliography of nto't value to those interested in food marketing in Iatin America .
 A comprehensive rcporl on manuscript records produced by the U.S. Pepts of State. of State . A comprehensive .rcporl of manuscript records .
 Holdings in various categories arc described as to si/e of holding and dale, together with a brief deseripiion of contents . Holdings in the various categories are described by the various category of holdings .
 A projected second volume i' to describe records relating to Latin America held by other departments . i' will describe records held by the Department of Public Records . i’'i’s second volume will describe Latin American records held in the U.S.
 annotations are frequently in Lnglish, but often are in the language of the original item . annotations are often written in the English language .
 AnM.m.mnotaied listing of 4,xt7 titles of hook* pamphlets, periodicals ibut not periodical articles). I atm American government publications .
 A Bibliographical Guide to Economy, History, Law, Politics, and Society . A Bihihan's Bihan was published in 2004 . He is now published in a book, "A Bihnan's Bibi"
 A selective bibliography limited to the areas listed in the subtitle with the addition of the added of the area of ""culture," and limited to works in the English language .
 It is designed particularly for the university student and general reader . The book is designed specifically for university students .
 An attempt to explore the efforts of the USSR and the USA . In outer space as revealed in a study of press reporting and editorial comment in Latin American newspapers .
 A valuable tool revealing holdings by U.S. libraries and archives of material peitaining to Brazil . The tool is a valuable tool showing holdings by United States libraries .
 Latin American section of this volume will be of value for others Interested In the area . Latin American . section is of interest for others interested in the region .
 Inter-American Review of Bibliography, Vol. 58, pp, 256— 265 .
 Contains works of history, literature, bibliography, philosophy, anthropology, geography, education, journalism, and miscellanea . Contains references to works of art, science, art, history and literature .
 A review of work done or under way, followed by an extensive list of titles of completed research projects . The list includes a list of completed projects .
 A review of a number of textbooks and other writings on sociology by Latin American authors . Latin American sociological texts are published in Latin America .
 Survey of Investigations in Progress in the Field of Latin American Studies, 1965 . Survey of investigations in progress in Latin American studies, 1965.
 A lengthy selection of books and articles of value for the student of Brazilian history . A long selection of works and articles for students .
 A tribute to Bartolom6 de las Casas, the Dominican defender of the Indians . Valdivia, Narvaez, Cabeza de Vaca, de Soto, Coronado, Alvarado and others of the Spanish conquistadors .
 An entertaining story of the filibusters who invaded Latin American nations from U.S. bases hi the period 1848-1861 . The filibusters were from United States bases .
 Human interest stories of events in the lives of Narciso Ldpez, Pierre Sould, General Henningsen, and William Walker .
 Well-written stories of the leaders in the fight for South America's independence . South American independence .
 Touissant 1‘Ouverture, Morelos, Moreno, Moreno and Rlvadavia, Feijd, Santander, Balmaceda, Irigoyen, Barbosa, Lizard). Bello, Euclides da Cunha, Dario
 Arturo Akssandri, Victor Radi Hays de la Torre, Rdotulo Betancourt, Jos. Flgueres, Luis Muhoz Marin, Victor Paz Estenssoro, Getutio Vargas, Juan Domingo Per6n
 More than 30 of the bestknown 19th century dictators are the subjects of study by A Curtis Wilgus, Lewis Bealer, Andrew N eleven, J Fred Rippy, Alan K Manchester, and Almon R Wright .
 Well-told stories of Spain's warriors who won the New World between 1492 and 1560 . Spain's conquests of New England were discovered in 1492 .
 The Gulifrrez-Magee, the Mina, and the Long filibustering expeditions from Louisiana into New Spain (present Texas and Northern Mexico) during the Mexican Revolution, 1812-1821 .
 A three-part history of Peru in the lives of the incas, the Pizarroi and their confederates, and of the men and women of the Church . The history of the Incas is told in three parts .
 A scholarly study of the role of Vasco Nufiez de Balboa la the exploration and settlement of the Isthmus of Panama in the first decade of the 16th century . The study was published in the spring of the 17th century and is based on the work of
 A brief jM uiHkwumrntcU bho*rar*> ut mhaih the aotho# gusMrx freely irom umjvvifir J hriup 1598. A brief .
 He is irpresenteJ as Patriot. Volume ti desrurd to asprsts of the lihbgdr ta shttk he is ir presenteJ .
 The entertaining story of the royal family of Brazil to the cad of the F.mpire In IOT9.9. Brazil . Brazil's royal family is the subject of the IOT series .
 A personal Insight into Castro’s political career by a companion In arms in the Sierra Maestri 1594 . A companion In Arms in 1594. Castro's political career .
 Latin American correspondent for the Chicago Tribune, lost faith in Castro . Castro is a former CIA director .
 The life and contributions of Mexico's president in the years ISM-1940 . Mexico's first president was assassinated in 1944 .
 The most readable and most authentic account of Columbus' voyages, whose routes the author retraced in a sailing vessel . The most accurate account of the voyages .
 A piufusely illustrated retelling of the co nt emp o rary storks of Columbus' lour voyages .
 Cot umbos' achieveme n ts t> seen through the eyes of Ms Has. Has. the scholar . The author of the book, "Cot umbos," is a member of the Cotuis .
 A scholarly account of the I MO-1 Ml r s pcdH i oo , headed by Franc too Vizrjuez dr Coronado . The Southwestern region of the United States .
 A study of the roles of the Spemsh .crvyurviador and the Artec ruler of -Mexico in .he batiks for control of present Uni te City .
 An exhaustive biography of one id the great historian of the Spanish conqm 4 of Peru . An exhaustive biography of one of the great historians of Peru.
 The author, a lefltst Arcrntinr lawyer, trlh of hit scars of acquaintanceship with fellow Artentittian fiur-ara . The author of this article is a lawyer from the Arrntininr .
 Jrtofarr dr Ouesads was a Spanish conquistador who contaned present Colombia . A biography of him is published in Colombia .
 An eahamtisr study ol the . hie of Bewtto Julie/ Mexican lewder of ihe nud-aiarscemk century 1614 .
 Miranda hahad to mtxh material (hat was not a-aiUNc lo William V RoMwh »hmc authonixuc woxk aifcarrj in 192* 1423. The auihtvf of iho sh«bil>
 Author has deperw*v J targefv lor mmjIic mairrtai on the to* remaining anoctw pktuft inoftK mmlKO). anna s, and ctu onelrv 1624. anna
 Crossbowman's Story of thr Firstjtploralion of the Amazon, George Millar . Crossbowmen's Story: The Amazonian FirstjTploralions . The Amazon is the world's first crossbowman, a man who crossed the Amazon .
 P453I. iKr life utils* ate »*l Maria I *i Duaitr who toyr to mftdxwT ra Afrrnnu as the w»*e »*• Iktalie Juan friva 1626. P453
 Bib Index. Juan aad U4W^> ts ihr aa«J nilmrti sM IVt« 1629. The i>4r« s«l iiiayiHst. iktuad* Juan Aad . The Bib Index
 1652. San Marlin. lose tie San . Marlin . the leaslcr s*f vtuihrin Vu.ih Vmen.j‘.strmrnt .
 dr Santa Anna, thr iIkijuh who sSiminaicd Ihc hislius id IhC Mcik an njikHl [lien lib tosttv 1*54. X t'touiarh* Annul* |
 Index X Kholath hfetaphs d ‘’•frrnlma's pies idem HUM l*7ai. filiK biuAjuM. jfHi Uip4*.«<na( 1*55.5%) Index X
 i til Irrvh 1*57.7.5.5 . i til I-57.5: i-57 . i-58.5 : i-59.7: I-59 . I-58 .
 Hib I istw«naii/e*l hi »4*»4**l the Frcixh Roidirttof! - »oJ fiHjixsjnt rOuirflutc. thr kj4r( ol
 A comprehensive review of the Ufe and political career of the Dominican dictator . The Ufe is a former dictator of the United States .
 Author makes much use of ictervlevn with those who knew the diet for The author's decision not to tat foot notes makes it dtfitcuk .
 A scholarly biography covering the political career of Getullo Vargas from 1722 to h» death in 1754 . Vargas' political career was covered in a scholarly biography .
 Atirmpt lo ""achieve an inclusive and unified picture of the thought of the Mexican philosopher in its entire range" 1645. An atirmpt was an attempt to encompass everything "oh earth and in hravra as aril"
 Chile. Church MonnaiiT 1441 /. **, »>; thi Yi » f'i-.ith t mitBOr (TnfUfr dftt/ f*i« Km* •*# pixtf* \ionttn
 I ir-sTN'ift >*. »*. »v »v»ctKwJ 4 feCi:V:»c -ss rvtdtfhs : .c —r*i s » m s*J<t .f :harWn
 A comrsariva* at the totes of G erm s* aad Amaricaa froiruamism to htse.. aad aad . Aad a study at Prosevtaat ways w the two (rex . oeei.it
 F ssrsyws is* Cephas frvwx •rhhh warms end c a as w Sv in Sv in m ■w pw u s h lord Pehnetwua mat am ta Aayat It5l. F srsrssyws
 In the 'live problem bv the Roman t'jihnla Church in colonial Cuba i* ct.nlraxrd with that of (he Church of England in colonial Virginia 1453)
 A umc of MaliMkat data pertaining to Roman Catholic Chu n Latin America . Data pertaining to the Roman Catholic Church .
 A description of the purpme and accnmptishmrnt' of the periodical Btaul Vtttmt. ntiuu .
 How the Christian Democratic Movement in Bfa/U differs from ib manifestations in Spam-Jv-spcaking vouMrio ofatin America and rriMJtn why the movement has failed to develop a broad followinp among Roman CmMm in Brazil .
 A true teg of the Chuich »v State urugglc from ICI to thr l**»‘v with dwtuwioen ol Carbolic crtwaitoa and the >pread of Prorrtlawbm.’
 A vampfutg of t roth repealed at the annual C1COP ICathofte lnrer-Ametkan Cooperation Program I contention m St. l ovn in the »inter of 1*67-4* 1459 .
 Author * ""articulate rrflrvtiM »*f the mttwencc wuh witch ( at holier* m has pr(meaud. nr sought to pet ovate. the hods politic'’ constitute""an njus
 An nantMkd c4 the frig ""'*hf of thr Rmnan Catted* Owtift in ( :bi to < astro * l cm .mu state unt Ifh 1445. The frig is the frig of thr .
 This volume is mu a history as such, but an inquiry into the historical evolution of the political position of the Roman ( dlhoiik ( hutch iii f atm America Fu|||' ) treatment is given to Mexico but ebapte's arr ahi 
 A scholarly study of the men and the event* involved in the struggle in which the ( nurch sought to retain its -cahh, »t> power and it* temporal mtiurncrcr m . The first 55 years of Mexican independence were fought during the first 55
 The Roman Catho 1 * Church in the 1965 uprising in the Dominican Republic . The Roman Catholic Church played a role in the uprising .
 Imci Amrfhui I'uopciataoa Pr 0*1 aml meet in* htM u '. fc*a«*v Jo I lisuar l«M thr U port* oh 'he foSt e4 the Cetto
 J22P635c. \ of writings, covtrnng the colonel, independence, and con:..inpnr.itv period'. bv such authorities as Jo*6 Toribio Me.'*.j.
 Of interest to students of American history for its revelations of the operations of the inquisitorial arm of the Church in Mexico Peru, and New Granada . Of interest for students of history .
 Ait examination, far North American Catholics, of the content of the report written at Chimbotc. Ait .
 In 1953, representatives of Catholic Action organizations in the 20 Latin American nations gathered in Peru . Peru was visited by Catholic Action groups in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The author, a Jesuit ptiesl. reports in very brief fashion his ohservatio . primarily as related to the Roman Catholic Church, at the cities of Santiago .
 A reexamination of the origins of the Cris’ero conflict, an identification of its goats, and an explanation of the outcome of the clash between Church and Stale in 1929 that ended the threevear 1 19:6 -1929) conflict . Thousands of Calhoti
 The use by the Spanish crown of the Catholic Church on the frontier as a civilizing influence in the conquest of Spanish America . The use of the church in the area was used to civilize the population .
 Roman Catholic writer reports on religion in Latin Amrrica as well as then-current historical developments observed firsthand .
 A look at such trends as those typified by the Christian Democratic parties, papal encyclicals, labor organizations, and church relationships with dictators .
 The story both of Catholicism and of more recent Protestant developments . The story is both Catholic and Protestant .
 Eighteen papers presented at the Third Annual CICOP (Catholic Incr-American Cooperation Program) Conference held in Chicago in January 1966 .
 An examination of the geographic, economic, political, and social factors that led to the development of the different sects . The study of the leaders and beliefs of the several different sects. The study .
 The Roman Catholic Church as a Factor in the Political and Social History of Mexico . Roman Catholic church as a factor in the political and social history of Mexico. The Catholic Church .
 An exploration of the history of the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico serves as a prelude to answering five stated questions pertaining to the Church uud its operations under the Calles regime .
 A review of the volume, produced after 10 years of research, reveals the great shortage of priests in all Latin American Communism countries .
 Review gives some clues to the size of the personnel problem confronting the Roman Catholic Church in the area . Review of the Catholic Church's personnel problem gives some clue to the allure of the problem .
 It is a collection of writings by 19 authors, half of whom are Roman Catholic clergymen .
 Political Considerations, Socio-Economic Considerations and Religio-Social Considerations . Political Consideration: I, II, III, Social Considerations; I, III and I, I, IV, Religious Considerations. Political Considerational Considerations: I and II
 An Essay on the Apostolate and the Evangelizing Methods of the Mendicant Orders in New Spain: 1523-1572. The author also wrote on the subject of an essay on the apostolate of the orders .
 Volume, first published in French in 1933, is the product of It years research by the author . Volume is the result of years of research . Volume was published in 1933 .
 In it he reminds the Mexican nation of the ""colossal debt it owes the Catholic Church" by bringing into focus the profound revolution in Mexican life brought about by the Mendicant friars of the Orders of St. Francis .
 A Journalist's view of the Communist threat in the early 1950s period . A journalist's view on the early '50s .
 A tracing of the Communists' role in Chilean politics from 1936 to 1930 . The Communists were involved in the country's political revolution .
 A very brief report on the problems posed for President Frei by Chile’s Marxist unions .
 The author writes that . . communism in Latin America has not operated under the aegis of the traditional slogans of class struggle and proletarian revolution . The Communists developed what for Latin Americu was a new concept of nationalism and then proceeded to exploit it .
 A brief report based on hearings conducted on the nature of the Communist subversive threat and its danger to hemispheric solidarity . The report was released by the U.S. House of Representatives at the end of the year .
 Hearings before the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 89th Cong., 1st sess., 1965. Hearings were held in the House of Representatives . Hearings in 1965 were held by the Committee of Representatives from the U.S. House
 Testimony on Cuban developments in 1964-63 and reports on various topics, including the number of Latin American students in the United States .
 The author points out that prior to the time of publication that the Communists’ performance had been poor in Latin America in spite of the relative freedom to propagandize and the distinction of many of its leaders .
 He feels the Communists’ performance will improve due to a change in initiative in Moscow and Peking, he says . The Communists' performance in Latin America will also improve, he adds .
 Communist movement from 1919 to 1964 . Origin, history, political efforts, political activities, front activities, and influence of the Communist movement . Front activities .
 History, organization, membership, programs, leaders, and prospects for the Communist parties in Mexico . Party members include members of the Communist Party of Mexico .
 Hearings of the House Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs, 90th Cong. 1st sess., 1967 . Hearings were held in the 90th Congress, 1967 .
 Testimony of U.S. Ambassadors to Guatemala, Bolivia, and Venezuela, and high Dept. of State and Dept, of Defense officials .
 Report of Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 90th Cong. 1st sess., 1967 . Report of subcommittee on Inter .American Affairs . of House committee on foreign affairs of House .
 A brief report on such target areas as Venezuela, Colombia, Guatemala, and Bolivia . A brief discussion of Cuba’s role in Communist activities in Latin America .
 A review of ihe methods used by Communist groups to promote Communism in America . The methods used in promoting Communism in the United States .
 Communists seek to take advantage of all situations favorable to advance their cause . How the Communist Party seeks to exploit all circumstances favorable to its cause .
 Testimony of Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs before a House Subcommittee on Communist subversion methods and accomplishments before and since Castro gained power in Cuba .
 Former Sc. laior's observations on anti-Americanism and Communism made on a trip with Adlai Stevenson in the spring of 1%0 .
 Testimony by Congressmen and others and exhibits describing Communist activities in Latin American area . Exhibits describe Communist activities .
 Hearings of a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary to Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws were held in 1959 . Hearings were held before a Senate committee .
 Hearings before a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 90tb Cong., 1st sess. Hearings are before a Subcommittee of the . Judiciary . Hearings were held before a . subcommittee on the Senate Judiciary .
 A multivolume collection of evidence accumulated during several sessions of Congress on the nature and extent of Communist activities in the Caribbean area .
 The author, a Marxist intellectual, finds that United States ""imperialism"" is a force countering Communist efforts to expand their influence . A different assessment of the prospects for Communism in Latin A meric .
 Hearing, Subcommittee on Senate Committee on Judiciary, 88th Cong., 1st sess., Oct. 1963. Hearings were held before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Oct. 31, 1963 .
 The leftist front organization was created by the Communist Party of Soviet Union in 1968 . The party was founded by Soviet-Russian-born members of the Soviet-born party .
 A comprehensive survey by a Post team of the strength of the Communist movement and of Communist plans for gaining political control in Latin America . The survey was conducted by a team of experts and journalists .
 Conditions conducive to the propagation of Communism, and actions required to halt its spread. Conditions . needed to halt the spread of Communism .
 A brief look at government-to-government contacts and relationships . A look at the relationships between parties involved in government and parties .
 The problem posed for the U.S. by the spread of Communism in Latin America was the Soviet Union .
 A review of factors that made Latin America a possible Soviet target for Soviet political expansion . Latin America was a possible target for the Soviet invasion of Latin America .
 The Mexican government imprisoned Communist artist Siqueiros and certain labor leaders for their roles in strikes and other disturbances 1737 .
 An explanation of the peculiar conditions under which the “Left’s” operates in Mexico . Mexico's Left is divided in the country's political landscape .
 In addition to the history of nationalism and Communism in Chile, the author devotes chapters to the roles of socialism and the Christian Democratic movement, and to the 1964 election .
 Appendix has a few comments on pro-Chinese and Trotskyist groups . A very, very brief appendix has a brief discussion of the Trotskyist group .
 An analysis of the consequences of the gaining of power by Fidel Castro . The efforts of Communists to operate in Mexico, Brazil, and Guatemala . The tactics employed in each nation .
 A longtime foe of Communism surveys Communist operations in Latin America . A veteran Latin American correspondent for the Chicago Tribune has been a Communist sympathizer .
 A survey of Chinese Communist efforts to ""wean" Latin American Communist parties away from Moscow . Chinese Communist Party parties in Latin America have been linked to Moscow .
 Red Chinese declarations and actual policy in Latin America differ dramatically . It calls attention to the discrepancies between declarations and policies in Latin American countries .
 Hearing before a Senate subcommittee of the Committee on the Judiciary, 89th Cong. 1st sess., 1965 . Hearing before the Senate Subcommittee of the . Judiciary, the . Constitution of American freedom of expression .
 Testimony by Jules Dubois, Stanley Ross, Enrique Chau, and Emitio Julian Navarro on the subject .
 A journalistic, country-by-country review of certain aspects of Communism . Based in part on visits by the author to the different countries .
 A brief tracing of the rise of Communism in Latin America from 1918 to 1962 . Includes emphasis on enlarged Soviet efforts after 1953, the role of Castro Castro, the arming of Cuba with missiles, and Communist activity in unions .
 An examination of the events, individuals, and political influences involved in the seizure of the fundo of “Los Cristales’s” on 28 October 1965 .
 Leaders and policies of Communists, Socialists, and “UltraLeftists" in Chile . Chile .
 A review of the programs of the Soviet-backed Communist parties and of the Chicom-backed parties . The two groups are ideologically split . The programs of both parties are reviewed by historians .
 Latin America, by the Undersecretary of Commerce in the Eisenhower Administration . Latin America by the U.S. In the Eisenhower administration .
 An examination of Soviet influence on the political development of underdeveloped countries as it applies to Latin America . Soviet influence in Latin America as it applied to Latin American countries .
 A 20-polnt outline of the methods used by the Kremlin In Its efforts to extend Communist influence In Latin America . The Kremlin is trying to extend its influence in Latin America.
 The author, a native of Peru, tells of his experiences with Communism at home and abroad . The author was born in Lima, Peru, and is now in the United States .
 The subjects, here presented in Fnglish. have been amplified from two lectures the author gave in South American countries in 1959 under the auspices of the Congress for Cultural Freedom .
 A translation of Hidoria de ta entturu en la America hispunica . A review of the historical development of Hispanic American culture . A final charter by the translator .
 A Reader in the Social Anthropology of Middle and South America and the Caribbean . A Reader of Social Anthropology of M.S. and South . Africa .
 A study of “the total functional and integrational setting” of cultural change in Brazil . Study of ‘total functional and integrated rational setting’ of cultural . change in Brazilian culture .
 Informative and interesting insights into Spanish American culture by a longtime student of the area .
 Fiestas fiestas or Ittes are religious, civic, and tribal, arranged by months of the year . Detailed descriptions of the various fiestes fiestos or ites .
 A fascinating and rewarding treatment of the institution* and processes that have shaped the culture of the former colonies of Spain . The film is based on the experiences of Spain's former colonies .
 Patierns of settlement in Latin America and economic and other changes in the recent past . Patiers of Latin America: Latin American settlement in the past .
 A collection of the author's writings that first appeared in various publications in the period .
 The record of the attainment of cultural power and influence by Brazil's foremost industrial city . Brazil's most famous industrial city is known for its industrialism .
 The role played by the Spanish character in shaping the development and maintenance of the Spanish American class system . The Spanish character is a key figure in the development of the class system in American society .
 The conference was concerned with the relationship of social policy to economic growth . The article treats a large number of topics such as education, population growth, agricultural problem-, social security, and other related subjects .
 A discussion of the economic policy revolution characterized by the trend toward self-sufficiency (the industrialization movement) that appeared in the bellwether countries of Mexico and Uruguay before the end of WW I and in other nations after the depression of the early 1930's .
 Contributions by 17 authors, most of them at one time or another US. government employes., on various economic topics or on economic affairs in 10 of the counttfes .
 The Latina economy is one of the most important economic problems in the world . Latina has been hit hard by corruption, unemployment and other economic problems .
 A revised and updated version of a paper was summarized in the Federal Reserve Bulletin in October 1967 . A revised version of the paper was published in October .
 An exposition on the vole of planning, and opinions as to the success of different Latin American nations in achieving their planning goals . An exposition of Latin American planning .
 A difinltion of “indigenous"" economy and a study of its manifestations in the countries having a high . conceit itr-.'lon of Indian population .
 A review of the role of science and technology in the development of Latin America’s resources . Latin America's resources .
 WW II analysis of Latin American economic problems and reco m mended policies and actions for the area . Analysis of WW II economic problems in Latin America .
 A collection of artxhs and stt'istlcal xudes on various aipects of the Latin American economy.es .
 A study of Latin American economy as development, aurarian reform, monopolies, primary products, inflation, foreign aid and national planning . A study nf such aspects of the Latin American . economy such as development and aurarian . reform .
 U.S. citizens who would criticize their own government to people abroad should remember a truism . See viil for author's statement .
 Statistical and other information for Latin America as a whole and for individual countries . Latin America is Latin America's most populous region . Latin American countries are Latin American nations .
 A Soviet writer briefly scans the causes of Latin America's economic backwardness . The Soviet writer explains why Latin America has a poor economy .
 Article, though more than 20 years old, is of value for its information on experiences of Latin American nations with oncproduct economies . Article of this article is published in the New Year's edition of this year's Latin American edition .
 A survey of Latin American economic problems based on a summer's soil by the author to six Latin American nations . The author's findings are based on the author's visit to six countries .
 The author heifins with a section tilled ""What's Clone Wrong.” then report*. Then report*.
 Brazil, Argentina -and winds up with a pessimistic assessment of the prospects for I,ALTA and a pair of reform reforms .
 Latin American governments and their state-owned oil companies' U.S. policy in support of the United States oil companies in Latin American operations . Role of the Latin American oil Industry in regional economic integration. Role of Latin American government and oil companies .
 Article originally prepared to serve as the basis for discussion and analysis by an ECLA seminar on the subject . Article was originally prepared as the . basis for . discussion and . analysis .
 Hearings of the Subcommittee on Inter-American Economic Relationships of the Joint Economic Committee, 88th Cong. 2d sess , 1964 . Hearings were held in the 88th Congress, 1964 .
 Testimony by U.S. industrial leaders and AID officials on role of private investment in Latin American development . Private investment is key to Latin American economic development .
 An examination of Latin America 1 need for private investment capital (both domestic and foreign) pinpoints the reasons why private investors tended to avoid the Latin American areas in the early 1960’s .
 Developments jn foreign trade, planning, tax reform, social services, industrialization, stabilization, and capital formation in the 1960-1963 period . Developments in 1960-63 period .
 An analysis of sources of saving for gross domestic investment in the period 1950-1960 . The analysis was based on savings rates in the UK .
 Types of tax incentives, reasons for adoption of tax incentive legislation, and the taxpayer’s response to such legislation . Taxpayers respond to tax incentives legislation .
 A collection of the author’s previously published articles on developments in Venezuela . The Venezuelan government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 Colombia, on the Carretera Marginal dc la Selva, and on transport strategy in Latin America . Colombia, Colombia, and Latin America. Latin America's transport strategy .
 A report on many aspects of the Latin American economy, based on the author's K-month trip to 15 countries in 1957-195* as an economic specialist on a State Department exchange of specialists program .
 A survey of preand post-WW II Latin American export trends, influence of industrialization, the need for enlarged markets for Latin American goods, the role of regional trading systems, and obstacles to Latin American development . The survey includes a survey of the pre-WWII export trends and
 Author recommends that Latin American governments abandon state socialism for free enterprise . Author recommends using state socialism instead of state socialism . Author: Free enterprise is the key to Latin American economies .
 A catalog of elements required for the economic development of Latin America . Latin America's economic development needs to be developed in the region . Latin American economy is a key part of the continent's development .
 Proposals for damming river systems in the Amazon basin and in the Choco Valley of Colombia advanced by the Hudson Institute . The Hudson Institute has proposed damming proposals for the Amazon and Choco rivers .
 Coffee prices jumped 75% in the Scptember-Novcmbcr 1948 period by a 5 nate Subcommittee of the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry . Coffee prices rose 75% during the same period .
 Congressional and other criticism of the manner in which the United Slates became a participant in the Treaty led to an increase in the world price of coffee and to a consequent increase in cost to the U.S consumer of almost $500,000,000 per year .
 An examination of the process by which U.S. policy on this subject “was made"" in Congress and by the Administration . A look at the process of making a decision in Congress, the Administration.
 European coffee consumption is a key factor in the consumption of coffee in the U.S.
 Analysis of draft ol a “Long-Term Coffee Agreement"" released to the press by the United States in December 19*1 Article . Article reports Brazilian position on stabilization of prices and presents a critical analysis of objectives of the Agreement, 1826. Analysis of the draft .
 Prospects tor and problems confronting the establishment of a Latin American Common Market . Prospects for the Common Market are unclear .
 LAFTA was created in I960 . It was the first of its kind to be awarded a British award for best British television show .
 Author: Latin American leaders are not yet ready to support a unity . Author: OAS presidents have announced support for economic unify by 20 OAS countries .
 A theoretical approach to a problem illustrated by an examination of the LAFTA program . The theoretical approach is a theoretical approach .
 Latin American Common Market is the answer to Latin American nations' illi. I-\, and CACOM to achieve their goal* and argues for the creation of a common market for Latin American countries .
 The author concludes that Latin America cannot establish a common market that has any meaning in the midst of economic and social stagnation . Latin America is in a state of stagnation .
 An inquiry into the role and functioning of inter-American trade organizations such as CACM and LAFTA . The implications of the operations of these organizations for U.S. trade .
 Ascompiishmcnia to the end of ISM itariff reductionst are identified . Obstacles to future growth are enumerated .
 Free TradZone Treaty signed by Argentina . Background to and provisions of the treaty . Argentina signed the treaty in 2003 .
 An analvvo of new proposal, de-ognrd t»* eliminate the weakr, -z. inherent in the t ALtA program toe stimulating interAmen, an tradr 1848 proposal .
 The Latin American Free Trade Association has been in operation for four years . Latin American Trade Association was created in 1994 .
 Authors tract the rata of LAFTA'i growth since its creation In 1961 . They also explore the role of lufsaritutknu in decision making, and the question of how LAFTA has adapted itself to  realities in tha different member nations .
 An assessment of the potential “benefits’ to ha derived from an effective integration of the Latin American economy . An enumeration of the “obstacles” to the ‘obstacle’ of LAFTA precedes an assessment of an assessment .
 An attempt to assess the economic future at the Latin American area in terms of traditional economic growth poneraa 1854. An attempt at assessing the future of the region's economic future .
 An attempt to illuminate pecvttefiites is the sockt ecuoomsr structures which have served as a framework for the g ene ts* of growth of the lain American cosmic* during the tost decade* ‘54.” 1854. An
 Frank R Brandenburg. The Development of Latin American Private Enterprise . Frank Brandenburg . Brandenburg: Latin America Private Enterprise. A Latin American private enterprise. Frank RBrandenburg .
 Fifteen pa pen prevented at a Conference of the International Economic Association held in Rio de Janeiro .
 Topics discussed included those of deve l opment, growth, capital, foreign investment, trade theory, terms of trade, primary products, raw material export,. and industrial development . Topics discussed include those of inflation, growth and capital .
 Material is presented in a ""subject-matter"" approach rather than on a ""countrybj-country"" basis . Material presented in the book is presented on a subject-matter basis rather than a country-based basis .
 A theoretical study reviewin g certain aspects of the Economic Jersey of Larin America . prepared by the Secretariat of ECLA of which Radi Prebisch was Executive Secretary. prepared by ECLA .
 A retJItreiy retreat survey of economi c trends, of preset* stage of ec on om i c end tocial deve l opm e n t , of d nriopm caa in sen are group* of coumnev and of exports
 Index. tecludcd re ibt. study of ecuaonuc puvtlt are the tolkrerec page's on hr an' George Wythe. Wythe .
 A discussion of development problems, of internal pot tens end administration, of dorrstic and foreign adriinistrelion,' export markets and foreign exchange, and of U S policy probl ems in the area .
 A theory of how most Latin American nations must reconstruct their society before te c hn ology can function within them . An rxposuion of how the Northern industrial nation, adapted to technological developments .
 An namiaatxre of Ihr ""external"" and ""internal"" obstacles to economic development . 1872. Id coanodu) prices, trade controls, inflation, and political uncertainty 1872 .
 Wurkuw Gnmp on Scwxal Aspect, of r« mums tV.yt. om u a . re I are Amerwa Mexico CUy.y. V ol t >reuui of paper, s ub menu lo iv lipti li
 Raduiiom anj Counh . Counh rmolutum Change umd Patutcmcr m Social 88 Subjects Structures , .120.000 .
 A 'lutlv variations in patterns of national development' in Ando-America and Iatin America . emphasis given to variations in levels of economic development . emphasis is given to differing levels of development .
 West Herman pulilic and private .ml .ml and investment in Sooth American industry. West Herman .
 A Case Slmly in the Operations of Private Enterprise in Retarded Rations . The case is based on a case of private enterprise in the form of a private enterprise .
 A wealth of information on types of British investment ventures. their successes and failures . A comparison of British and Iatin views on the relative value of these investments .
 Volume's purpose is to estimate the flow of capital between Latin American nations and other world nations since the end of WWI . Volume’s purpose is . estimate . to estimate . flow of . capital between . Latin American countries and other . world nations . Since WWI, Latin
 Nineteen studies of investors in Spanish and Portuguese America . from independence to the present in such fields as mining, transportation, and retailing .
 A Peruvian writer discusses the rotes of inflailon and foreign loans in internal politics . Peruvian writers discuss the role of foreign loans and inflailons in the country's political system .
 An examination, from the I.atin American viewpoint, of the problems to be encountered in the development of closer economic and political relations with the Huropean Ixonomic ( ommumty)
 A Yearbook of tltc tiraduate School of Public Administration, Harvard t'niversity, 1 9.9 .
 The conflict between the Industrialist and the laUlumllstti is discussed in this article . The Industrialist is the subject of a series of historical conflicts in Finland .
 In which the author laid the groundwork for a program of industrialization of Latin American nations . The full text of the report first published in 1950 .
 The relationship of Industrialization to the population explosion and urban growth is described as the relationship of industrialization to urban growth .
 Latin America has an intense desire for industrialization in Latin America . Latin America wants to industrialize more and more . Latin Americans want to develop their own industries .
 Ten studies and a bibliography tell the story of Industrial development in Latin America in terms of its leaders, management, influence on agriculture, union labor, and U.S. foreign policy .
 An examination of the extent and character of manufacturing establishments, and a study of forces and factors influencing the growth of industry . An examination . of the . extent and . character of . manufacturing establishments .
 A brief tracing by a Soviet writer of the growth of industrialization since the 1930’s, and the role of the U.S. in the industrialization of Latin America .
 Survey conducted by the National Industrial Conference Board of relative costs of production in the U.S. and abroad . Results of the survey were compiled by the board of Industrial Conference board .
 Executive Secretary of the U.N.'t Economic Commiuion fir Filin America. America . Executive Secretary. Executive Secretary . of the United Nations .
 P r oble m involved in import substitution sad tariff protection in Latin American area . P roble m was involved in . import substitution .
 Article is iilusuatat.d with a treat number of Heines and statist leal tables . Article includes a treat many Heines, Statistic tables .
 Volume Is designed for use both by the general reader and the social scienc. student who is not an ""economics major "" 1999 . Volume is designed to use both for use and for use by non-economics students who are not an economics major .
 Volume is designed as a “first introduction"" In Latin American economy “for the leader who wishes to visit the Latin American countries nr taler to study their affairs more intensively" 1919. Volume is . designed as “a “First introduction”
 A short analysis of the roles of the “monetarist’s and “structuralist schoob of economic thought on inflation .” The author of this article concludes that the role of the economist is to blame for inflation inflation .
 A summarization of the ""osonrsa. nl"" and the ‘structuralist"" pom son, and proposed policies for asntusg ih» p robitms of us nation . A summary of the 'structuralism' and 'struct
 Lars* Acsrr.se* n,wus 1999. Appcndti Volume w«s V w w rJ hsfc r> . bs’-c-sJ survey *ad a i sHsu) tor survey causes on the Lars
 Exploration of revised met hods for computing terms-of-trade ratal ieftships and use of four methods for recomputing data for five years in the IWCs .
 A brief analysis of significant factors in inter-American trade r eviewed by the Mexicar. A brief . analysis of . significant factors . in inter .American trade . A brief study of significant . factors .
 'Out of disrr. volume may have some satue for me in historical comparisons. Although now, out of disrrr volume may . have some historical comparisons for me .
 An outline presentitiou of drsrtafiucnt. taking fix c or undrt way in lunutswl tr*»*c policy and an argument for [hr taking of .ourifcnatrd action by the Larin American countries] An outline of dr
 Jansen Usd*tm mto thr r slew* and saftawnre ls f ""Vno-Soswr Tradr with t mm ,-smrtKa ' ns. s mt Him sum sum nut 1919. Jansen usd*mto thrr slew
 1922. A siudy of factors influencing economic relations and prospccis for future developments . 1922. The World Series of Economic Developments. 1922.
 A cataloging of the barriers to the free flow of U.S. capital lo I atin America, and the role of United States government capital in the area . A statement of Hie need for capital .
 Author probes the outlook for commodity exports in the 1960's . Author examines the problem ot increasing the rate of export growth tn the |9oo\, and studies the problems involved in enlarging the market for I atin American manufactured goods in the U.S.
 These are “A Latin American View*,"" ""Mittttel S Wionc/ek; -'An Argentine View,** Enrique (arcia Vi/qurz; ‘A Brazilian View,” H<lio Jaguaribe; ""An Interpret
 A special issue devoted to ten different aspects of problems confronting U.S. industrial or commercial operations in the Latin American area .
 Soviet condemnation of U.S. business interests in Latin America . A typical Soviet condemnation .
 A philosophical exploration of the question of how U.S. business should conduct itself abroad . The book explores how the United States should conduct its business abroad .
 Latin American misgivings on trade and business activities of U.S. private business interests, thoughts on how Latin American suspicions can be overcome, and a listing of United States public aid supplied to Latin America in the posl-WW 11 period . Latin American views on the U
 Results of a survey of some three dozen U.S. firms, revealing the nature, location, and availability (for research purposes) of their corporate records pertaining to their Latin American operations .
 Study concentrates on the banana producing efforts of United Fruit Company in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama . Study focuses on the domestic and international operations of the company in the movement and sale of bananas .
 Conditions under which U.S. business organizations must operate in Latin America, influence of the Castro movement on business operations, and prospects for the future .
 The trial* and tribulations experienced by American A Foreign Power Company in doing business in Latin America . The trial, trial, tribulations of American A foreign Power Company .
 A description of the various types of problems confronting United States private Investors inatin America such as taxation, expropriation . cic.. and an indication of profits in the period after I960. cic .
 Soviet writer describes V S private investment in Latin America and outlines nine objectives of U.S. imperialism in relation to Latin American industrialization . Soviet writer outlines nine ""specific objectives of United States imperialism"
 A brief review of the Services performed by the Pan American Union through its Library Development Program . A very brief review . of the services performed .
 Brief comments on illiteracy and lack of schools, dropout problems in elementary schools, teacher training and salaries . Teacher training, salaries, forces at work in higher education, and new educational legislation .
 Results of a 1960 survey giving information on the selection process for higher education, economic background of students, and student attitudes toward politics . Results of the 1960 survey were published by the University of California .
 Eastern Regional Conference, Comparative Education Society, held May 7-9, 1964 . Eastern regional conference, Comparable Education Society held in May 1964 .
 A collection of papers examining several aspects of education in Latin America . The papers include papers examining the education of Latin American students in Latin American countries .
 A look at the Cordova Movement and its influence, the composition and political complexion of student bodies, and four significant changes that have occurred within the last decade . A look into the composition of the student body, and how it has changed .
 Educational establishments of Catholic, Jewish, and Lutheran denominations, with statistics on enrolment by types of schools . Statistics show enrolment of schools by type of school .
 A description of the university reform program that began in Argentina in 1918 . It has touched all Latin American universities in one fashion or another . Argentina's university reform began in 1918 and has touched many of its universities .
 A brief, cursory report indicates the extent of centralized control over education . Political influences on teachers, curriculum, curriculum and types of schools, methods of teaching . Report: A brief cursory look at education, political influence on teachers .
 A brief comment on Castro’s attack on illiteracy precedes translations of a poem dedicated to a teacher . An orientation and indoctrination manual, and an arithmetic workbook, are also included .
 A brief overview of some of the significant aspects of education in Latin America . Latin America is home to many of the world's poorest students .
 Review of two Latin American studies of ‘education"""", illustrated and enlarged with references to California’s experience in higher education .
 An attempt to develop a formula for guiding investment in education in developing countries . The formula will be used to help guide investment in developing nations .
 A contract study was prepared for the Office of Education, U.S. Dept. of Health .
 The author observed educational programs and institutions on visits to Chile in I960 and 1963 and made use of his observations in the preparation of this study .
 A review of educational literature in English, Spanish, and Portuguese published between 1048-1952 . The review was published in 1048 and 1952 .
 Organization of school system, curriculum, enrolment, and degrees awarded by universities . Organization of schools system includes curriculum, curriculum and enrolment of universities .
 A general survey of the Mexican school system, a study prepared by ihc United States Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare .
 A study of educational policies and programs based on extensive travel and research throughout Mexico . Study of Mexico's educational policies based on travel, research .
 A note on Brazil's unsegregated educational system and the Negro's role as a student . Brazil's education system is largely open to African Americans .
 Population explosion, urbanization, industrialization, and industrialization are factors in education education .
 In or control of university student and teacher organizations . A review of the processes by which Fldelixmo gained a foothold in university student organizations .
 Results of tests designed to determine the literacy level of mixed tndlan-Spanlsh peasants in five villages in Andean villages .
 A four part review of the role of the traditional university, recent university reform, and comments on critical aspects of the total educational system . The university is a force for change, and the university a force of change .
 An analysis of the provisions of the Brazilian education statute of 1952 . The Brazilian education law was passed in 1952 .
 These annual volumes have reports on certain aspects of education in each of the Latin American nations . The Latin American education volumes are published in Latin American countries .
 A brief misiitlcd examination of the state of education in Latin America . Latin America's education in the U.S. is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Brief comments on origin, history, influence of Cordoba Movement faculty, relationships with North American universities . Cordoba movement has been in touch with the U.S. for decades .
 A description ot teaching methods, teachers, curricula, etc. tempt to show how the past is in conflict with recent efforts to relate campus training and research to present needs of the area . A description of the past and future of teaching methods and curricula .
 A description of leaching methods, teachers, currlculua, etc., as revealed by visits to 37 law schools located in 16 Latin American republics .
 A study of the relative Influences of the Portuguese and Spanish languages as revealed In reseurrh in the schools in the towns of Uvramento, Brazil, and Rivera, Uruguay . The study was published in the journal The International Language Institute .
 The author traces the steps by which the North American Intellectual community developed its interest in and kinship with Latin American institutions .
 The Cultural Mission Program was inaugurated in 1923 and reorganized in 1942 . The program of and and the vocational educational 'ole of the Cultural Mission program .
 History of educational efforts, post-1920 developments, nature of government control, success in combatting illiteracy . History of education efforts .
 Mexico's attempts to educate its masses, especially the rural population, since 1920 . Mexico's successes and failures in its efforts to educate the masses since 1920 have been documented .
 The writer is a visiting professor at Buenos Aires University . Educational practices observed by the writer as visiting professor .
 A description of a teaching method perfected by Brazilian Paulo Freire for the teaching of adult illiterates in Brazil and Chile . The teaching method was perfected by the Brazilian .
 AID'S ROCAP (Regional Office tot Central America and Panama) produced and distributed textbooks for elementary schools in Central America .
 Papers presented at a five-week seminar held in Paris in April and May 1964 by the International Institute for Educational Planning . Some of the papers presented at the seminar were presented in Paris .
 Decree legislation, government control over education, teaching organizations, methods, student enrollment, and antiilliteracy drives. Decree laws, laws, education policy, education policies, education systems, and more .
 An expose of the two types of legends that exist concerning Latin American universities . The Latin American university legends are based in Latin America . This is the first time Latin American students have been allowed to study abroad .
 Social philosophy governing thinking of national administrators, school enrollment, espenditures on education, future prospects for education . School enrollment, enrollment and future prospects are key to education .
 The authors desire to reveal the workings of education In a modern society end to interpret Brazilian developments to the English-speaking pcoptea .
 A brief look at political practices in the universities, the building of new university campuses, the introduction of the coeducational school, and multifaceted university professors . A very brief look into political practices and the creation of new campuses .
 An inquiry into the nature of the nature and extent of political involvement of Latin American universities . The inquiry will look at the extent of the political involvement involved in Latin America .
 Student movements in several countries, characteristics of them, and forces recently influencing them (Communism) Student movements have been influenced by student movements in the past .
 JO is a collection of articles and reports on various aspects of the political role of the student in Latin American higher education . JO looks at Latin American students' political role in education .
 A review of xuch aspects of education as national control, organization, administration, and curricula of primary, elementary, and secondary schools was published in 2007 . The review was based on a review of national control of education .
 A tracing of student efforts to achieve or Influence changes in university structure and operation from 1920 to 1943 and an evaluation of the succewet and failures of the movement . The study was published in October 2013 .
 Study is based on a survey in which 1600 Argentine students were questioned on how their university experience had influenced their political thinking . 1600 students were quizzed on how they felt about their political views .
 An insight into the elements of student power, the role of the student in the large state university, the student as a political activist . The student is a student at the University of Cambridge, a student in a state university .
 One of the more recent studies on university and cotkpc education around the world. The study is based on a recent study on university education in the UK .
 Section VI.27-379 has reports on educational development, in Argentina . Section V. 27-379 includes reports on Argentine education .
 Author traversed the roots of the Htghwny. tw gmmn a ia Venenata. toOououing the West Coast count ri es to Chile, aad returning via the Ease Const countries to cod in BrariL 2019 . Author
 A somewhat different type of travel book by a well-known Venezuelan-Amerlcan writer . The book is published by Venezuelan-American writer .
 The usott comprehensive textbook on Latin American geography available . The book is available in the US.
 Volume is a goldmine of geographic, economic, political, and social Information . Volume is the best-selling book in the world, with more than 1,000 pages .
 Population. topography, resources, hisiory, political institutions, transportation, agriculture, mining, and manufacturing, precede studies of countries or regions . Discussions of population topography and resources, . topography .
 It Is the result of hit 10year ""search for knowledge of Latin America," a werch pursued in the library and in the field .
 A rather elemental tr. atment of the lands, people and produce of the region . The region gives special attention to the various agricultural crops native to or transplanted there .
 A cultural anu historical geography of the Caribbean, Central America, and Mexico . A cultural history of the region . The Caribbean .
 An interesting collection of black-and-white photographs lllustrtes the textual description of the cities and countryside through which the highway passes .
 A photo siory of the authors’ 12,000-mile tour of South American countries and of plans of the various countries to preserve their national heritages .
 A discussion of five problem areas for Latin American students attending U.S. Diversities, by the President of the National Association of Foreign Student Advisers, 1961-1962 .
 A very brief look at the Colombian Army's three-cornered program for combatting its guerrilla binds . Offensive combat, civic action, and psychological warfare are key to success .
 John J Finan. Postwar Experience in Latin America.” includes the foBowtng studies of insurgency and counterinsurgency: John JFinan.
 The ""famous"" Guevara ""Wbte"" foe the revohutonary. many of whose portions he would probably rewrite, were he alive, to tsKocpocete the lessons learned .
 Article discusses the three-point program of rural subversion and guerrilla warfare . Includes the capture of a band of Argentine guerrillas in the Province of Saha in 1964 . of urban subversion, terrorism and underground supply and communications channels .
 Colombia, Colombia, and Vrotruels. and lack of support by Soviet and Chinese Communist Panics for the groups involved. Panics . Panics in China and Latin America .
 Interview with guerrilla leader Francisco Amado Granados . Article contain* Information on the MR-1,1 movement, the role of rebel leader Yon Sota .
 Extent of, theory and practice, and conditions favoring guerrilla warfare in Latin America, is studied .
 Comments on the unrealistic aspects of that theory, and on social and political factors influencing guerrilla operations . Debray, and others for application in Latin American situations .
 A review in some depth of guerrilla warfare as practiced in Mexico against the French invaders from 1861 to 1867 . The Castro-ied uprising against Batista in the 1956-1959 period . A review of the period since |94x .
 Examples of guerrilla activity and urban violence in Peru, Venezuela, Colombia, and Guatemala . Peruvian, Venezuelan, Colombian and Colombian guerillas .
 Guerrilla action* of June 1965, and the nature of the left-wing and right-wing opposition to the Peruvian preildent .
 A report on the activities of the Bolivian guerriUa movement and of the capture and execution of Che Guevara is published . The report is based on a report from the capture, execution and capture of the guerrier .
 A lengthy presentation marked by the author's comments on the U.S. role in Latin America . The United States has a long history of Latin American relations .
 Paul Bethel presents brief reviews of Communist-led guerrilla activities in Bolivia, Guatemala, Venezuela, Colombia, Colombia and Argentina . Bethel reviews the activities of Communists in the U.S. and Venezuela .
 Brazil, Chile, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, and Peru . Haiti, Haiti and the Dominican Republic among the countries listed .
 The Peruvian government quelled the peasants' revolt in the Province of La Convend6n in 1962-1961 .
 Guerrilla warfare is practiced by the FALN (Armed Forces of National Liberation since 1964) Guerrilla Warfare is practiced in the Philippines since 1964 . The armed group is known for its guerrilla warfare tactics .
 This general review of the development of an inter-American system, discusses the social and historical backgrounds of developments, comments on the present and the future, and presents, In the Appendix, a ""Synopsis of Inter-American Conferences, 1826-1948," 2064 .
 An attempt to present within one volume the story of the boundary disputes that playued South American relations from the first days of independence to 1937 . The book chronicles the events in which South America was at the center of its territorial disputes .
 Appendix contains statistical tables of recent economic and other information . Appendix contains numerous statistical tables for recent economic data .
 The text of the document signed at Bogoti, Colombia, 16 August 1966 . It was signed by the Presidents of Chile, Colombia and Venezuela and by the representatives of Ecuador and Peru .
 Mexican delegate to the U.N. is a longtime advocate of disarmament . Author is a prominent Mexican delegate in Mexico .
 A popular college textbook which devotes a number of chapters to Latin American topics .
 The Eleventh Conference was originally scheduled to be held in Quito in 1960 . Ecuador was the host nation selected at the Tenth Conference in 1934 . Ecuador has not found it opportune to hold the Eleventh .
 A discussion of the origin, powers, and activities of the Commission by a member of the Department of Legal Affairs of the Pan American Union . The Commission is based in Washington, D.C.
 Inter-American Efforts to Relieve International Tensions in the Western Hemisphere, 1959-1960 . 1959-60: Tensions between the U.S. and the world's most populous nations . 1959/60: Inter-american efforts to relieve international tensions in Western Hemisphere .
 A narrative summary of events, followed by a large collection of documents pertaining to the diplomacy of the period . A large number of documents related to diplomacy .
 A cc tcept embodyins an interrelationship of Europe, North America, and Latia America . As explanation of the Atlantic Trlansle concept, the concept is explained by the concept of Europe and North America .
 Article is based on a chapter in the author's Strategy lor the America's. America's Strategy . The author's strategy is based upon a chapter of a chapter .
 An attempt to convey an appreciation or an undemanding of how the Latin American people view the U.S. and Great Britain .
 An early examination of European, Asiatic, and U.S. interests in Latin America from independence to the poet-WW I era . A brief review of inter-American problem s of the IWO's .
 An examination of the status of efforts to protect human fights within the eaistine inter-American machinery . The U.S. has been involved in the creation of the U.N. State Department of Defense .
 AuiAM Ct son nawit 2M7. Ihc adopted a collection of the resolutions adopted by IHc above conference . IuiAMCt son nwit 2.7. Auiam Ct son son nweit 2m7.
 The Colombian Minister of Finance casts aew byte on (hr purpose ot the Affiance 2M9.9. The Colombian minister of finance casts aw byte on the 2-M9 .
 Comprehensive rev tens of ec ono mic. potiSKaL and bus infer deselopmefHs dump the first year of the AlUaarv .
 Hi to, *ad p nwpffti for cte AlUaaca. Qgmji of, fpf-k of. fffp ff ff i tf iHi to . Hi to . fp fpffti .
 The Affiance lot Fragreas la a vapid iiam w i a t patched to ge ther to rerve dm nsadh ot Uatksd States dtpiomacy. an atsaapt to Cover Up dm feiMre of tha Cuba
 Agreement among dm Ladn Ama rtca n nathma eras boughs by the promise of United States esramy "" 2997 . Agreement was reached in 2003 .
 A re-readies of lhe record of United States I n volvesn ea t in Latte American affairs from the foundation of the natron to lffil. and a Unking of dm Affiance to earlier U.S. poho. A re
 Secretary of State tor tmer-Amartean Attain vutxuto t erjmmandmtent foe t llu n m tar Fragreas action to ihr ath aanual ms m a g of the Inter American tomnk aad Soctel
 Aa analysis of the Alliance and Its p roble ms , ahkfc . Indicates the ''number and nature of the obstacles confronting" it. Indicates a number of obstacles confronting it. Aa Analysis of the alliance and its p role .
 A look at the impact the A l li li a nce has had on the penkipatla* Lada American nations . This essay is illustrated with tlx tablet ""tsiusi rations indices of e c onomic gtosnh and development.
 A survey of the mOhary.es* political, busu.es*. and ec ono m i c aspects of the Alliance's second year, supplemented by official UA doc ument 2197 .
 The Alliance Alliance is celebrating its third year in existence . The Alliance will celebrate the third year of existence in the United States .
 Smirt writer* who urn C nrn i f n < ton rpmuwm 10 tr* erifta fufwikootac uf (he A&vkc. CoMrftwtiM) by hi Smirt writers .
 Chile', prrudrm traces the propmah and venous for krm.. phene eeoooaeic cooperation mat prvceskd the otabhshmem of the Athene* lor Proems, outturns the Alliance', ebyt
 A ntvk* of the wane tdjRtsn. obstacles, aad (nidMM. aa) of the rote of tht Check at the AJbenct lor present . Aad is a word for a person who fails to follow a
 A comprehensive review of AlUaact for Progress goals, aa examination of Latin American land reform p ro m u m . land reform . A study of exisiiag tax structures and the need for reforms . A review of the goals of the U.S. government .
 A study of tht prob km s confronting Latin American nations in the areas of do mes ti c dt v tl opm tn foreign trade, external assistance. and regional integration. CIAP. 2116 . CIAP .
 The ABtance for Progress is tty attain its ltd ito prospects lot t u t ii lt; ec o nomic tiiiininw of the Latin American community .
 A mttica a Chiefs of State, held in Puma del Earn, was part of the Alliance for Progress program . U.S. support for aa talargiment of the alliance program prior to the mart tag .
 Aa a n d sr seood in alhn u teas of Latin American his tory . An attempt to dturm n a the effects produ ce d by these c o nce p ts on the rate of law as a pe a ce fu l instrument for promoting
 Isrkgtiavaf to the creatioa ot Us, A n iao r t tee Pragm a and a re p re p ort oa the rate of to Fund at Experts. Visit the website to find out more about the project .
 Crtektam of *triom sep t e t s of the ARstawe pragma. tsg ot i a g y of the me of VSoastonara2123.
 The Ui tv err aaa » Castro; U4. a g y a n *f the turns Car Pt. 2114. The U4 . The U.S. TV show is based in New York City, New York .
 Alliance la la ""challener which t* more intricate and more difficult than that of any international economic and .octal pc OUT am ever before initiated hy the Free World"") and ncommendation for meet aw aw the challenne 2126 .
 An apprai-ai of accomplishment* of the Alliance for Fn-gres* *ia tear* after n wn first approved at I hr 1141 meeting in Uruguay .
 Ike li 5 Coorduuioe cl the Alliance lot Progress t tt April 19*2.2 1 outline-, the ohyrctnc* at the program 2136.2 . Ike li .
 If Sr r*FW*fw*iatt* for chan chowmg growth raw of dJtereai conntrie* for prnod lent)194ft 2132.194ft (2132.4m)
 Sccmit) KuvS A*vha-**0ur 1 inwti. <nd other* oft tvnt and r-rorsved future C S support lor the Alliance 2133. Sccmmit .
 A sutse* of cat program-. a* (.-All and track .* ks« 4r*rkrc4 counuir* the I '* I .nirtrtar on Its* and tk-tvI-c’Wvmt
 The present political role of the military in three caieeoriea of countries, <J) the mWuty's fuactiom and capabilities. and U.S. policy toward the Latin American military. and United States policy .
 An exnaUn n t ion of the rotes of IndmiHnBrelton and the population eiptoMon to changing society, changing society . The process of potokal d evel op m en ream political trends to Mexico is under way . An ex
 The Alliance for Progress and the Politics of Development in Latin America is a study of Latin America . The Alliance is based on the politics of development in the region .
 An uptmusiic dwc titt lon of the need for an ana prospects for ac hiev e m e n t* hy the Alb aura 2146. An upmusiics of the needs for ana prospects .
 A* attemto to tvalumc the ""ectmemy and efficinscy of VS atd oprrat tow*"" as a mea n s of pr n mo l la g the early aim etna of the *o*h of the Atbs
 Purpose* and acramrtttimtat* of the AWaace aassessed by ■ Soviet wrtter. Purpose* was defined by a Soviet wettler .
 Former member of Inter-American Defense Board describes machinery through which peace efforts are channeled . 2145. A former member of the board describes the machinery of peace efforts .
 Work presents instances of employment of the Rio Treaty to effect peaceful settlement of inter-American disputes . Review also reviews the creation of the system of peace and security .
 Progress in the program to negotiate the treaty designating Latin America as a nuclear-free zone . The treaty would designate the region as a free-zone .
 A study of the inter-American defense system to determine how it has met the threat of Communism . The inter-U.S. defense system is designed to protect against Communism .
 A review of the content of the Rio Defense act of 1947 and of action scheduled to be or ""needed"" to be . accomplished in Bogota in . 1948 . Rio Defense Act of 1947 .
 The Walter Lynwood Fleming Lectures delivered by the author ai LSU in 1941 . The author delivered the lectures at LSU University .
 He discusses the evolution of ihe American system, the resources and politics of South America, and the resources of the area . He also discusses commercial relations in the area, and tierra dorado .
 JDB in Atliani*'ior Progress. Progress. JDB's role as a key figure in the development of Atlianianiania*' ior Progress . JDB has been involved in the creation of the Atliania project .
 The Inter-American Bank is one of the largest banks in the world . The bank is based in New York City, New York, and Washington, D.C.
 Latin American 2153. Its prospective nature and organization, and its probable development*’* <0 ' al VO,Ume of re:>ourt ' s for Latin American .
 A review of the question of ''intervention"" as developed In interAmerican conferences since t928.928 . A review . of the . question of "intervention" as developed
 OAS provides for the protection of human rights in an enforceable treaty . Author poses and answers the questions r 1 > Could the OAS provide for the . protection of the . rights in a treaty be enforceable?
 In their exploration of the subject of the development of the American doctrine of non-intervention, the authors devote considerable attention to specific instances of United States intervention In the Western Hemisphere .
 A collection of papers presented at the December 1948 meeting of the Ihe American Political Science Association .
 William Manger. Evolving Pan Americanism’; Federico G Gil, “The Latin-Amcrlcan Viewpoint’”; . Federico Gil. ‘The Latin American-American Viewpoint.’ ; William Mangers .
 Latin American tendencies to associate their causes with U.S. actions in the hemisphere . Latin American tendency to associate causes with United States actions in ihe hemisphere .
 An examination of the issues involved and of the attempts to reach a settlement in the post-1962 dispute over diverting the waters of the Lauca River by Chile .
 The council's powers and performance have been described as 'functioning' by the council . The council has been criticised for its lack of transparency and effectiveness .
 A review ol (he nivloricjl) of the background ol the OAS. and an anulsvii of the virudure and operation of the organization since its reorganization :n iV4g.
 Background history of the development of the controversy, its causes, and the role of the OAS in its settlement . Background history . OAS role in settling the dispute .
 A brief discussion of Inter-American Congress, conferences, nd consultations from the Panama Congress of 1826 to tne Tenth Imer-American Conference of 1954 .
 Pro and con arguments on the proposal for the creation of a permanent peace keeping force by the members of the OAS 2169 .
 The role of the OAS in the arbitration of dispute, between member nations, is to be arbitrated . The OAS is the body of the Organization of the World Anti-Discrimination .
 Three lectures delivered at Holy Cross College prior to the Ninth International Conference of American States . The lectures were delivered at the Holy Cross .
 March-April 1948, and subsequently revised to incorporate actions taken at that conference . April 1948, revised to include actions taken from that conference. March-February 1948 .
 A comprehensive and scholarly history of the development of the idea and the machinery of the Oz\S and its antecedents . A comprehensive history of . the development . of the . idea and its . antecedors .
 Brief reviews of the role of the OAS in mediation of disputes in the 1948-1950 period . Brief reviews look at the mediation process between the two sides .
 Costa Rica versus Nicaragua, Haiti versus the Dominican Republic, and t 11 versus Haiti . The nations involved in the disputes were i 1 1 1 Costa Rica vs. Nicaragua, i2) Haiti vs. The Dominican Republic vs. Haiti .
 A Soviet analysis of the role of the OAS has been analyzed by the Soviet Union . Plans for reorganization of the Organization of Soviet Union were discussed in the 1980s .
 Director Gereral ot the OAS gives a Latin American viewpoint on the handling by the United States of its rela'ions with Latin America .
 An analysis of the role of LaUn America in world politics, designed for use as a text . The analysis is based on a study of the country's role in world affairs .
 An examination of the changes wrought in the inter-American system by the Third Special Inter-American Conference, Buenos Aires . The conference was held in Buenos Aires.
 A detailed examination of the contributions of two OAS units to ihe successful conclusion of the Dominican election of December 20, 1962 . The Technical Assistance Mission of 1961 and the OAS Observation Team of 1962 were both OAS teams .
 U.S. role so fostering Pan American movement, accommodation of U.SS policy to principles and procedures of OAS, and role in Western Hemisphere relations . United States role in fostering Pan Ami movement .
 The author, long associated with inter-American affairs, is one of the hemisphere's leading authorities on the subject about the subject .
 A probing of the problems posed for the OAS by the turmoil in Middle America and the continued rule of Castro as the dictator of Cuba . The OAS is the body of the Organization of the Arab world .
 The Regional Problem in America in America, Economic Cooperation and Pan Americanism, is a series of articles . The region's regional problem in America is a regional problem . Economic and political cooperation and Pan-Americanism is a key part of Pan Americanistism .
 An examination of the terms of the Protocol of Buenos Aires of 1967, which was offered as an amendment to the 1948 Charter of Bogotfi . The Protocol was proposed as a constitutional amendment in 1948 .
 Report of the Secretary General of the Organization of American States Regarding the Dominican Situation. Report of . the Secretary of the . Organization of the. American States regarding the Dominican . Situation .
 A description of the activities in the Dominican Republic of the OAS Secretary General . The OAS secretary general is currently in the country .
 An indication of the danger that the ""United-World"" concept holds for the “Western Hemisphere” concept . An example of the dangers of the "Western Hemisphere" concept .
 The Secretary General of the OAS compares and contrasts Latin America with Anglo America as to history, customs, culture, etc. etc. He speculates as to the future courses of action of the two areas .
 A criticism of .he opening ELCA session of 1948 and of the decision to create that organization . A criticism . of the . opening of the ELCAs session . of 1948 .
 Report prepared for the Fourth Extraordinary Meeting of the InterAmerican Economic and Social Council oi the OAS, held at Rio de Janeiro .
 A review of the ECLA doctrine, formulated and preached by Raul Prcbisch, which greatly influenced the planners of the Alliance for Progress . The doctrine was formulated by PrCBisch, who was influential in the planning of the alliance .
 Latin American approach :o, contributions to the U.N. and role in the United Nations . Latin American approaches to the UN have been criticized for their lack of transparency .
 An examination of 1400 votes in various United Nations meeting,'by Latin American nations during the first 10 years of the U.N.'s existence . Latin American countries voted for the first time in the last 10 years .
 Reports on ECLA, technical assistance, special fund, social activities; social activities, human rights; children's fund; refugee programs . ILO, FAO, UNESCO, UN, ICAO, IBRD, 1FC, IMF, IMCO; IMCO, G
 An analysis of the three basic institutions on which the interAmerican system rests . The interAmerican institutions are key to the success of interAmerican relations .
 An explanation of the functions of the cuhitdos in Spanish America under the Hapsburg kings of Spain . An explanation . of the function of the hulitdos under the Spanish kings .
 Charles W Arnade discusses political causes in a three-part analysis of political causes . Charles Arnade is the author of a new book, "Arnade"
 Arthur P Whitaker describes economic factors, and Bailey W Diffic concludes with comments on various aspects of the independence movement . Bailey Diffic also discusses the Scottish independence movement, with Arthur Whitaker discussing economic factors .
 The> cover a wide range of topics from native peoples and European colonists to colonial government, society, culture, economics, and the Church, to the movements for independence .
 Five appendices devoted to a study of histories and historians of the period . Five of the appendices are devoted to the study of history .
 A textbc.ik .ik covering discovery, exploration, colonization, international conflicts, institutional development, and the wars of independence in both Spanish and Portuguese America . A textBC.ik book .
 Brief descriptions of the survivals of colonial institutions and practices and their influence in current activities . Brief description of the surviving colonial institutions, practices and current activities. Brief descriptions . of the survivors of colonial institution and practices .
 The first seven chapters of this volume are devoted to a study of the role of the Spanish as explorers and colonizers in the southern United Stales and in present Mexico . This volume includes seven chapters .
 Early chronicles of the role of the dog in earls Spanish seitlemcm of America . Siories from the early chronicles .
 A very early textbook study of Spanish institutions and their functioning in the Western Hemisphere . The study was an early textbook on Spanish institutions .
 Volume is designed to “examine the evolution of the Latin American stales since the achievement of their independence’s independence,” the study says . Volume is . designed to . examine the evolution . of the . evolution of Latin American . stales . Since independence,
 As background for the story of the struggle for independence in the Spanish colonies, the author describes the racial groups in the colonies and their role in the revolutions . Jews, Masons, and Jesuits in the wars for independence .
 English and Irish volunteers who served under Bolivar in the wars of liberation in northern South America . Largely the story of English and . Irish volunteers .
 The nature and extent of involvement of German banking houses in the financing of Spanish colonization efforts in Latin America is revealed . The nature of the involvement of the banks involved in the funding of the Spanish colonial effort .
 This two-volume set constitutes one of the most comprehensive collections of scholarly materials on Latin America readily available to the student .
 Latin American sections carry the story through the Wars of Independence . The Latin American section of the book traces the story back to the American Revolution .
 Author concerned with gauchos of Argentina, with Mexican charros, corridos, and Calaveras, and with the North American cowboy . Author is concerned with Argentina, Mexico, Argentina, and the American cowboy.
 Illustrations include copies of color paintings by Castells Capurro, Walker, Nebel, Pcnelon, Castellanos .
 Spanish naval unit tried to restore Spain's control over the west coast of South America . A detailed account of the causes for and the events of the war that ensued .
 A brief review of significant developments In the first half of the Twentieth Century . A brief Review of significant Developments In the First Half of the Twenty-Century .
 It undertakes to explain how Latin America has come to be what it is today . Latin America is Latin America's most important country, with Latin American roots .
 A half century has patted since this volume went to press, the reader will find much to interest him In in pages . Although a half-century has been patted, this volume will be a good read .
 A comprehensive college textbook covering the Latin American area from pre-Columbian natives to political developments in I960 . A comprehensive book on Latin American history . The Latin American country is Latin America's most populous region .
 The volume will be of little value to those interested in post-1945 developments . In spite of the author’s excuse for not bringing the subject matter up to dace, the book will be little value .
 An anthology featuring the works of the principal U.S. students and teachers of the various aspects of the history of Latin America . An anthology of the works o( the principal . students and . teachers .
 Principles of international law and new declarations and maolutioos on the subject . Principles of International Law and new declaration .
 A reprint of a collection of . variouc lecture* delivered in the period 1941-1942 and originally published in 194.1 .
 A Communist portrayal of the history of the Western Hemisphere by the long-lim Communist leader in the U.S. A long-time Communist leader .
 The first portion, lor the most part, surveys topics having application to the whole or considerable parts of {parish America . The first part of this article is a collection of articles written in New York City .
 A history of the peoples and institutions that had a pan in the Spanish colonial empire in America in America . A history . of the people and institutions . that had the . peoples and the institutions that . had a . pan . in the . colonial empire .
 A reprint edition of a scholar I set. parts of which were orientally published in 1911 . Volumes 2-4 contain chapters on Spanish colonial colonial drsdopmrnis in the Americas .
 2266. A h»Mo*> loW »n I he Jurtcv jounuK. and ktrm ol the purItopanh in making 2266 . A h »Mo**> LoW »N I he . JurtCV j
 A Mud> of 'ifch Spanish intuiuitom in ihr New Wo*k as (he efKtvmeivjj. ihe t hurch. the Slate, thr voi»»n>. ami d*her s*prvt« of
 Journals of Spanish land and saa explorers in the region from Texas to California . Translated of Spanish explorers .
 Trade and Navigation between Spain and the Indies in the Time of the Hapsburgs . Spain's trade and navigation between the Indies was the most significant trade between the Spanish and the Dutch .
 The story here presented covers the vkc royahy as an instiurioo ha both New Spain {modem Mexico) end Spanish South America .
 Viceroy as an administrative. and military trader and as a patron of adocation. of hosptiats. and of charily. It dr»c ri bes .
 Author ranees over Latin American history tram djarnviry to mid-Twentieth century and casts many a critical glndte at V S motors loaned Latin America to V S motorworks .
 A statistical comparison is a statistical comparison of U.S. and South American newspapers . The comparison is based on a comparison of published news stories .
 An Inquiry into the availability and influence of mass media In Latin America . An Inquiry . into the . availability and . influence of . mass media in Latin America. An inquiry into the available and influence . of mass . media in the region . In Latin American .
 A brief report on facts pertaining to newspaper, radio, and TV subscription and listening . Report on facts .
 Cirdenas government confiscated American-owned property by Mexican government . L.Sccrpts from a wide cross section of Western Hemisphere newspapers and periodicals on the subject of Mexican confiscation .
 The role of the proletariat in strikes, nationalization of industry and agrarian reform arc described in brief terms by Soviet writers . The role was described in a brief term in a series of Soviet publications .
 A three-part review of managerial attitusies toward executive training and productivity, pension legislation in Chile, and the role of the Chilean labor union leader . The review also includes a three part review of Chilean pension legislation and labor union legislation .
 An explanation of the different method* of handling labor relation* in the three countric* and observation* on ho« ihc*c method* have influenced the economic development process. An explanation .
 An riaminalHui of cmrioymerit structure and patterns in general and ol the employment of Use tabor force in varimrs fields of endeavor, especially in urban employment 2284.4. Use of Use of use of force invarimrs field of endeavor
 A >*>ci«ci«i«logical«ocul psychological » » » . Use developing economy of Chile 228$. ”( ommunivm and the Labor Movemcnls of Latin America Charles A Page. ”
 An examination of the success of Communists in penetrating and guiding the action* of Latin American labor unions . The Communist Party's influence in Latin America's labor unions can be traced back to Cuba .
 The process by which labor organized and gained influence after the assassination of Trujillo was documented .
 A careful inquiry into the influence of Chilean social security legislation on the Chilean economy . Social security legislation is a key part of Chile's economy .
 A Study of the Social Question and the Industrial Relations System in Chile in Chile . Chile . A study of the social question and the industrial relations system in Chile.
 His product is a “study of the genesis and the first fourteen years of development of the legal industrial re la tun, system in Chile’s .
 ihc distribution in Chilean employment reflects urban concentration rather than genuine economic development 2299.2299. An attempt lo show that ihC distribution in Chile reflects urban concentration .
 Results ol tjs intersicws in a 10 nation survey conducted in Ihc period l »S« l«u.u. l«U.C. The survey was conducted in a period of 10 years . It was conducted over the course of that period .
 A brief history of the labor movement since the death of Dictator Gomez in 1935 . The death of the dictator in 1935 has been the subject of much of the country's labor movement .
 Findings as to the social and economic condition of Indians working on 30 coffee fincas in the 1946-1947 period . Findings are based on the work done in the 1930s and 1940s .
 An attempt to determine, through the use of sociological methodology, why Mexican farm laborers shift to urban factory employment . The study will use sociological methods to determine why workers shift from farm labor to urban employment .
 Standards of living of Latin American laborers compared with those in the United States, labor organizations (national and international) and Communist influence in labor organizations . Workers' standards of living in Latin America compared with that in the U.S.
 The nature and estent of cooperation between U.S. and Latin American labor movements . The nature of cooperation in Latin America .
 A study of labor politics and labor relations under the free government of Pardo.15-1919; Bustamante.45-48; and Prado.56 19622299.56 .
 Problem-* trv.iicd by labor, and settlements for.Oil on the >:o*ernmem corporation by labor after . labor after the < \pr-.*prt.Mion of foreign oil companies .
 A review of the twentieth century efforts of organized tabor to participate in the political process in several countries . A brief review of  efforts to participate . in the . twentieth century .
 Article is based on an ILO report used in a discussion of labor-management relations at an Inter-American Study Conference held at Montevideo in November I960 . Article was used in discussion of Labor-management Relations at an I960 conference .
 An examination of guarantees for labor found in the constitutions and in legislative ac's . An examination . of guarantees found in constitutions . and legislative .ac's .
 A “broad picture"" of the Brazilian labor force, of employment problems and policies, and of the supply of and demand for trained manpower. A ‘broad picture’ of the Brazil labor force.
 An examination of various aspects of the Peruvian situation by an official in the Ministry of Labor . Peruvian official: "The situation is very different"
 In addition to studies of individual labor movements in 19 countries, the author presents a picture of economic and political forces affecting labor . The author presents the picture of international labor organizations in the area .
 Latin America's two principal non-Communist labor organizations and of the issues which divide them . The nature and character of Latin American labor organizations are discussed .
 Accomplishments of the five congresses of the PAFL held during its lifetime, 1918-27 .
 History of participation by bbor organizations . In three different attempts to creme a national planning system . History of bbor participation .
 A review of the attitudes of different groups toward participation by labor representatives in national planning operations . The study was conducted by labor leaders in the United States .
 A thorough-going piece of research on the labor force in the Peruvian textile industry . In Peru, the textile industry is one of the world's biggest employers .
 Problems in the administration of labor legislation revealed in a seminar held in Lima, Peru, in October 1955 .
 A history of the drafting and operation of the law to regulate the movement of migratory Mexican workers into the United States . The law is a history of its impart on Mexico and on United States relations with that country .
 Labor's gains in the post-WW II period in various countries were largely due to labor's organization, leaders, strikes, wages .
 Authors trace the history of organized labor In various countries, the growth of the Inter-American labor movement, and the role of labor In politics . Authors trace history of labor in the United States .
 The Role of the Bracero in the Economic and Cultural Dynamics of Mexico is described as a 'bracero' in Mexico . The role of the bracero is key to Mexico's economic and cultural development .
 An inquiry into the great existing gap separating tabor law and labor practices in Latin America . Tabor law is a key part of Latin American labor practices .
 A description of the “traditional pattern of labor organization” prevailing in the Zona da Mata in the Brazilian State of Minas Gerais. A description .
 Analyses of employment changes in the 1925-1950, and 19501962 periods, review of present trends . i:nd the presentation of certain hypotheses relevant to changes that might occur by 1975. i:and the presentation . of certain . hypotheses . to . present . changes that
 A body of information on rights of employment, legislation, pay. conditions of employment . assembled for use at an lLO-sponsorcd meeting in Lima in December 1954 . The information was assembled at an LLO-sponsored meeting .
 A review of Spanishand Portuguese-American literature from the sixteenth to the twentieth century . The review is a look at Spanish and Portuguese literature in the modern world .
 C hoice products of the pen of leading I atin American writers (rum the colonial period to midtwentieth century)
 Con venations with LatinAmerican Writers,uis Harss and Barbara Dohmann. Harss: "Latin American Writers"
 Studies of the lives and works of ten 1 atin American novelists banal on interviews and reading of their numerous productions. Studies of these authors are often banal .
 Juan Kulfo, C arlos I nettles,ahriet C.areia Maiquez. and Maim Vargas I losa. Juan . Maim . Vargas . Maquequez. Maquerez . Juan .
 An anthology of poetry and prose compositions ot the major Spanish and Portuguese writerol Latin America who have wrutin in the period since 1940 . Includes poetry, prose compositions .
 Ulus. \ ktn » »»»»Rv oversii'w of the I’SAF mission Svsiem in I alin \mcru.i uhicvtixe. personnel, *«sM»;ntt’cn|
 Vers brief d»%viisoon »»l employment of Bolts ian and Paraeuav.m An forces in ihe lut* lun conflict 2339 . Vers brief brief d.m. An forces were employed in 2339. The United States and Russia
 American t'niversilies Field Stall Reports . Sen ice hast Coast South A merit a Series . Sen. Sen. Ted Cruz: "I'm not going to let it go"
 No May Jun 1959. 29 39. 39. \ kt»»»cu'Moii 'in N|*ar:»hJ » » »»f . » »*|*cst* of m-litar-*m m farm .
 D.oid WihkI 1 orulon I lie ln*litntc for Strategic Slmlic* Nr*' 24 pp 9tri. (9tri. J. D.O. O.W.I 1/2)
 S It* »*>rj II M * 5 a Aspcv't' of the I aim American Policy ot Ihe United Stair*.” he ouilinr*. analy/r*. and rrtOci/r* United States p>'
 Author idemilie* and de'cribr* ""new"" miluamm aroma in the pM-WW It period that 6 dorinaubhrd from (be ""old"" mllilarom prevalent wncr (he laios. and
 A hixlorivat review ‘f the rok ol duoaioe* and auhiaty kadrr* in republican llrpamc AmetKa. Ametka. A review “f” and ‘auhiat�
 An jiuIim* ' »*f the foie the iMtHof) pL »>rJ bft»rrti lAV) and IMS* joj >n jwcssmrM id mtittjf) ifltoti
 A brief catalog of lome of (be different civic action project*) currently supported by the different branchn of the Argentine military establishment . Jun I-Z6S. pp sx lllm Ill Military Institution and Influences .
 Chile, and Colombia; Volume J of Ccnta Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ecuador . Volume J was published in Volume J, Volume J. Chile, Colombia, Colombia .
 An attempt to ""idtntify some of the ‘inar ed i ent* . . . patterns' of civU-mllfcsry relations that have developed in Araentina .
 Chile and Peru since they achieved independence from Spain . Appendtaes A B, and C list military revolt I in the three nations .
 Author runes and answers several questions concetniac the retatiombips that have cabled and non prevail la different Latin American nations . Suggests approaches to be used in further study of these leieisooshtps .
 A brief history of Colombian support for the U N mutual security efforts introduces the study of Colombia support for that effort . A review of the impact of those support activities on Colombia's domestic affairs is reviewed .
 Mrs. bcginmag with Prestdem cirdross in 1933. reduced the power and influence of the Army ia oat to n al posit is2359.
 A study of the “uadtiioaal vs. atodtraiaauoa’' dichotomy that has rent the armed forces since 1930 . The dichotomy has been the subject of a study by the U.S. military .
 Bricks, of histories of Honduran Air force, aad a report on ■hr types of aircraft o pe rated by the HAT .
 Twenty Yeats of Orpoti.'elhw and 7famine by the l'ailed Stales Marine Corps lames H McCrockltn. Lames McCrockln.
 Background, geography, political heritage, industrial inter-dependence . History ol cooperation, defense planning, techniques of hemisphere defense . Inter-Amerkan defense and U.S. 2366 .
 Students, faculty, curriculum, curriculum and curriculum, and field trip (foreign visitation I program) program . Students, teachers, students, parents, students and faculty members .
 Compo*it»ofl ofatin American fleet*. vudabtbi) lor AiW »mkr, operation ol UN IT AS maneuver*, and future rede* of ihnr uuo in hcmrwpoetr defeme 2369. Compo*.
 A iracint of ihc antecedent of the different role* of the I at in American military . The I at at in the U.S. military.
 References to Latin America can be readily located by use of I he Index 2372 . Volume is world-wide in us scope .
 The lUBkliVRUiRU of tbc m »**iofi the o »f4i »i/iih« of (be Mrieafl army bomta and l*(l. »« term* of aunniftt , tr
 A >rH*(8«ht of Bibtzfi taffacmr taffafmr tbr tbr and l S fwtocy io«ard mbtafT frpnr* 2J75. The Bibtzf is the world's first Bibtz
 I9J-I99. "I99" is a reference to the World Series 1,000,000 . "I9J" is an example of the world's first time a person has been in contact with the U.S. government .
 An .imvtjtnl iramUnon of a ipmh dctivrrrd in September Iv** h> Alternate lieneral l uis Rodolfo (M«vSle/ Evsemiaili the ume iludi appears m ihe
 A retie* of Edwin Lieuwtn'i Arms and Potato in Latin America iNr. New York. i nr.
 IfiUor* »*f I aitn \mtt%%ett* ccpciwn.e with (he milliard's involvement m political affairs. opectall* in ihe vhangev in the s’ffKr i>( chief
 Notes. fiej »araiH'«>’i and events **f ihe (Klt*hrr I® to revolution (hat h f*Ht*hi \ areas is* power 2313.13. ihe) .
 Washington Institute for the Comparative Study of Political Systems . The study was published by the Washington Institute of Comparative Studies . The results were published in 2006 and 2007 .
 Ih( . . . rate* (H imcrcM to Mudents of I alin American affairs are (he chapter* reporting on project* in Brazil) Ih. rate* .
 Twentieth century hbtory of the Bo'trian Army, the subslitutioo of the civil mUtta tor the army by President Pax in 1*3}. hit rebuiidiaa of Us* army and ctmcentrattoo of ita t
 As inquiry into the poim-vi role ot the armed forces in the . period tram 1*16 to April 1963 .
 A Mgxp ‘d fbr fk*hr <A thr nditon an thftr yMpeir* of ,sH4Rt«t thoa< ia *h*sh ci *»’ r* MMrtf
 An examination of the ""program, otiani/ation. political tactics and strains” of the . ""tenenies” I lieutenants) in the Vargas led recoil of 1*10. The . Vargas’s political strategy and
 The author seeks to determine the relationship of the icnrnies to other croups . He seeks to evaluate their crlormanse as state and national officials .
 The number of military interxcntions in the political process from 1406 to 1465 is a compilation of certain methods of sc of in* the dilfeiew nations . Author constructs carious models and indexes and indexes .
 International Security Affairs, discusses the reason for U S political interest in and U S. p-titles toward Latin America, . U S devotes most of his attention to the Latin American military .
 An 4«al> viv of the varied role* of the 1 alin Amerkan military, typrv of military establishment v budgetary MipfiMi of the mill* ur>. and U S. policy in re (he I atm American military 24*3.
 A very brief look at trend* in populat i«*n rrt»*lh. agricultural production, and educational development 24*5. la America iMlina de Hoy .
 A collect ion of wniiRp by leading I alin AmrrKifl »mrr* on a variety of lopKv i* drugned a> a> textbook for 'luJctHi of (hr Sfemvh language) A
 Its Imp-xi oe AmttivjB f oertjn Mk> 24§7, -Andean Kepubiiciici. II rtuho. The Cuban Revolution. the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban revolution .
 A re*»»e-* » f reveni i development* by mi specialist* Thex and th*.r appraisal* ale konaM M Vhr*c*c»dcf. Thex is a re*** » . Thex, th*.
 November I V l gf ’2 I v-je. Mate t tuvc »'it’s November .
 urban development, agrarian development and its influence on such countries as llrupuay. Uemoeiacy. ednxatiot . urban development and agrarians development . influence . influence in the development of such countries .
 Abridged texts of speeches, and floor comments thereon, delivered at an Overseas press Chib symposium in March 1 .
 An 18,938-mile visit to the twentv Iatin American republics . One of the author’s typical ‘Inside’ volumes, based in whole, or in part, on the author''Inside'
 Observations based on author’s 1966 visit to ten nations of South America . Author's visit to South America was based on visit to 10 nations .
 Area I ""The Individual and the Family."" discusses such topics as birth control . Area I discusses birth control, birth control and the individual's relationship with the family .
 Area IV, “The National Level,” treats such topics as socio-economic structures, integration of the Latin American nations, and inter-Americanism . Area IV focuses on socio-economy structures, the integration of Latin America nations and inter Americanism .
 Area V, Latin America in the World,” is concerned with such varied national topics as trade, communications, military relations, food production and distribution, and the Universal Church . Area V is concerned about such . topics as . trade, . communications, and military relations .
 Author analyzes the stages of Latin American growth and survevs the problems of Guatemala, Peru, Venezuela, Cuba, Cuba . Author: Guatemala, Peru, Peru and Venezuela are among the countries in Latin America .
 Mexico, and Bolivia, and presents some rceonwvT.datioi > for future U.S. action in the area .
 A small volume condensing much of what the author has written in separate volumes about the new nations . The volume condenses much of the author's work .
 Robert J Alexander. “l.aiMi America anu the Communist Bloc""; David Burks. ‘laiMiAmerica anu.u. the Communist . Bloc’.
 Communism, politics, and economics precede reviews of the individual nations . Communism, the Alliance for Progress, politics and economics are reviewed of each nation's policies .
 A hasty review of Latin America’s past and present with some attenticn given to its problems and its leaders . Latin America's problems and leaders .
 Ecuador has a "fragmented society" and a "Fragmented Society" in Ecuador .
 Roberto Oliveira Campos, “Relations between the United States and 1 atin America”; Lincoln Gordon ""InterAmerican Tensions and the Alliance for Progress"; David Rockefeller, ""Economic Development: The Lessons and the Challenge’; Jos£ Figueres .
 German Arciniegas ""I atin America in a Developing World”: l ran s ois Fontaine and Max Kohnstamm .
 Wuw/ic"" MVefc. and similar publications on various aspect' of 1 atin American hi'torv and society for the period 1950-19«2.2.
 A collection of II papers presented at a colloquium held by the Center for Strategic Studies .
 James Petras and Maurice /ciilin, “M.ucrs and Agrarian Radicalism"": Torcuato S Di Telia. Toruato S di Telia . The Italian-born Italian was a member of the Communist Party of Italy .
 The Rra/ilian Case”; F'duardo Galeano, ""Uruguay; Promise and Betrayal""; Pablo Gon/alr/ Casanova. “The Rra /ilian Case"; "Uruguayan; Promise & Betray
 James O’Connor: The Dynamics of an Agrarian and Semicapitalist Revolution""; James O'Connor. ""; James . O‘Connor. The Dynamics . of an Agricultural Revolution"; James O.Connor.
 A reprint, in large part, of material originally published in The Sinn.com .
 Bolivia, Cuba, and Cuba, the impact of foreign capital, and the role of religion . Bolivia and Cuba are two countries with the highest per cent of the population in the world .
 A collection of ten articles presented at the April l%5 meeting of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .
 S9-I960 by a Latin American studs group sponsored b> the Twentieth Century Fund .
 An elementary survey of trends, problems, international relations. and the Alliance for Progress. and an elementary survey. and a survey of global relations.
 I ord Bryce, “The Relation of the Races m South America""; Arthur P Whitaker. Arthur Whitaker . Arthur P. Whitaker, ‘I ord Bryce’; ‘Bryce’.
 Questions as to the need for large armed forces raised by the former President of Colombia . Similarities and differences of Latin American nations .
 Chapter 8 in the annual foreign policy survey conducted by the Council on Foreign Relations . Chapter 8 is chapter 8 of the Council of Foreign Relations' annual survey .
 The second half is a collection of readings on various topics and on the individual countries .
 Author briefly discusses recent developments ir. eight South American nations and follows wiih readings by several authors on various topics and individual nations . Author discusses the recent developments in the South American region . Author also discusses South American issues in the region .
 A “commentary on some of the similarities and differences" between the nation-building process in Latin America and in other parts of the world . A ‘commentary’ on some similarities and . differences"" between the nations-building processes in Latin . America and other parts
 Ten essays presented at the Conference on Obstacles to Change in America, held in Chatham House, London, in February IV6 .
 A discussion of such obstacles as ""populist"" movements and anti-Americanism, and of such topics as the role of the urban middle sectors, post-WW It developments, inflation, and the attitude of the intelligentsia. A discussion .
 A collection of papers presented at UNESCO meetings in Sdo Paulo and Geneva in 1954 .
 Origins of Iatin American philosophy, most famous preachers of philosophical thought, and influences of on Latin American development . Most famous preacher of philosophy thought, was Iatin .
 Richard N Adams, “Political Power and Social Structures""; E J. llobsbawm. Richard N . Adams, "Political Power" and "Social Structures"; E. llobobsbwm. Adams .
 Jos. Figueres, ""Tnc Problems of Democracy in Latin America" : Jesus de Gindez, ""Anti American Sentiment in Latin American""; Germin Arciniegas. Jos. A. dindez .
 These include travel reports, fiction, editorial and journalistic comments, history, political analyses, poetry, art reviews, and book reviews . We also feature travel reports and fiction .
 Brazilian economist who served as Minister of Planning under the Government of Castelo Branco, 1964-1966 . A collection of papers, lectures, addresses, speeches, and unpublished manuscripts .
 A British author, the Latin American correspondent for The Observer since 1948, has written the text .
 John P Gillin, ‘Some Signposts for Policy ’; Allan R Holmberg, “Changing Community Attitudes and Valles in Peru: A Case Study in Guided Change""; Richard W Pafh. Gillin. ’. ‘Change Community
 Richard N Adams. United States Assistance in a Revolutionary Setting”; Charles Wagley, ""The Brazilian Revolution: Social Changes since 19J0""; Richard N. Adams . United States assistance in a revolutionary setting”
 A collection of 11) papers presented at the Conference on Latin American Studies held in R»o de Janeiro .
 Included are discussions on economics, political science, history, sociology, sociology and economics .
 Famous British political scientist on a fourmonth journey in South America before WW I 2482 . Observations by famous British scientist on four months journey in . South America .
 An rntrr.itnint; Mu lupin tmly that dcrivo much of itsiluc from ihc* hbcr.il lifting o # rn.iteri.il from original sources . An rnnrr.il lifted o
 A revision of the author's 1W*2 volume of the same title in which he cvimines the ueoooeriph.iph.v people, economy, labor problems .
 A collection of 12 articles, most of which first appeared in Monthly /fewer. in 1962 and 196.1. in 196.2 .
 Andrew G Frank, ""The Varieties of Land Reform""; Paul M Sweezy, ""A Great American |Caruenas)""; Andrew G. Frank, "The Variety of Land reform""; "A Great America | Caruenaas)"; "The
 Harvey O'Connor: "Ihe Janus Faces of 20th Century Bourgeois Revolution""; Harvey O’Connor. ""; Harvey . Ihe . Janus faces of 20. century Bourgeois . Revolution"; Harvey O.Connor. Ihe. Janus:
 A Christian Country""; Sebastian Salazar Bondv, “Andes and Sierra Mantra”; Manuel Agustin Aguirre. A Christian . Country . A Christian country""; "Andes"; "Sierra" .
 Fnev then enumerate a number of complaints .leainst ioici^n investors and describe foreign bunncs> practices that ate the suh^vt of criticism . Fnv then describes foreign investors' practices .
 Ihe author's thesis i« that the absence ot a hi'lorv of actpiamtai'.scship with threeKtors accounts for ihc failure of I atm \ioerua to l-e icvcpti'e t«*
 V' M »t ; s m\x*bikl m ant n itt.malt m>i and flow the consent has ml bn tts cd development in the last three decades 2493. V'M »t; s m .t ; .
 R.xus ot ami. roles of middle class parties, and how the U.S. can best cope with nationalism . The role of middle-class parties in the United States is to blame .
 Reports by 15 specialists on various aspects of nationalism in I atin America .
 Definition of growth of. and influence of . nationalism in different 1 atin American nations .
 A definition of nationalism and a discussion of its expressions . In such aspects as patriotism, social value, and ideology . A discussion of patriotism and social value .
 The National Revolutionary Ideology is a Latin American nationalist ideology . The Jacobin Left is a challenge to nationalinm from the Jacobin left, other Latin American ideologies .
 An examination of several aspects of Argentine nationalism such as the nationalism of manifest destiny, creole nationalism, porteilo nationalism, integral nationalism, Pcron’s nationalism, economic nationalism, and military nationalism . The study was published in Argentina's first published book, "Argent
 An analysis of significant aspects of Cuban nationalism, especially of (he influence of Jos< Marti on Fidel Castro) An analysis . of . the influence of (Jos. Marti) on . Fidel Castro . The influence of Marti and Fidel Castro on Cuban nationalism .
 Leaders, proposed programs, agitation, and accomplishments of the Student Federation of Havana Univetsily in the late 1920's and early 19.10’s.
 Specific examples of nationalistic developments in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Mexico . Briefer accounts of examples in five smaller nations .
 A review of Spanish and English-language literary references to machismo . The review is based on a review of some of the best known machismo literature .
 Origin and development of the institution, national laws endorsing it. and examples of Us application. Us application .
 Historical fasts of life, and a view of prospects tor creating 'democratic and representative government tn 1 aim America "" 2514. 2514 .
 An analysts of the conflicting roles ol government bureaus rat' in the (asc of a changing economic, and or psilittcal environment 2515. An analyst of the . conflicting roles in the . changing economic . environment .
 Ideas and movements that have influenced Latin American history since World War I 2516. 2516 .
 Charles G Fenwick and Arthur P Whitaker have written about Latin America's role in the Inter-American Regional System . Russell A Fiugibbon is the author of a book on Latin America .
 An examination of the political institutions and the forces of political change in Mexico . Mexico's political institutions, the institutions of the Mexican government .
 Volume affords an opportunity to view Latin American institutions through the eyes of the French writer and to compare his views with the rno-e widely available one'
 Extended versions of papers read at the 1949 meeting of the American Political -Science Association .
 A Study designed to influence students of Latin American politics to . Slew their specialty as a pari of the broader area of comparative politics and modern political .
 Author describes how ihe urban middle groups pained political power in Uruguay . He shows how they have influenced ihe social and econoniic orientation of the governments of Uruguay . Author: Urban middle groups have influenced social and economic orientation of Uruguay's governments .
 An attempt to dt-teimine the degree of correlation, if any, between Political development and socioeconomic development . Political development is an attempt to determine if there is a correlation .
 Neale J Pear-on. “l atin American Peasam Pressure tiroups ,mo the Modcrnizanon Process”; Kalman M Silseri tea.rrship / orm.it,on and Modetni/iiion
 T355p. of lexas Press. Univ. of Lexas Press .
 Political Croups and Political Functions; 4 Government Structures and Authoritative Functions; and 5. Political C Groups and Political functions; . Political Cgroups and Political . Functions; . 4 Government. Structures . and 4 Government . Structures; . Authoritative functions; and . Political
 Observations by the author in Indian communities in Guatemala and Mexico .
 A study based on the findings of three groups of Latin American Experts on Public Administration . The study was conducted by three Latin American experts .
 The use ot “non-Marxian class analysis"" to interpret I atin American political phenomena 2537. 2537 . The use of non-Marxist class analysis to interpret American politics is an example of American politics .
 Out of date for a number of countries which have modified constitutions since that date . Now out of date .
 A list prepared especially for the use of students, attorneys, and others in translating Latin-American constitutions and laws into English .
 He points out that “Nowhere are constitutions more elaborate and less observed” than those in the U.S. He points to the fact that there are no more elaborate constitutions in the world .
 An examination of the contents of Latin American constitutions and comments on the origin and efficacy of certain constitutional provisions . An examination . of the origins of the . constitutions . and the efficacy of some constitutional provisions are discussed .
 Social principles incorporated in Latin American constitutions in the twentieth century . An examination of social principles in Latin America constitutions . A look at the social aspects of the Latin American constitution .
 An exploration of the causes of caudilllsm and its influence, and references to some of its better known practitioners . An exploration into the causes and influence of some of the best practitioners .
 A listing of presidential assassinations since IKS. with comparisons of the incidents and some conclusions as to causes and future prospects facing chief executives. A list of the most recent assassinations of presidents .
 Soviet attempt to show that the U.S. was involved in post-1930 military takeovers of Latin America . Soviet attempt was an attempt to prove that the United States was involved .
 In the light of recent event', the reader wiU find of interest this 44-year-old commentary on the Institution ol dictatorship .
 A brief review of the ups and downs of dictatorships In Latin Aoterkt after i9JJ, and particularly after 1952 . i9J: The ups & downs of Latin American dictatorships in the 1950s and 1960s .
 A brief general review of the reasons why dictatorship flourished and a brief characterization of a number of dictators . A brief description of dictators and a few dictators .
 The influence of foreign loans, rights of asylum and exile, foreign educational Influences, foreign philosophies, Communism, and neofasclsm. influence . influence .
 A brief examination nf the reasons why caudillos exist and how they function . The reasons why they exist and function are explained .
 An analysis of the exercise of executive power by Latin American leaders . Latin America's leaders have exercised executive power in the past . Latin American presidents have been accused of corruption .
 A brief compariso nof the accomplishments of President Victor Paz Estenssoro of Bolivia and President Rdmulo Betancourt of Venezuela . A brief comparison of their accomplishments is made between the two .
 Fiyures. \n attempt to understand the phenomenon of political W't.i fulit v >n a l uli'i in I aim Vinrrii.m f*■ v»*im».»n-h> rx. nimnc
 An attempt to malx/r |i »liiu.il »>r""*jopn.eni. through the 10c ol xt.itisttl trvhfi .jnrs 2561.il . The attempt is an attempt to make
 I jHt< S-n j-fn-p• • * r •* -rt* v . * ■ ■ ' f ’ V “ • ' s . tTFOUTICM FAFTttt 2572. IJHt < S
 Mow ( hftsttun deimtvraw »n | atm America differs from the f'uropcaninetv and i e« »untrv*hv-country examination of the spread of the movement 2575. Mow .
 Of some v line to students of I atm America for its brief ref creme I** f at in Ameriun aspects of the movement . Of some of the v line of some v lines to students .
 Present •ntluefuc and future r»sle of Christian IVm*Kratu •*r/am/atiens m I aim Amciisd 2578.
 Icejl and if »slitutu>nal pressnptt«*ns and imraf artv striKture and programmatic schema "" 2571 electoral Systems. Electoral Systems.
 Rilvrt F MeNivotl pp 26< 281. m Paul Kramer and Kidvrt . McNic . Paul Kramer .
 In the process the nut In TF roml« out the characteristics IhsM diflerrntiate the prevent (hft'lion Democratic pa ft lev from traditional Catholic parties 2584. In the . process the . nut In tf roml » out the . characteristics
 A ro»h 1 yenefal rekK» of influences and moccmrnt> at '•oik m I ;<nn Amcru. A ro »h . of influences, influences and . influences . at 'Oikm I ; <nn Am
 Some comment »m the role of S*viali*t panics and d d«Htrinr* m 1 atm Amcfuj Ms*stl> on a larger theme .
 IVmorratK Parlro have an uirtlaMe have rn claw atIrarKo are invapahte of meeting a miliiarv situation . IVmoratK Parrro have been uirtreated . IrarKo have been bitten by a monster
 A stud* describes the term’s of *hctf dedtsattor tt . Thetf prtAljiPevl idcvU> is a stud*
 PT 4 k > No«v V 7'C thweSts i* |\>'.itRol pan **%; rtr,u« t** tM jatr »f »« ivVa* »-n t hnat*.*s (kw
 A iur**»f) *tud> of the ideologic* of the major political parliev 2597. Aiur** »f) Aur***tud > of the . ideologic of the the . major political . parlieve 2597
 Ameiiran rioups 2598. A rci«» ol the -uirin. development. and philosophic it themes ot < hiivitun IVm.m. HiivitUN IVm .
 An tnuuirv mio the belief', the dextrine' c'fwui'ed. and the n»*ntr)butH»n' **f I atm Xmciaa * leading p*n*uJore» *uv
 An anal"")* of %«*mr of the *ntmv' »d Wader* of “political thought"" co'enne vari**U' peru’d' s*r ituormcnt' 2682. An . anal"
 Vtitudcv among Ihe SpamshspeaLmg Imelligenivia in the ( aribhean “ Manuel Maltkmado Denis. Denis. “
 Notes \ siitds of the I at.n VrtHUvdh mteikstuat mask* ls*f the phupcssc »*l detefm.nttt,h**-* >n!!.*u,rr events m his
 I,,,jir, ,n Pan II irrai dr,rlnpmmi, in ,pr,ilk‘ emintnc 2621. the People and Politics of latin America. I,,,.jir’s . the People . and Politics
 2222. X tr,i*cJ ,ri,u,n nl a enllrifr Irxllss'k Ilf*l puhltdwd b> Wi” WiUum** »n WW) 2622.
 V ..wlc*Jix*n *>f 21 'iwheN pfcrjrcJ cspr^Mlh fiv this volume tlw .miKdx jn«l their subjects arr Manin l bireslJer “Mexico
 Ut M Hf.i/il Paul M Prnv?*:t -v, l ' Vr.n. '*a; ; r j« Miulv ts i)**sik.nrit In rote* mhH Uem« »:
 I 13.iphic DivlnbutKtn of Ihc Pitpulahon i>i I atm AitKiK.i amJ kccMtr.il IVvcIitprsK-nt Pmtftitc' fan :tr
 Pjcau-i» \ lann-* ti \ *»i It; * rp MS jlO •M 4 . lotvrr.'l VS; raSus m Mos*' l VViwt :.n .mo.m . Pjc
 Whal Price I vasnm ''* and Irene B Taetiber, “Population Growth in Latin America; Paradox of Development” ibid. Whal price is $1.5 billion .
 Statistics 01 the imputation explosion in Mexico, Central America, and C u ribbean Islands, and the capability of the natural resources of the . population to continue to support the population . Statistics 01: The population explosion is the result of a population explosion in the region .
 C'huracivri>tic negative approaches to the subjects and more recent positive analyses have been taken on the subject .
 An examination of Latin American reaction (principally in Brazil and Colombia) to United States and other efforts to encourage familv planning and other types of birth control programs . The study was published in 1998 and 2008 .
 A review of various factors influencing the increase in population and the influence the population explosion has on the economy . The population explosion is the result of a population explosion in Australia .
 A collection of to papers most arc directly related to Latin America) on population problc.. -. prepared as background reading for the delegates to the Pan-American Assembly on Population which met at C. A. ali.
 A brief review of the rate of growth in Latin America since 1900, and of causes fo rthe growth of the growth, and the cencentrarion of people in the cities . The review is a look at the growth of Latin America in recent years .
 A study of individual countries and of related problems of economic development, industrialization, urban growth, amt education . The study is based on economic development and industrialization .
 Descriptions of the various racial components and an attempt to gtiess what percentage each constitutes in the total population of the population . Descriptions include descriptions of racial components .
 A scholarly look at estimates of estimates of population growth and the demands increased population will make on industry, agriculture, and social services . A presentation of alternative possibilities .
 Also included is testimony at a Senate committee hearing on the same subject . Also includes is testimony from the same Senate committee on the issue .
 Types of demographic research conducted in Latin America and purposes for which were used .
 Author calls attention to population explosion, poverty, standard of living, natural resources, industrial possibilities, and future prospects . Author calls on population explosion and poverty to raise awareness of population explosion .
 Argentine scientists are divided over the ouster of President Jllia and the installation of nenetal Ongania as provisional president . Nature ami extent of the unrest among Argentine scientists following the June ouster .
 Survey of Soviet research institutions dedicated to the stii.lv of I atin American topics .
 A preliminary analysis of the status of planning programs in the Latin American area . The Latin American region is a key part of the planning process .
 A Brazilian physiols* Indicates the role that science and tech nology shojid play in Latin America, and of the need for national and international support of these areas .
 Fields covered include geography, history, anthropology, politics, economics, sociology, and law . Fields covered in the study include geography and anthropology .
 A brief review of the many and varied types of space projects in which several of the Latin American nations participate on their own or in cooperation with the U.S. or other space powers .
 Author outlines the ""positive advances’s" made in world-wide research in Latin American affairs, and his “doubts’ as to the future course of such study . Author outlines positive advances made in recent years in Latin America affairs .
 An outline of the problem in technological reseaicli confronting the manufacturing industry in Latin America . In Latin America, the problem is to be solved by technological solutions .
 Problems in the utilization of natural resources, implications of resource development, and possible actions to employ knowledge of technological developments . Problems in utilizing natural resources include implications for resource development .
 A description of research projects conducted by Latin American organizations under contract to the USAF in the period 1951-1963 .
 Soviet writer locates and describes U.S. space research and tracking stations in Latin America . He briefly describes the space programs of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico . Writer locates, describes United States space research .
 A Mexican writer analyzes the economic and political factors that make inevitable a revolution in the U.S. A revolution is inevitable, he says .
 A Canadian journalist’s 50,000-mile search for revolutionary forces in Latin America . Canadian journalist's search for Latin American revolutionary forces .
 An explanation of why political turbulence exists in Latin America and why it will continue to exist for a long time in many of the countries . The Latin American country is experiencing political turbulence in recent years .
 A description of the factors or forces that are conducive to revolutions . A description . of the . factors that are . conducive to . revolutions . The revolution is a revolution in France .
 The Intellectual Background of the Revolution in South America, 1810-1824. The intellectual background of the revolution in South American. The Intellectual background of South America. 1810/1824 .
 A reprint of a volume first published in 1924 in which the author examines 'he mentai attitude of the colonists, the influence of foreign ideas, the Creole spirit, the Church's position, the issue of monarchy vs. republic, and the role of Simon Bolivar and his
 A brief introduction to such topics as Communist activities, left-wing intellectuals, Yankeephobia, nationalism and such nationalist movements as APRA, and Peronism . A problem facing the U.S. in dealing with the problems posed by these subjects .
 A review of 20th century Latin American history, much of it with a distinct anti-U.S. bias . Much of it is a review of the 20th Century Latin American .
 A collection of 27 writings which describe, discuss, or analyze the role or influence of many forces, institutions, or ideas which may have played a part in the development of the revolutionary movement in Latin America .
 An attempt to portray the forces of revolutionary change at work in Latin America . The film is based on the work of a group of Latin American revolutionaries .
 Cuba, Bolivia, and Bolivia, the Caribbean countries, Central America, Venezuela. Central America . Central America. Latin America. Venezuela. Latin American countries. Central American nations. Central Americans. Latin Americans.
 Shah, Cida Silva, Simon Torres and Julio Aronde, “Debray and the Cuban Experience” Robin SiH ff< I x fthnkburn .m*l Perr\ \ndeiMUi. Shah, ""Class, Politics, and
 A collection of n aiiiclc-s or evens 1 Mini, previously put'IishedJ ih;it cx;iniinc IX'brav’s thesis on the l aim American roolmion as revealed in hi' 1 K*u*
 A Brazilian professor reviews various factors contributing to social ferment in Latin America . He says the social ferment is a result of various factors in Latin American culture .
 Cuban, and Uruguayan revolutions precedes observations on demographic revolution and what it portends for Latin American nations . Church’s attitude and policy toward birth control has implications for birth control .
 The capital ""R" Revolutions" is the name of the three twentieth century capital cities in Latin America . The capital cities of Latin America were the capitals of the world's first revolutions .
 A generalized appraisal of the Latin American middle class . Its origins, composition, composition and heritages, its philosophy, prospects .
 An arrangement of the peoples of Central America into eight cultural categories, each of which is briefly described . Each cultural category is described by the author of the book .
 Observations of the influence on peasant society of changes accompanying the industrialization movement . Observations on the influence of the . influence on . peasant society . of changes . of . changes accompanying industrialization . movement .
 Characteristics of middle class groups and the political, economic. and social problems that confront them . Middle-class groups and social . problems .
 Racial groups, sociological problems, influence of indti'triaiization on interracial relations, legislation concerning race, class vs. race in society in society .
 An extensively documented inquiry into the subject of the owning of Negro slaves by Peruvian Indians after 1600 has been extensively documented . The inquiry was conducted by the author of an extensively documented report .
 A look at the people, culture, resources, agrarian problems, minina, industry, and political, reliaious and educational features of the IJ nations where racially mixed peoples predominate .
 Evidences of and types of prejudices toward, legal equality of with whites, attitude toward religion, attitudes toward pre-capitalist mentality of, and problems in improving the economic, social and educational levels of . whites . Prejudiced attitudes toward and legal equality with whites .
 Origin, definition, and influence of the above terms, especially as they affect the Latin American world .
 An inquiry into the Latin American viewpoint on these subjects as opposed to some U.S. viewpoints . A report on the place in society of non-whites . An inquiry .
 The influence of Brazil’s National Revolution (beginning in 1930) on the development of a middle class and middle management personnel . Brazil's National Revolution was beginning in 1930 .
 A review of significant factors influencing the develonmcnl of atin American society . The review is a look at significant factors affecting the development of American society.
 2719. A look at class structure in several countries past and present, with an indication of the possible effect of the . possible effect on the . existing arrangements, 2719 .
 Sociology can help in the solution of Latin American cultural problems . Suggestions as to how sociology can help solve problems .
 Wilbert E Moore, "Introduction: Social Change and Comparative Studies”; Peter Heintz. Wilbert Moore, “Introduction”: “Social Change’s social change is social change, social change and social change.”
 Author constructs a tentative typology of peasant groups to be used as a basis for further research . Author constructs tentative typeology of peasants to be a basis of further research.
 Middle-sector leader' and parties' prospects for future political influence . Strengths and weaknesses of middle-sector leaders' .
 An inquiry into the causes for and the results of the diversification of function that has taken place in urbanization in recent decades, 2725. The inquiry will look at the causes and results of diversification in urbanized areas .
 An »**aminition of the historical ami cut rent roles of municipal gouinments »n different 1 atin American nations .
 Nature ami extent of urban housing shortage, different national approaches to solution to shortage, types of urban problems stemming from urban population explosion, and suggested solution to problems 2731 .
 Examples of housing development programs, how they arc conceived, financed, and administered . Housing development programs are funded by the government .
 In an attempt to determine whether people of rural or urban origin constitute the majority of urban slum dwellers, the author traced the mo\enients of a number of residents from their birthplaces to their birth places .
 An attempt to show how slums .ire not equals integrated into cities'mlitie ami services, and to idrrttifs ‘some aspects of social change . relevant to neighboring relations” and to show . how ‘“tension, antagonism,
 I actors influencing site selection, layout, and growth of cities in I atin America in the first century after the conquest . I actors influenced site selection and layout of cities .
 A pessimistic, but probably realistic, appraisal of what the future holds for Latin America . A pessimistic but realistic appraisal of Latin America's future .
 A study of migration patterns from I9 iM) to 1950, reveals a long-term trend toward immigration to the larger cities . A more recent trend toward decent rat i/at ion as revealed in the growth of suburban towns in the Mexico City metropolitan area .
 A li'tus .ritiv.tl riuiew mu onlv ot ihe IVp.irimt-m ,*f the Aims’* pi.mned study of Chilean institutions, but of other research conducted by United States scholars ami students in
 A studs of the diplomatic role of the United States in the struggle between Ciiiie and Peru and Bolivia in the period 1879 1883 . The U.S. was involved in the conflict between Cii and Bolivia .
 A collection of political essays on a wide variety of Mexican and I atin American topics . Includes some that examine the role t f the 1 nited States in Mexico and in other areas of America .
 I atin America’*, problems and United States role in I atIn America, as viewed by the author, lor 30 >** .rs a journalist and univer ;ii> lecturer speaali inc in I aim American developments .
 Are We Uood Seighhors / Three Decades of Inter American Relations, 19301960.960. Are We Are We Seighsors? Are We American Relations?
 The author has “sought to get beneath the surface of the Latin Amciican mind and to interpret inter-American relations in terms of the feelings of the people "" His work is especially .able for us footnote citations of sources in economic and international relations fields .
 Types ot inlluercc exerted hy the United States inatin American affairs . Types of American influence exerted .
 Instructions to diplomatic scents, names of names of agents involved, and the nature of the information submitted . Please submit your information to the editor of this article .
 A review of U.S.-Latin American relations in the litrht of Cuban developments and the extension of the cold war . The review includes a review of the Cuban situation in Cuba .
 Author’s approach is highly critical of the U.S. role in America when not outright opposed to it . Author's approach is critical of United States role in the United States .
 A well-documented presentation of the objections posed by Congress and United States livestock and business interests to the Stale Depattment's effort' in the 19.33-1942 period to permit the importation of Argentine meat and Paraguayan tea 2754. 2754 .
 Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States . Concerning the Independence of theatin-Ameriam Nations .
 A collection of diplomatic correspondence, conic printed and some never before published . Includes some never-before-published correspondence . Includes correspondence from diplomatic colleagues .
 Index. t'mtrd Sta'. t ljttin American Relations * Sri’K*' b*i««en t’ S representative* in Spain and the i s .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson toured South America on tour of South America . Stevenson was President of the U.S. from 1961 to 1964 .
 Stevenson testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee . Article is largely based on Stevenson's testimony before the House and Senate Foreign Affairs committees .
 In its holdings from 1912 when the AUL collection begins, through 1931, Latin American material is found in the various annual volumes . The AUL Collection includes material from 1912 to 1931 .
 Separate volumes on ""The American Republics"" contain the Latin American materials .
 A brief history of intcr-American relations, dissimilarities between the U.S. and Latin American nations, and evidences of change in Latin America . A brief . history of the United Slates and Latin . American relations with Latin America.
 The 1965 revision of this work was titled The Great Fear in Latin America . It was published in 1965 and published in 1966 .
 An uns>mpathetic treatment of U.S. relations with theatin American nations . The United States has been criticized for its treatment of American nations.
 The author attempts to ascertain the natutc of naval activities olf the distant coasts of Chile and Peru in support of American commerce . The resulting relation hips of the naval commanders Sr* fern JJ2 **mH patriot .iml f<*.»bo '-'fft
 A r* print of . iiiluitir ih;»t apprjtd in l<*2V which cxjmmed the Uiplom.rtii rclitions of the 1 .«nn Amcru.tn >n WW 1 I7r
 Senator Mansfield’s separate repsirt on His obsers .11 lolls a member of the fi-inan McUlcll.m jrroiip of scn.itur* who visited I atin America from November 1H to December 7 1
 An attempt to explain why there is such a striking contrast between the economic experience of the U.S. and that of Latin America .
 Author defines the ■ new” Latin America as that part composed of Argentina . Author defines “New Latin America’s” new “new Latin America .”
 Mexico, Uruguay, Mexico, and Uruguay contain two-thirds of the i.N. population . The country is one of five countries that contain the majority of the world's population . Political and economic forces are at work in these countries .
 Senator's notion, on United States problems in Panama and C. uba. Included arc (he Senator's idea, on U.S. problems, on Panama and U.A. C. U.B. A. B uba .
 U.S. public opinion in 1.50 was more impatient than in earlier years, Kroons says . Kroons: American failures in democracy, and act urns by which the United States was expressing and could express it* leadership in inter Am ncan affairs .
 New t ngUnd. and Penns.l satir i and Spanish an .J I’ortucuot to Ionic* in the Amcruav 2773 .
 I the * nonintervention pmuiplv should avl .« |hc fa*.c ol dor'i-prumi' in tuba amt in the rest of the rest .f | .,tin \mcrtva 2774.f |
 A collection of >9 documents pertaining to the U N the OAS . inu-r-Afreri, jn treaties with various countries .
 Findings of a Subcommittee team composed of Representative* Selden and Maillard on a trip to the listed nations in the period November M-December 10 .
 A Review of the Relations of the U.S. and Other American Republics. A Review . of the relations of the . United States and other American . Republics . The Review of American Relations .
 Hearings before the Subcommittee on Intcr-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 85th Cong., 2d sess., June-July 1958 . Hearings were held in the 85th Congress of 1958 .
 A comprehensive report, illustrcted with many d-tailed statistical exhibits, of the operation of LJ.S. civilian and military agencies in Latin America, together with much economic, political, and social information on the countries visited by Senator F.llendrr between October 26
 Sen. Sen. Fllendrr’s obse-vattom made on Sp --Sspccltoo lour tbn third or South and Central American countries in the period .
 A classic early work on U.S. diplomatic relations with the Larin American nations . The work was published in 1973 .
 A measure of the various way* m which thr United Mate* vor.'twinly and mkiirkio«i*Ii influence* Latin An.if tea tea .
 Thr United Shifts and South 4 ou t s o Thr \orthrm R, public .Arthur P Whitaker r .inhridgt Harvard l niv. The public is urged to use this article to refer to the public .
 Author iratt' the de*rl. pn.cni ot I'S rrlaiuin* m the area and analyze* tnc |‘f<H , »lem* ciKottmercd 2796 .
 Study concludes with a look ai rrospccti.e desetopments to 1970 2797. A position paper foc. ocd on the L’S stake in Latin Amctica and the threat leaternal and internal) to U.S. interests .
 A comprehensive scholarly studs of developments and events tran*ptnnf ir the period 2798. The period is 2798 .
 ShtiiDeptn intent T-ii'i-l Regulations iind I'o-Cattio PiopiiKrinda lilii(fil l m m the I 'ruled Stall % Hearings before the tloux* ( oiim
 Peter NchemKiv New 3 oik Knopf, l%4. ’<10 pp 3C4 IH N39SI Author * dr^ien t* to 'unrnavk thr that block' omlrr'tanthijf .
 A 'tud>'iratoe am/at h>*i and pfixedure' of the irvhfiKd as'i'iance pft'cram' administered by the United State*. The United Natnmv and the Oreanr/
 Healings before Ihe Senate Committee on horeign kcUlionv, S6lh Cong.. 2d vesv. Healings . 2d . Committee .
 Pin III Washington C»P») '96* 55HI71 t U'tifl 1966 Tnitmom on V S t<» t anr. Pin III D.C. Washington C.P. '96*.
 U.S. Postwar Aid i.u.com*slete fMttrul ArroufOmy** I atm Amel ia An I ihmn of lncom*
 Special Report prepared for tlte H-.ujv; Foreign Affairs Committee . Organitulions—Obligations and Loan Authorizations, July !94S-Junr .10, I9M Special Report .
 Vest ihc t aiir AmcitvJft .umm rcis-ft anJ inUi.iJujl ..mam icr »tl. »'t l’s .i J fc.rnc-J - <rnc
 The author finds examples in the controversies between the United Stalo and the nations of Bolivia . In the process. the author findv examples of the controversies .
 Mexico, and Venezuela over the operations of l' S oil companies within (hen jurisdictions). Mexico, Venezuela, and Mexico over operations of . l'S oil companies .
 President of Guatemala paved the way for the regime of Jacobo Arbenz Guzmin, who was overthrown in 1954 after almost delivering Guatemala into Communist hands . A condemnation of U S. actions In Latin America by the tometime President .
 A lengthy appraisal of how the three mentioned practices influence U.S.-Latin American relations . A lengthy assessment of how these practices influence the U. S.-Latin America relations .
 Reception of United States offers to supply atomic materials;»-.j generating devices and ""know-how"" to Latin American p.J generating devices . Reception: U.S. offers to provide atomic materials and know-how to Latin America .
 A Soviet attempt to link the CIA with most military involvements in eofpei./e eanJos in Latin America .
 Soviet ‘expose’ of USIA operations and expenditures in Latin America . A Soviet “expose" of U.S. operations . USIA spent $1.5 billion in Latin American operations .
 Volume is of interest to the student of ITS -1 atm American relations for its chapters dealing with U.S. intervention in the area . Volume of this volume includes chapters dealing in the United States intervention in Afghanistan .
 An historical review of the U.S. involvement in the election processes of ten I attn American nations of the Caribbean and Middle America . The review is a look at the history of American involvement in elections in the region .
 An attempt to reveal the impact of Samuel Guy Inman's above tilled article, which appeared tit the -ft/,.sin Monthly Monthly .
 A look at U.S. interventions in the Caribbean and the results thereof, the evolution of the inter-American systewr and suggested revisions of the OAS Charter . The United States has been involved in several interventions in Caribbean .
 A detailed examination of day-hy-day diplomatic developments that led to U.S. intervention in different Central American and Caribbean nations in the first two decades of the twentieth century .
 A biased indictment of U.S. policy tn LaUn America by the President of Guatemala . The President had much to do with preparing Guatemala for the developments that took place under his successor, Jacobo Arbenz .
 Organization, personnel, and objectives of USAF mission program in Latin America . U.S. Air Force: Latin America is one of the world's largest military bases .
 Use of United States arms by military leaders in coups, post-WW II U S military aid program, and pros and cons of continuing aid program . Use of U.S. arms by . military . leaders in . coups .
 Commanding General, USARCARIB. briefly discusses ihe role of the Army’s mission program . He also discusses other Latin America* oriented phases of Army's Canal Zone activities .
 Brief advice to prospective members of U.S. military missions in Latin America . Brief advice on how to conduct military operations .
 The Soviet view of the role and the extent of U.S. military assistance to Latin America is revealed .
 An analysis of the role of USSOUTHCOM in relation-* with Latin America . The purpose and extent of the U.S. military assistance program in the area . The analysis will focus on the role and purpose of the United States .
 Thistide, adapted from a speech delivered to the Association of the United Stales Army in October 1967, is repented from Transition .
 U.S. supplied military aid to Latin America, amounts and kinds of aid . Latin American use of military-assistance equipment. Use of military equipment.
 Role of U.S. Army Engineer units in civic action projects in Latin America . Report on rural school construrrion in Honduras .
 MAP aid ir.50-50-1965 period in 12 Latin American nations in Caribbean area . Nature and extent of MAP aid .
 A cursory review of types of assistance—both materiel and training—supplied, and an assessment of the results of such programs . Notes: The results of these programs are based on the training and materiel provided .
 The author asks several questions about the need for and the employment of U.S. military assistance funds in the Latin American area . The author also answers several questions regarding the need and employment of funds .
 A review of the manner in which the Monroe Doctrine had undergone and was undergoing evolution . The Monroe Doctrine is undergoing evolution in the United States .
 A re-examination of the Monroe Doctrine, of its original application*. of its extensions of Latin American views of . Latin America views of the . Monroe Doctrine .
 A summary and a continuation of the author's more detailed studies of the Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine is a detailed study of the doctrine .
 A cursory revie* of the history of the Monroe Doctrine from 1823 to 1962 . The Monroe Doctrine was created in 1823 by President Monroe .
 Author consulted manuscript records in the principal archives of the United States and Western Europe . In his efforts to present a “fuller understanding of w’at is perhaps the most important single document in Americar diplomatic history.""
 A collection of 26 writings on the Monroe Doctrine spanning the last half century . The Monroe Doctrine is the subject of a new book on the subject .
 A Soviet writer identifies the causes which influence U.S. policy in Latin America . He says the causes are behind the rise in Latin American terrorism .
 An examination of four general U.S. objectives in Iatin America will aid a discussion of the negotiations carried on with the negotiations . 1887 .
 The author and answers seven questions that might be asked by a U.S. citizen as to why certain conditions prevail and what the United States policy toward Latin America should be . The author also answers 7 questions about why some conditions prevail in Latin America .
 A suggested 10-point program for a reorientation by the United Stater, of its Latin American policy . Reflections on the socio-economic problems of Latin America and on the U.S. as a contributing factor to these problems’s .
 An examination of U.S. policy toward Latin America in the pre-and post-Castro eras . The United States has a history of Latin American relations .
 This small volume is of inicresl for ils treatment of the role of the Monroe Doctrine ano toe toe Good Neighbor Policy in U.S. relations with 1 alin America .
 For a more detailed study of these topics, see the author's other works . The author's work on the topic is available on Amazon.com .
 Four Appendices contain numerous agreements, resolutions, and corrections adopted by or presented to inter-American conferences . A collection of a large number of presidential messages, addresses, papers, and congressional reports from 1706 to 1949 .
 Eisenhower Administration's approach to the handling of U.S. relations with Latin America . Eisenhower Administration . Eisenhower administration .
 Emphasis is given to delineating the changes effected by Hoover’s policies in inter-American relations . Hoover's policies were the result of his policies in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Factors influencing U.S. policy relevant to Latin American nations . ei&ht suggested “do’s and don’t’�s” for dealing with the nations of the area .
 An analysis of economic, political, and social issues presented for the purpose of furnishing the conccrred layman with a basis for reappraising U.S. policy toward Latin America .
 Volume examines U.S. foreign policy in its ""political” as well as strategic context . Volume examines United States foreign policy  in its "political" and "strategic context"
 The Diplomat as Propagandist: William Lindsay Scruggs.93-1895"""; Chapter 5, ""The Diplomat . as Propaganda"; Chapter 5 of William Lindsay . Lindsay Scrueggs' book, "Diplomat as . Prop
 The term ""revolution" is defiiu j, forces and/or institutions competing to fill the ‘motivation/organization"" vacuum are described . How U.S. policy and programs are influenced by the revolution is revealed .
 Theodore Roosevelt's attitude to Latin America is an eurly scholarly stu'.y of the attitude of the president on such topics as Panamanian independence, intervention in Cuba, debts of Caribbean nations, and mediation in Central America .
 Study presents a ""strategic ov»rv:»w” that sheds some light on major Latin American tre Js that bear on U.S. foreign policy .
 A statement of guiding principles of the U.S. policy toward Latin America . The statement is a statement of . guiding principles . The United States has a policy on Latin American affairs .
 A review of the development of U.S. policy toward Latin American economic and social revolutions . A review . of the . development of United States policy . toward Latin America .
 The Vice President discusses relative priority of Latin American matters, basic U.S. policy in the area, and implementation of the policies established .
 An appraisal of U.S. policy goals and objectives when confronted with military regimes, revolutionary disturbances, the ideals of the inter-American system, and the problem of military assistance as opposed to political development .
 The author concludes that the U.S. should promote broad internal reforms and improved educational opportunities . The author recommends cooperation in a search for solutions to commodity and trade problems .
 Article devoted primarily to the question of the recognition of new governmental administrations in the Americas . Article is devoted only in incidental fashion to recognition of a new nation that has thrown off its colonial status .
 An examination of the pros and cons of de facto governments is a subject of much interest to students of U.S. diplomacy . The United States government has often been confronted with the question whether to recognize a de facto government .
 President Wilson developed his policy for treating Latin American nations . An examination of the process by which President Wilson . Wilson's policy for Latin America nations .
 Numerous chapters in this work deal with United States diplomatic relations with Latin American nations . The most erudite of U.S. diplomatic historians deal with the relationship .
 Author devotes his attention to inter-American relations in the 1946-1956 period . Author gives particular emphasis to the role of economics in the developments of the era . Author also gives special emphasis to economic developments in the period .
 Much of use will be found in the nine chapters devoted to the U.S. relations with Latin America .
 A scholarly study oi the organization, strength, and weaknesses of the ti.c inter-American security system . A study of the role of the U.S. in that system .
 Of particular Interest to a study of Latin America are Chapters 3-5 and 15 . Of particular interest to a Latin America study of the continent are Chapters .
 German interests in.-41.41; gross domestic product.: guerrilla warfare.33.41.33 . Gross domestic product: 41.41 .
 Uebray in, 2054; FCLA study of.6-121, 2749; economic assistance. Church.65; Communism 130, 1710, 1711; culture.65.2: Communism 130.2; Communism.130, Communism.65 .
 Argentine, 60.35, 1536; Bolivian, 130; in labor unions, 2285.35; in . labor unions . Argentine, . 60; . 60, 60; bibliography on Argentine, 15.35 and 1536.35 .
 1681: culture, 969, 975, 985, 990, 1013, 1105. 2456; customs, 993, 1039, 1045-1048, 1052, 1053, 1564, 1570, 1601-1603
 Leftist parties and, 2599; military assistrnee.02, 2548, 2859-2873; Monroe Doctrine, 2448.02.02 . Monroe Doctrine.02: Monroe Doctrine . Leftist party and military assistance.02; military assistancernee .02
 Nicaraguan operations, 1188, 1189, 1191 Urban Growth and Problems.24-2739: development of cities, 2484; political instability and.61: problems of, 2457; recent trends.32; squatter settlements.28-1351; agriculture.
 Mexican educator . Mexican educator.44; political doctrine of.00 Venezuela, 1352-1405: AD history.85, 1389.85 . Venezuelan educator .
 IMF endorsement of exchange rates, foreign policy, imperialism and. imperialism, industry, and. industry, 1361. IMF endorsement: 1384; imperialism, 2489; . imperialism, . 2489, . imperialism and . industry, . . industry .
 Z Zapata, Emiliano: career of Mexican revolutionist, 1647 . Zapata was a Guatemalan leader . He was also a Mexican revolutionary .