 The election of 1960 was the closest since 1884; Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon by fewer than 119,000 votes . The election was the first televised televised debate in history .
 Kennedy was the youngest person ever to be elected president . Kennedy was elected president in 1964 .
 King Arthur’s mythical court – Camelot – is the perfect life Kennedy & ‘Camelot’ President and Mrs. Kennedy .
 During the Kennedy Administration, ongoing tensions with the Soviet Union led to crises over Cuba and West Berlin . The Kennedy Administration was led by President Kennedy in 1962 .
 President Kennedy created aid programs for developing nations and expanded the space program . Kennedy created the programs to contain communism and stay ahead of the Soviet Union in technology .
 “Missile gap” – United States Term outlining perceived superiority of the number and power of the USSR’s missiles in comparison with its own – especially referring to ICBM's . “Flexible Response’ – Buildup of troops and expand Special Forces units
 Stated mission is to provide technical assistance for helping people outside the U.S. to understand American culture . Help Americans understand the cultures of other countries .
 On the night of April 17,1961, some 1500 Cuban exiles supported by the U.S. military landed on the island’s southern coast at Baja de Cochinos, the Bay of Pigs . Some 1500 exiles from Cuba landed in Baja on the night
 The CIA and the exiles hoped it would trigger a mass uprising that would overthrow Castro . Castro was overthrown by the CIA and exiles in 1953 .
 Cuban forces, backed by Soviet tanks and jet aircraft, easily repelled the exile invasion . Cuban forces were backed by tanks, jet aircraft and Soviet tanks .
 Revolutionary leader, Fidel Castro, openly declared himself a communist and welcomed aid from the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro declared himself to be a communist .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent further deliveries of Soviet weapons . Kennedy Addresses the Nation Soviet missile installations in Cuba on October 22, 1963 .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile bases in response to Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba . Kennedy promised not to attack Cuba in October . The bases were dismantled on October 28 .
 Kennedy traveled to Berlin in 1963 to dramatize America’s commitment to West Berlin and West Germany . Kennedy's trip was one of the high points of his foreign travels .
 In a speech at the Berlin Wall, Kennedy electrified an audience of about 150,000 Germans by stating “Ich bin ein Berliner” thus declaring the solidarity of all free people with the people of West Berlin .
 Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . He was assassinated by Soviet troops in the fall of 1968 .
 President Kennedy and President Johnson supported programs intended to end poverty and racism at home and promote democracy abroad . Kennedy and Johnson were both presidents .
 The War on Poverty and the Great Society programs marked the greatest increase in the federal government’s role in society since the New Deal . The war on poverty and Great Society were the greatest increases in government power since the 1930s .
 Kennedy’s aid programs for developing nations also marked a dramatic shift in American foreign policy towards developing nations . Kennedy's aid programs marked a significant shift in U.S. foreign policy .
 To provide volunteer assistance to developing nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, volunteer for developing nations . JFK and Moon Landing were the first Americans to land on the moon .
 Warren Court Reforms Under Chief Justice Earl Warren, Supreme Court issued a number of decisions that altered the voting system, expanded due process, and reinterpreted aspects of the First Amendment .
 His car raced to a nearby hospital, where doctors frantically tried to revive him, but it was too late . The driver was pronounced dead at a local hospital .
 In 1963, the Warren Commission investigated and concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had shot the president while acting on his own . The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had killed the president .
 Ho Chi Minh, Ho Dien Bien Phu and the Viet Cong were all involved in the First Indochina War . Vietnam was one of the world's most successful military campaigns in Vietnam .
 LBJ  ‘quagmire’ in Vietnam . LBJ: ‘I’m not going to go to war. I’ll never go to Vietnam again.’
 William Westmoreland was Vietnam's first president . He was in charge of the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The Tet Offensive took place in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive .
 Michigan teach-in was a forum on the Vietnam War and attempting to decide the best way for 12 faculty members to protest the war rather than strike from teaching .
 We don't smoke marijuana in Muskogee . We like livin' right, and bein' free. We like to live right and left, and to be free .
 I'm proud to be an Okie from Muskogee, a place where even squares can have a ball . We still wave Old Glory down at the courthouse, And white lightnin' still the biggest thrill of all . We don't make a party out of lovin'; We
 Repeat Chorus Leather boots are still in style for manly footwear . Beads and Roman sandals won't be seen in the men's shoes .
 Football's still the roughest thing on campus, and the kids here still respect the college dean . College dean: "The kids here respect the dean. They respect him"
 Gotta get down to it / Soldiers are cutting us down should have been done long ago . Should have done it long ago. Gotta do it? "Gotta get Down to it"