 "Some of the more significant insights into understanding and conceptualising the nature of trust in international politics," says David Cameron . "I'm sure there will be some significant insights," he says .
 Neither of us can remember what these insights are . Unfortunately, as we’d both drunk far too much on that occasion, neither of us could remember these insights .
 I should add that when I use the term dialogue, this refers to an interactive process in which I talked and Professor Wheeler listened . Professor Wheeler listens to me when I talk .
 This is another way of explaining that my engagement with, and awareness of, the literature on trust in international politics, is limited. This means I have limited awareness of the literature about trust, I said .
 Khrushchev actively deceived Kennedy about the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba, betraying Kennedy’s trust, he says . Kennedy's trust was betrayed by the Soviet Union, he writes .
 Trust was rebuilt under the threat of nuclear war . And then how as . the crisis developed that trust was rebuilt .
 CNN's John Sutter says the Cold War narrative is flawed . He says it raises some broader themes and issue in nuclear history of Cold War . Sutter: "Before I provide that account, I make one critical reflection on the narrative and its assumptions"
 Such differences are as semiotic as they are semantic, in that they denote differing perspectives on the nature and origins of the crisis . Such differences can be seen as a semiotic and semantic, as well as semantic .
 In Havana, where the threat of American attack persisted on a continuing basis after 1961, the time horizon was more like thirteen months’s . In the context of trust, deceit and betrayal, this is an important point of trust .
 In focussing on the Soviet deception in 1962, this isolates one element in the relationship between the Soviets and Americans and between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The film focuses on the events in 1962 and 1963 .
 The previous year, the American Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, initially told the UN Security Council that the U.S. was not involved in the Bay of Pigs fiasco .
 Since 1960, U.S. officials at the UN had regularly denied Cuban allegations about American subversion and assassination attempts directed against Fidel Castro . U.N. officials regularly and indignantly denied Cuba allegations about subversion .
 We have known since the 1970s that the CIA was very much engaged in trying to assassinate the Cuban leader . We continue to learn about American attempts to subvert and overthrow Castro’s government, he says .
 Much has been rightly made of Kennedy’s attempts to reform American and NATO strategy . Robert McNamara, his defence secretary, to move toward no-first use of nuclear weapons, was his secretary .
 By the autumn of 1961 the Kennedy administration accepted that the missile gap did not exist . It was the United States that was well ahead and moving further ahead of the Soviets .
 Kennedy with McNamara’s blessing embarked upon a further build-up of Polaris and Minutemen ICBMs . The aim of preserving United States nuclear superiority was to preserve U.S. nuclear superiority .
 This also touches on some broader issues of Cold War nuclear history and particular Soviet perceptions . This is also a look at the wider implications of the Cold War .
 Soviet intelligence – both the KGB and the GRU – were telling Khrushchev that the Pentagon had been preparing a nuclear first strike . This was a period in which thanks to the work of Fursenko and Naftali, we know that Soviet intelligence was telling us .
 It is also worth noting the rekindling of the old debate about why the Soviets deployed the weapons in Cuba . Whether this was primarily to address the strategic nuclear balance, the debate is worth noting .
 Recent historiography has been to emphasise the defence of Cuba as a key goal for Khrushchev . One of the features of much recent . recent . history has been emphasised the defence . of Cuba .
 Fursenko and Naftali in their 2006 book Khrushchev’s Cold War have rekindled this debate . They argue that what sparked the deployment in Cuba was the realisation in February 1962 that after the first generation Soviet ICBMs had proved an almost total failure
 None of this is an apologia for Khrushchev’s actions, but it is essential context . None of the above is an apology for the actions .
 It seems to me how we see trust and honesty in this context surely needs to be informed by at least some attempt at empathy with Soviet leadership . It seems that trust must be based on an attempt to empathize with Soviet leaders .
 There are parallels between the early 1960s and early 1980s when the Soviets perceived themselves to be in positions of strategic vulnerability . The Soviets were perceived as a strategic vulnerability in the 60s and 80s .
 In the early 1960s, however, Soviet worse case analysis was at least based on a realistic assessment of the correlation of forces . The Soviet threat perceptions were at least more realistic .
 Khrushchev's deceit and Kennedy’s trust in other words framing the international relations of the crisis in interpersonal terms . Now I began by talking about Khrushvic's deceit, Kennedy's trust in others .
 We need to examine the range of systemic, ideological, cultural and bureaucratic factors that may shape and govern relations between states or governments . But equally of course we must examine the . range of ideological, ideological and cultural factors which may shape relations between governments or states .
 Any assessment of the role of weapons in the crisis requires understanding of the operational level, and a focus on the command and control of nuclear weapons . The risk of inadvertent nuclear war requires understanding, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Looking at the inter-personal level, it begs the question of how far and in what ways we explore the values, beliefs, norms and states of mind of the decisionmakers . And equally equally equally, looking at the . question of . how far we explore . the . values,
 Psychological perspectives are a potentially crucial if underexplored dimension to the crisis, says John Defterios . He says psychological perspectives could be crucial to the solution .
 The contrast between the interpersonal and the intergovernmental is nicely illustrated in the initial reactions of the Kennedy brothers to the discovery of the Soviet MRBMs . The Kennedy brothers' initial reaction to the Soviet discovery of MRBM was a surprise .
 The literature on Soviet policy-making during the crisis has drawn from a degree of controlled access to Soviet archives . It provides us new insights, perspectives and information, though key debates remain .
 Presidium took decision to install Soviet missiles in Cuba in May 1962 . Presidium was responsible for installing Soviet missiles .
 There remains debate about Soviet objectives including whether or how far West Berlin was the key objective . West Berlin is still a key part of the Soviet Union .
 There is a very clear consensus in this literature that Operation Anadyr was the initiative of Nikita Khrushchev . The Russian leader is believed to have been involved in the operation .
 Khrushchev decided that the operation was to be kept secret, and the Americans were to be deceived . The U.S. was not allowed to be informed about the operation, the author says .
 If Khrushchev had made public his intention to deploy missiles in Cuba then the crisis would have been very different, say commentators .
 Khrushchev later reflected on what he saw as ‘a very big mistake’ by the former Soviet leader . And later reflected .
 Cuba was an independent sovereign state whose avowed purpose in accepting Soviet missiles was to strengthen the socialist camp in the correlation of forces in the global struggle against imperialism . The Cuban government accepted Soviet missiles in order to strengthen its socialist camp .
 Various ExCommites have indicated that if they had faced a public announcement from Khrushchev to deploy missiles in Cuba, the confrontation with the Soviets would have been different .
 It now seems evident that secrecy and deception fuelled Kennedy’s belligerence on 16 October and contributed to his conclusion that a military response was necessary . And it now seems obvious that the secrecy and . deception fuelled . Kennedy's conclusion that . that day that . a military . response was
 We’re going to take out these missiles,’ he said, though he was not yet decided on a general air strike or an invasion . ‘We’ve not decided on whether to launch an air strike, but it’s not clear whether a general
 If the Americans had believed a decision to use force was necessary that day, Khrushchev’s tactics could have tragically rebounded . If the U.S. had believed it was necessary, the situation could have rebounded, says historian .
 In the event, Kennedy and his colleagues were able to give more thought to the potential consequences and reconsider the military option . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to war. I'm going to make a decision"
 Khrushchev had made clear to Kennedy that he did not intend to create political problems for the Democrats in mid-term Congressional elections in November . Kennedy did not want to create problems for Democrats .
 Announcement of existence of the missiles would be made when Khrushchev visited the United Nations and Cuba in November, when the MRBMs would be deployed and IRBMs were nearly ready .
 This was part of the deception but it also reflected Khrushchev’s intentions, he says . This was also reflected the intentions of the Soviet Union, he adds .
 He did not intend to fire any missiles merely to deter an attack on Cuba, he said . He said he didn't intend to launch any missiles to deter a Cuban attack .
 Since he did not have the intention of using the weapons in an offensive operation, he considered them defensive . The weapons were not intended to be used in offensive operations .
 He was looking at the kind of weapons whether or not they were strategic weapons . He said he was looking into the kinds of weapons he wanted .
 Ambassador Dobrynin and Khrushchev’s emissary, Georgi Bolshakov, stated that no nuclear missiles capable of reaching America were being placed in Cuba . According to Robert Kennedy, no nuclear missile was being placed there . Robert Kennedy: No nuclear missile capable of
 On 11 September, the Soviet News Agency TASS stated there was no need to deploy nuclear weapons in other countries because Soviet rockets were so powerful . TASS said that Soviet rockets are so powerful that they would not need to be deployed .
 Kennedy met Andrei Gromyko on 18 October, the Foreign Minister reiterated the general Soviet line that aid for Cuba was not offensive in nature .
 Soviet secrecy and duplicity rebounded on Moscow by diverting world opinion from the fact that Soviet missiles in Cuba could be readily compared to American missiles in Europe . Moscow's duplicity and secrecy rebounded by diverging world opinion on Moscow .
 It was very difficult for the U.S. to condemn the Soviets for doing in Cuba what they had done in Europe . The Soviets were doing what the Americans did in Cuba, says historian John Avlon .
 Moscow’s attempts to deploy the missiles in secret gave the U.S. the opportunity to portray the Soviets as aggressively undermining the status quo . Moscow's attempt to deploy them in secret also gave the Americans the opportunity .
 The secrecy and the deception also helped frame American debates about policy–options . The secrecy helped frame U.S. debates about foreign policy .
 How far deception and how far secrecy were crucial in this respect remains a matter of debate . Kennedy felt the need to act even when doing so raised the prospect of war with the Soviets .
 President Obama has been in the midst of a major crisis in the Middle East . He has been forced to step back into the role of the U.S. president .
 Partial naval blockade announced on 22 October coming into force on 24 October . Kennedy's initial reaction to use force against missiles gave way to a strategy based on a partial naval blockade .
 Nuclear mobilisation was accompanied by nuclear mobilisation, with Polaris submarines flushed from their ports . B-52s of Strategic Air Command ’s airborne alert circled toward their fail-safe points; and the DEFCON alert state was raised to DeFCON-3 on 22 October
 We now have a clearer picture of how Khrushchev and his colleagues reacted to some of these events . This is still based on limited access to Soviet archives, though this is still limited .
 We do have insights into the debates within the Presidium about how to respond to the situation . We do not know how to react to the latest developments in the world of politics .
 Khrushchev's initial response to a possible blockade, for example, was to delegate authority to Soviet commanders in Cuba to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of invasion .
 There was also heated debate within the Presidium over whether to allow four Soviet submarines to run the blockade .
 Each submarine was carrying nuclear torpedoes, unbeknownst to the U.S. navy which took to dropping explosive devices on them to persuade them to surface . These submarines we now know were each carrying nuclear . torpedoes .
 At the diplomatic level most historians would follow Lebow and Stein in observing how in the next few days both leaders manoeuvred to accommodate each other, trade-off some of their own objectives .
 How we conceptualise – what explanatory framework we might use raises some interesting questions . What explanatory framework might use? How do we think about the world?
 James Blight for example proffers a model of adaptive fear which seeks to explain how both leaders drew back from the brink . Blight says that adaptive fear is a key to drawing back from brink .
 It is now clear that Kennedy was prepared to ‘go the extra mile for peace’ and undertake to withdraw Jupiter IRBMs form Turkey and Italy .
 Kennedy made his offer on the explicit basis that NATO was not to be told . There is now though though a debate about whether that offer had any significance on Khrushchev’s thinking .
 Khrushchev honoured the agreement – even to the point where he did not reveal the arrangement in his memoirs when they were published in 1971 .
 Kennedy’s sense of betrayal – the nuclear affront – was a betrayal, to use McGeorge Bundy's later description . So how important was the loss of trust and trust and Kennedy's sense of . betrayal . The loss of . trust and . betrayal was an affront to
 The crisis ended in mutual accommodation, although equally apparent is the Soviet retreat to use the word that Khrushchev used to use to the Presidium on 28 October . That the crisis ended with mutual accommodation is apparent, but equally apparent .
 Whether this period can be associated with trust is more open to doubt . Whether it can be linked to trust is also open-ended doubt .
 The American offer to withdraw IRBMs from Italy and Turkey was conditional on the Soviets keeping the arrangement secret . And finally let me observe that the American offer was conditional .
 It was indicative of the relationship at the time between Khrushchev and Kennedy that it remained so. The relationship between the two men remained so strong .
 After the crisis, Kennedy sent Rusk and McNamara off to lie to Congress on whether there was any arrangement with Khrushchev over withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey .
 Given the circumstances that was rather a good idea. But we also might conclude that given the circumstances, it was not a bad idea .