 Castro has two brothers, Ramón and Raúl, and four sisters, Angelita, Juanita, Enma, and Agustina, all of whom were born out of wedlock . All of the siblings are married .
 He also has two half-siblings, Lidia and Pedro Emilio who were raised by Ángel Castro's first wife .
 By the early autumn of 1960, the U.S. government was engaged in a semi-secret campaign to remove Castro from power . In September 1960, Castro created Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which implemented neighbhorhood spying .
 Giancana and Miami Syndicate leader Santos Trafficante were contacted in September 1960 about the possibility of an assassination attempt by a go-between from the CIA . Go-between Robert Maheu had contacted Johnny Roselli, a member of the Las Vegas Syndicate .
 Hugo Chavez of Venezuela is a long-time admirer of Cuba . He reached agreements with Cuba to provide subsidized petroleum in exchange for Cuban medical assistance . Chavez reached agreements to provide subsidies to Cuba in return for medical aid .
 The First Vice President of the Council of State assumes presidential duties upon the illness or death of the president . Article 94 of the Cuban Constitution states that the first vice president of the council of state is the president of Cuba .
 There have been rumors, speculation and hoaxing about Castro's health and demise . Due to the issue of presidential succession and Castro's longevity, there have long been rumors .
 In 1998 there were reports that he had a serious brain disease, later discredited . There were also reports that there was a serious illness .
 In June 2001, he apparently fainted during a seven-hour speech under the Caribbean sun . He is known for his fainting during a speech .
 Mayor of Bogotá said Castro "seemed very sick to me" following a meeting with him during a vacation in Cuba in 2004 . Later that day he finished the speech, walking buoyantly into the television studios in military fatigues, joking with journalists .
 On October 20, 2004, Castro tripped and fell following a speech he gave at a rally, breaking his kneecap and fracturing his right arm . Eugenio Selman Housein said that the press speculates that Castro was in good health .
 CIA said it thought Castro had Parkinson's disease in 2005 . Castro was able to recover his ability to walk and publicly demonstrated this two months later .
 Castro denied such allegations, citing the example of Pope John Paul II in saying that he would not fear the disease . Castro denied the allegations and said he would never fear disease .
 Fidel Castro was too ill to attend the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Granma boat landing on December 2, 2006, which also became his belated 80th birthday celebrations . Fidel Castro died at the age of 80 in 2006 .
 Cuban officials stated that Castro had no terminal illness and would eventually return to his public duties . However, on December 24, 2006, Spanish newspaper El Periódico de Catalunya reported that Spanish surgeon José Luis García Sabrido had been flown to Cuba on a plane
 García Sabrido is an intestinal expert who specializes in the treatment of cancer . He is also an expert in the diagnosis of cancer and treatment of intestinal cancer .
 García Sabrido's traveled in also was reported to be carrying a large quantity of advanced medical equipment . García Sabrido also reportedly to have traveled in with a large number of medical equipment carried .
 García Sabrido held a news conference in which he answered questions about Castro's health . García Sabrido revealed that Castro is still in the care of Fidel Castro .
 He stated that ""He does not have cancer, he has a problem with his digestive system,"" and added that his condition is stable .
 Most Cubans acknowledge that they are aware Castro is seriously ill . Most also seem worried about a future without Castro .
 García Sabrido reported Castro was in ""very grave"" condition, having trouble cicatrizing, after three failed operations and complications from an intestinal infection caused by a severe case of diverticulitis .
 White House press secretary Tony Snow said the report appeared to be a roundup of previous health reports . Cuban diplomat in Madrid said the reports were lies and declined to comment . White House spokesman Tony Snow says the report appears to be "just sort of a roundup"
 Acting President Raul Castro said in mid-February 2007 that Fidel Castro's health was improving and he was taking part in all important issues facing the government . On January 30, 2007, Cuban television and the paper Juventud Rebelde showed fresh video and photos from a meeting between
 On February 27, 2007, Fidel Castro called into Aló Presidente, a live radio talk show hosted by Hugo Chávez, and chatted with him for thirty minutes . He sounded "much healthier and more lucid" than he had on any of the audio and video tapes released
 Reports of improvements in his condition continued to circulate throughout March and early April . Later in the conversation, he made reference to the fall of the world stock markets .
 On April 13, 2007, Chávez was quoted by the Associated Press as saying that Castro has ""almost totally recovered"" from his illness . Castro was reported to have almost totally recovered in 2007 .
 Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Roque confirmed that Castro had improved steadily . Roque said Castro had resumed some of his leadership responsibilities .
 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns, his failing health, and not to be disturbed by his future death . In January 2009 Castro told Cubans to not worry about the lack of news columns .
 Castro met with Argentine president Cristina Fernandez on January 21, 2009 . At the same time pictures were released of Castro's meeting with Fernandez .
 In a letter dated February 18, 2008, Fidel Castro announced that he would not accept the positions of president and commander in chief at the February 24, 2008 National Assembly meetings . Castro effectively announced his retirement from public life .
 On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously chose his brother, Raúl Castro, as Fidel's successor as President of Cuba . Fidel Castro was Fidel's brother and the leader of Cuba until his death in 2008 .
 By his first wife Mirta Díaz-Balart, whom he married on October 11, 1948, Castro has a son named Fidel Ángel ""Fidelito" Castro . Castro also had a son born on September 1, 1949, born by his wife M
 Fidel Castro had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews, born in Havana in 1925, resulting in a daughter named Alina Fernández-Revuelta . Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis, Alexander ""Alexis" and Ángel
 Fidel has another daughter, Francisca Pupo, the result of a one night affair . Fidel has a daughter from a one-night affair .
 Once-close friend of Castro's wrote that Castro had huge accounts in Swiss banks . Gonzalez asserts that Comandante's reserves have been linked to counterfeiting business empires and money laundering .
 Forbes listed Castro among the world's richest people in 2005, with an estimated net worth of $550 million . Castro has a personal guard of more than 9,700 men and three luxurious yachts, Forbes said .
 Cuba has one of the world's highest literacy rates and most effective healthcare systems, low wealth inequalities, stable government, and record of supporting international populist struggles in Africa . Those who support his government generally state that Cuba has a stable government .
 Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted . People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church include Atheists and Atheists .