 Admiral William S Benson Admiral Robert E Coontz Admiral Edward W Eberle Admiral Charles F Hughes Admiral William V Pratt Admiral William H Standley Fleet Admiral William D Leahy Admiral Harold R Stark Fleet Admiral Ernest J King Fleet Admiral Chester W Nimitz Admiral Louis E Denfeld Admiral Forrest
 Admiral David L McDonald, Admiral Thomas H Moorer, Admiral Elmo R Zumwalt Jr. Admiral David McDonald, Vice Admiral Thomas Moorer . Admiral Zumwalwal Jr. was the Admiral of the United States .
 Trost Admiral Frank B Kelso II Admiral Jeremy M Boorda Admiral Jay L Johnson Admiral Vernon E Clark Admiral Gary Roughead Admiral Jonathan W Greenert Admiral John M Richardson Admiral Michael Gilday Master Chief Chief Chief Petty Officers of the Navy MCPON Delbert D Black
 April D Beldo Carl M Brashear Jesse L Brown Samuel L Gravely Jr. MCPON Rick D West and Steven S Giordano are featured in this week's official photo shootings .
 Levi Woodbury Mahlon Dickerson, Jr. James K Paulding George Edmund Badger and Abel P Upshur . George Bancroft William B Preston William A Graham John P Kennedy . Isaac Toucey Gideon Welles Adolph Edward Borie George M Robeson Richard
 William Henry Hunt William Eaton Chandler William C Whitney Benjamin F Tracy Hilary A Herbert John D Long William H Moody Paul Morton Paul Morton Charles J Bonaparte Victor H Metcalf Truman H Newberry .
 Fred Korth Paul B Fay Paul Henry Nitze Charles Fitz Baird Paul R Ignatius John Hubbard Chafee John William Warner J William Middendorf William Graham Claytor, Jr.
 Edward Hidalgo John Lehman James H Webb William L Ball Henry L Garrett III Daniel Howard Sean Charles O'Keefe ADM Frank B Kelso, II John Howard Dalton Richard Jeffrey Danzig Robert B Pirie, Jr.
 Gordon R England, Susan M Livingstone, Hansford T Johnson, Donald Charles Winter, Raymond Edwin Mabus, Jr. Raymond Mabus Jr. was the Secretary of State at the time .
 For thirteen days, the fear of impending nuclear war continued until an agreement was reached for the removal of the weapons . For 13 days, a nuclear war was feared for 13 days .
 The Navy, in cooperation with the other U.S. armed forces and allies, strategically employed military power in such a way that the President did not have to resort to war to protect vital Western interests . The Navy and allies strategically employed .
 Khrushchev realized that his missile and bomber forces were no match for the Navy's powerful Polaris missile-firing submarines and the Air Force's land-based nuclear delivery systems . The Navy and Air Force were no longer able to compete with the Soviets .
 Admiral Robert L Dennison led U.S. naval forces to intercept Soviet submarines operating in the area . The ships were intercepted by the United States .
 United States destroyers and frigates, kept on station through underway replenishment by oilers and stores ships, maintained a month-long quarantine of the island .
 Radar picket ships, supported by Navy fighters and airborne early warning planes, assisted the Air Force's Air Defense Command in preparing to defend American airspace from Soviet forces .
 As the unified commander for the Caribbean, Dennison was responsible for readying Army, Air Force, Marine, and Navy assault forces for a possible invasion .
 Low-level aerial photograph of Mariel Naval port, Cuba, taken 2 November 1962 . Missile support equipment at the port being prepared for loading on Soviet ships for removal from Cuba .
 Soviet freighter Volgoles carrying missiles away from Cuba on 9 November 1962 . Soviet freighters were carrying missiles from Cuba .
 High altitude aerial reconnaissance photograph of missile launch site number 2 in San Cristobal, Cuba, 14 October 1962 . The wingtip of the photo plane, SP-2 Neptune, is also visible .
 Low altitude aerial photograph made over a portion of the Remedios-area military camp in Cuba on 25 October 1962 . John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston .
 Aerial reconnaissance photos of Mariel Naval port, Cuba, and vicinity, taken 4 November 1962, show missiles and support equipment being prepared for removal from Cuba .
 Soviet freighter Labinsk bound home from Cuba during the removal of missiles from that nation, 9 November 1962 . Soviet freighters Kasimov at sea, with 15 IL-28 Beagle bombers on deck, 11 in crates which were opened by the Soviet crew for United States air inspection,