 Home Explore Submit Search Search Upload Login Signup Upload Home Explore Login Sign up .
 The Soviet Union tailed the United States in the Arms Race and their missiles were not powerful enough to be launched against the U.S. The Soviets were not as strong as the United.
 President Kennedy claimed that the United States had fewer missiles than the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev still felt wary of the U.S.
 Fidel Castro searched for a way to keep his nation safe from a U.S. attack . As Premier of Cuba, Fidel Castro, searched for ways to keep Cuba safe from an attack . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of Cuba .
 Castro approved Khrushchev’s idea to station missile sites in Cuba . As a result of the plan, Castro approved the idea to build missile sites . Castro was forced to give up the idea .
 On October 15, 1962, photographs of the Soviet’s missile sites were revealed to the United States . The Soviet Union secretly built these sites during the summer of 1962 .
 President Kennedy was riefed on the missile installations the next day . The missile installations were the first to be deployed in the U.S.
 President Obama quickly called a meeting of his twelve most important advisors to deal with the crisis . He quickly called the meeting of 12 most important advisers .
 On October 28, 1962, they agreed to remove all missiles and put the crisis to rest . The two countries agreed to end the crisis and remove missiles from each other .
 One cause of this crisis was due to the missile gap President Kennedy spoke of during his campaign in 1960 . The gap in missile supply was a cause of the crisis in 1960s .
 Although the U.S. had more missiles than the Soviet Union, he stated otherwise . The United States had more missile missiles than Soviet Union .
 As President, it was up to Kennedy to decide whether or not to react to the serious nuclear threat from the Soviet Union . Kennedy was President of the United States during the Cold War .
 The Soviet feared attack from the United States because they did not have missiles powerful enough to be launched against the country . The United States had no missiles capable enough to launch against the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev produced a plan to place intermediate-range missiles in Cuba to reestablish the balance of power in the Cold War . The plan was rejected by the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Nikita Khrushchev had no intentions of starting a war but he knew the U.S. was serious about an attack . Nikita knew the United States had serious intentions .
 High Communist party officials were displeased with the agreement between the two . Two years later, after further discontent, he was removed from office .
 When Castro came into office, Cuba’s relations with the U.S. weakened . Castro came under pressure from the United States .
 President Kennedy attempted to overthrow Castor in the Bays of Pigs Invasion, but failed . Castor was overthrown by Castor, the Cuban dictator .
 It did, however, make him take precautions for another United States attack .
 When Nikita Khrushchev proposed his idea to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, Castro approved . Castro approved the move . Castro was the Cuban president of the Soviet Union .
 John F Kennedy repeatedly spoke of a missile gap between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Kennedy spoke of the gap in missile technology .
 The Pentagon reported to the Soviet Union that the U.S. had more missiles but Kennedy stood behind his words . Kennedy stood by his words despite the Pentagon saying he had more .
 After Kennedy was elected president, Nikita Khrushchev began to “test” him . After Kennedy became president, Khrushche began to "test’ him. After Kennedy’s election, he said, “I’m going to test him.
 In response to his actions, the Kennedy Administration felt to reveal to Khrushchev that there was no missile gap . The Kennedy Administration believed to have revealed the gap in missile technology .
 Khrushchev had always known they had more missiles, the Soviets knew . The U.S. now knew that Khrushchevitch had always been aware of the missile program .
 Fidel Castro worried of an attack by the United States . This lead him to conceive the idea of placing missile sites in Cuba with hopes of countering the U.S. lead in a nuclear attack .
 These attempts included the Bay of Pigs Invasion, which failed, a military exercise in 1962, and a mock invasion of a Caribbean island .
 The United States also developed a plan to invade Cuba in order to make Castro nervous . The U.S. also developed plans to invade the island nation .
 As a result, Castro was assured the United States was serious about invading Cuba . <li: Castro was also assured the U.S. was serious .
 After discussions between the Soviet Union and Kennedy’s advisors, an agreement was reached . After discussions, Kennedy's advisors were able to reach an agreement .
 President Kennedy agreed to dismantle all U.S. missiles stationed in Turkey . The missiles were removed from Turkey in 1963 . President Kennedy also agreed to remove missiles from Turkey .
 Nikita Khrushchev also wanted Kennedy to publicly announce to never invade Cuba . Kennedy was in the midst of a civil war between the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 Because he did not announce it publicly, he was said to have lost and become weakened . Because of his lack of public support, he lost and became weakened .
 The people in both Kennedy and Khrushchev’s government did not completely agree with their decisions not to take action . The people involved in the decision not to act did not agree with the decisions .
 It did, however, keep the lives of their country’s citizens of out of danger .
 U-2 spy planes were used to capture photos of missile sites in Cuba . 11 U.S. spy planes captured photos of the missile sites .
 January 3, 1961 United States rids diplomatic and consular relation with Cuba . U.S. rids relations with Cuba in order to end diplomatic relations with the island nation .
 Kennedy pledges U.S. will not use military force to overthrow Castro . April 12, 1961 Kennedy pledges the United States will not . Use of military force will not be used against Castro, Kennedy says .
 EX-COMM Meeting Meeting Meeting of President Kennedy and his advisors discussing possible ways to handle the crisis . Ex-COMm Meeting Meeting was President Kennedy's first meeting with his advisors .
 Nikita Khruschev wrote a letter to President Kennedy . The letter was signed by Nikita Kruschev in 1960s .
 The Daily Discussion is a weekly weekly feature on CNN iReport . Use this week's weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you need to read about the Daily Discussion .
 Clipping is a handy way to collect important slides you want to go back to later . Clipclips are a way of capturing important slides in the digital world . Use this Clipboard to help you capture photos and videos of your favorite slides .
 Read the latest in a series of books by John Sutter . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 .