 Sergei Khrushchev said his father decided to send missiles to Cuba because he felt an obligation to defend it . Sergei said he felt a duty to defend his father's Cuba .
 The crisis ended two weeks later when Mr Khrushchev promised to remove the missiles in exchange for a promise by Mr Kennedy not to invade Cuba . Mr Kennedy also promised to keep the missiles out of Cuba in exchange with a promise that he would not invade .
 George W Anderson Jr. died Friday of congestive heart failure at the Arleigh Burke Pavillion in McLean, Va. Anderson was the chief of naval operations during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis .
 Anderson retired from active service in August of 1983 . He was known for his outspoken views concerning civilian officials' involvement in weapons systems' development and tactics .
 Anderson's two-year tenure as CNO included the Cuban missile crisis in the autumn of 1962 . This led to disputes with then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara during his tenure .
 Anderson clashed with McNamara over nuclear-powered aircraft carrier construction and Navy fighter aircraft questions . Anderson also reportedly clashed over nuclear carrier construction .
 Anderson was graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1927 . Anderson was born in Brooklyn, Y.Y., Anderson was a member of the Brooklyn Navy .
 During World War II, he was a carrier navigator and tactical coordinator . He later was assistant to the deputy commander of the Pacific Fleet .
 He commanded the Mediterranean carrier division during the Lebanon crisis of 1958 . Later commanded the U.S. Sixth Fleet .
 Anderson served as ambassador to Portugal and was chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . Anderson retired in 1963 after active service in the Army .
 Co pyrig ht 19 9 9 2, Unite d P re s s s Inte rnatio nal, Inc., Inc., All rig hts re s e rve Cit at ion 'Adm. 'Cadm. Adm. at ion
 Soviet forces in Cuba had 36 nuclear warheads for the 24 intermediate-range missiles that were capable of hitting the U.S. Johnson, said . Johnson said .
 At the time, the CIA said it didn't believe there were any nuclear warheads on the island, McNamara said . McNamara: The CIA said there were no nuclear warheads in Cuba .
 McNamara: Soviet field commanders in Cuba authorized to use nuclear warheads in event of U.S. invasion . McNamara says he learned that Soviet field commander in Cuba could use warheads without Moscow's permission .
 Soviet Union deployed six dual-purpose tactical launchers supported by nine tactical missiles and nine nuclear warheads . U.S. invasion force was used against the Soviet Union, McNamara said .
 The confrontation began after the United States verified reports that Moscow was building sites in Cuba for offensive missiles that could easily reach the U.S. mainland . The United States says Moscow is building launching sites in the Cuban territory .
 On Oct. 1962, President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade around the island . Kennedy demanded the withdrawal of all missiles from Cuba .
 After two weeks of high tension, Nikita Khrush-chev yielded and agreed to withdraw them . After two . weeks of tension, Soviet leader Nikita . agreed to pull them .
 McNamara was one of dozens of Kennedy-era officials from the United States, Russia and Cuba attending the Havana meeting .
 Fidel Castro's beard is gray and his voice has a slight tremor, but the man who built a Communist state just 90 miles from America's shores seems as strong and defiant as ever as he turns 70 .
 Cuban leader has outlasted nine successive American presidents . Despite numerous predictions to the contrary, the Cuban leader doesn't seem to be going anywhere anytime soon .
 Security forces have kept a tight lid on internal dissent . The revolution that triumphed in 1959 has been battered, but security forces have been tight .
 He gave up his trademark cigars years ago for health reasons . He is said to exercise and has a team of physicians watching over him .
 Castro presides as ''maximum leader'' over one of the last remaining communist societies on Earth . Continuing to declare ''Socialism or death'' in a world now covered by mostly Western-style democracies .
 He no longer seems to actively shape Cuba's society as he once did . Cuba's economic crisis brought on by the collapse of the Soviet bloc has Cubans grumbling about job cutbacks, food shortages and low salaries .
 Eco nomic figures show Cuba's gross domestic product grew 9.9 percent in the first half of 1996 . Figures issued last month show the country's economy grew 9 percent .
 Reforms allowing Cubans to own small businesses and hold once-forbidden dollars have created more economic options . Reforms allow Cubans owning small businesses, holding dollars once forbidden . Cubans are allowed to own more than $1 billion in Cuban currency .
 Castro: ''The country is recovering slowly,'' Castro told tens of thousands gathered for last month's address . Castro: The economy is slowly recovering slowly .
 The Helms-Burton law, backed by anti-Castro Cuban exiles, is aimed at toppling Castro's government . It was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives last week .
 The Cuban air force shot down two civilian planes in February that anti-Castro exiles had piloted off this coast . It was rushed through after it shot down planes that were piloted by exiles . The Cuban government rushed through the measure after it was shot down in February .
 Castro jabbed his fingers in the air, waved his arms energetically and praised the men who died 43 years ago in the first revolutionary attack, a disastrous assault on the Moncada army barracks in the eastern city of Santiago .
 Castro's most fervent admirers are middle-aged Cubans who remember when dictator Fulgencio Batista fled Cuba on New Year's Day 1959 . The bearded rebels fighting Batista's army marched triumphantly into Havana in 1959 .
 It is the younger generation, born after socialism took hold, that tends to criticize . The younger generation is more critical of the government .
 They dream of new clothes and freedom to do whatever they like in the U.S. They say they want to live in the United States. They want to be able to dress up and go wherever they want .
 Jose Antonio refused to give his full name during a Havana street interview . He said he did not back the kind of violent overthrow espoused by many Cuban-American exiles . But even Jose Antonio said he would not back violent overthrow .
 While the Castro government admits dissidents exist, it rightly points out that they are not organized . Castro government acknowledges dissidents exist but points out they're not organized. Castro government says dissidents exist .
 Most seem more inclined to leave the country than stay and fight the system . Most seem to be leaving the country rather than staying and fighting the system. Most seem less inclined to fight the government .
 Gribkov was in Cuba at the time of the crisis . He says the Soviets had given authority to the local commander to fire missiles in the event of an invasion .
 Gribkov was in Cuba at the time of the crisis . He said the Soviets had given authority to the local commander to fire missiles in the event President Kennedy ordered an invasion .
 U.S. defense secretary at the time said it was '99 percent' likely to have ordered nuclear retaliation . Kennedy would have ordered retaliation if he had been attacked by the Soviets, he said .
 McNamara said he didn't know about the presence of the short-range nuclear warheads in Cuba until the Soviet general's disclosure . McNamara was a participant at the meeting .
 He told the Post that the revelation changed his assessment about how close the missile crisis came to nuclear conflict . He said he was surprised by the revelation .
 He took off his glasses and waited for the Russian ambassador’s translated reply . The Russian ambassador's translated reply was translated by the translator .
 Across America, some 55 million TV viewers watched the events . President Kennedy amongst them watched with keen interest .
 Several blown-up photographs of Cuba missiles, taken by U-2 spy planes, were placed on an easel, publicly embarrassing the Soviets . Stevenson reinforced his point by placing the photos of the Cuba missiles on the easel .
 America welcomed the fact that the Soviets avoided direct confrontation in the quarantine zone off Cuba . Nikita Khrushchev had signalled that the Soviet Union would take no reckless decisions .
 Washington is most anxious to reach a peaceful resolution, Washington says . But Washington also anxious to find a peaceful solution, he says .
 Kennedy would reply later that day to a letter from Khrushchev and urge him to alter the course of events . Kennedy was aware that some of the Cuban missiles were operational . Kennedy would respond to the letter by changing the course .
 U Thant, the UN’s acting-secretary general, is talking to the US, the Soviets and Cubans in an effort to find a peaceful solution . The Glasgow Herald said U. Thant was talking to U.S. and the Soviets in an attempt to
 Khrushchev had agreed to suspend arms shipments to Cuba for two or three weeks if the blockade was halted . The blockade would have lasted until the end of the war .
 Time running out for peaceful solution in Ukraine . Co pyrig ht 20 17, Ne ws que s t Me dia Gro up Ltd.
 The 72-year-old Ontario resident remembers the relief of not having to have fought a nuclear war with the Soviets thanks to the efforts of President Kennedy .
 He was shocked to hear that the president, beloved by many, had been assassinated . The president was killed by a single bullet shot at the head .
 Martinez initially thought the assassination was the result of a Cold War plot . During the initial stages of the story, Martinez thought it was an assassination attempt . Martinez initially believed the assassination to be a Cold war plot .
 Suspected assassin Lee Harvey Oswald was captured by police . Soon after however, the suspected assassin was captured . Oswald was later found dead in a house fire explosion .
 Martinez snatched up all the newspapers related to the story from the printing press and saved them . Martinez, a former copy boy at the Newburgh News, was a copy boy .
 He still keeps them today, including an edition that was published in the press though never distributed because of new information that had come in later in the day . He keeps them, including a copy that was never distributed .
 All rig hts re s e rve Re pro duce d with the pe rmis s io n o f . Me dia Ne ws Gro up, Inc.
 The $2,500 cost of the monument -a marker and an adjacent bench - was raised by the Boynton Beach Veterans Council to mark the 13 tense days in October 1962 . The world stood on the brink of nuclear war after the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 In February, commissioners approved the monument for the crisis, as well as other markers honoring the various military branches . The monument was approved in February .
 The city rejected one to mark the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961 . City rejected one for the failed Bay of Pics invasion of the country .
 It had been proposed by Mayor José Rodriguez, who is Cuban-American, who had agreed to raise the $4,000 to pay for the marker .
 A city board recommended against it, and the idea stalled after the mayor was arrested . Mayor was arrested Jan. and then suspended . The mayor was suspended after the arrest .
 The pencil scribbles on a yellow legal pad suggest an impending crisis . It is the first time the government has been forced to take action against the government .
 John F Kennedy wrote the words ""decisions"" and ""leaders"" on his pad as his advisers debated the next step in the Cuban missile crisis .
 In the middle of the sheet of paper is a set of concentric circles perhaps representing a blockade of Cuba . The circles are thought to represent a blockade .
 Exhibit marks 40th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis . John F Kennedy Library and Museum is displaying artifacts at the museum . The exhibit includes a sheet of paper .
 The exhibit features a 20-minute film of newsreels, television news footage and a December 1962 TV interview with Kennedy . Kennedy and Khrushchev correspondence show how relations between the two men evolved during the crisis .
 Kennedy's doodles seem to have the most resonance with visitors, museum curator Frank Rigg says . Kennedy's scribbles on yellow paper a habit of his, curator says . The exhibit is on display at the National Museum in New York .
 Rigg says he hopes visitors come away with a sense of how Kennedy remained open to discussion and different viewpoints how he did not jump in and jump in .
 The exhibit traces the timeline of the crisis with photos, meeting minutes and letters to and from Kennedy . The exhibit also includes letters, photos and meeting minutes from Kennedy.
 A handwritten letter from 10-year-old Betsy Pieters of Mishawaka, Indiana, tells Kennedy, "We are praying that all your decisions will be right" Kennedy: "We're praying that the right decision will be made"
 Khrushchev offers to withdraw missiles from Cuba if U.S. pledges not to invade Cuba . Four days later, he offered to withdraw the missiles if the United States pledged not to invasion Cuba . The missiles were withdrawn .
 Khrushchev said if two sides kept pulling on the ""knot of war,"" it would be pulled so tight only war could break it . The letter is known as the "knot letter" because Khrushche said two sides would pull so tight that war broke it .
 For Beltramo and her husband, Walter, the exhibit brought back memories of the tension the entire country felt during the 13 days . The exhibit is on display in Washington, D.C.
 St. Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch at ion Greg Sukiennik; The Associated Press, 'EXHIBIT'
 Jennifer Barnes' only wish was to please her husband, until the Cuban missile crisis drove her desires south . Jennifer Barnes was a housewife who wanted to be a wife .
 Triangle Productions' uproarious version of Doug Field's "Down South" Jennifer's anxieties range beyond Cold War politics into the nether land of latent desire . The show is set in the South .
 Jennifer reacts to the crisis by peeling layers from her sheltered life . Wearing platinum bouffant hairdo and a succession of dresses from pink rayon to gauzy evening wear .
 "If we survive the radiation,"" she says, ""I'd like to be able to converse" First she learns Spanish, then Cuban love songs, and finally a sex act that makes her husband dispensable .
 Daria O'Neill is hilarious as Jennifer, whether happily stockpiling canned goods or suggesting her coming liberation in the way she wiggles through a doorway . Oozing verve and allure, she plays Jennifer in the new series .
 Don Alder is equally funny as husband Bob, managing to be both vain and bewildered as he becomes increasingly superfluous . He manages to manage to be a vain, bewildered husband .
 Jennifer Niederloh sashays onstage in a red satin dress as Bob's friend Eddie's sultry, sex-obsessed wife, Cheryl . The show's real heat comes from the real heat, however, comes from Jennifer .
 When she and O'Neill share the stage, the steam is as thick as the laughs . The steam is thick as she and her co-star .
 Dale Johannes uses a Jersey accent to suggest Eddie's lowbrow life . Patrick Holden veers between camp and caricature as the closeted neighbor Stephan . Sharon Mann is straight out of ""Bewitched"" as Stephan's Gladys Kravitz-like wife . Dale Johannes used a Jersey
 Director Don Horn uses lighting efficiently to suggest scenes outside the single set, a modest '60s home . The film is based on a single set set, set in a modest home .
 The set's obvious period adornments -hi-fi-console and Spam-filled cupboards, for example -make the script's stock '60s images more apparent . Unfortunately, the set is set with an obvious period-themed set .
 Just an hour and 10 minutes long, ""Down South" rushes too quickly to its close .
 A slightly slower pace would let those final laughs breathe, allowing the audience to savor the fun a little longer . The final laugh would be the last of the show, but a slower pace might let it breathe .
 Those under 18 must be accompanied by an adult . Because of adult themes, those under 18 need an adult.
 The 'Cuban missile crisis' has gone down in history as the near-meltdown moment of the cold war . The confrontation that took the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 As one who sat in on some of those White House deliberations in the president's cabinet room, I believe that the dangers of that 13-day interlude in October 1962 have been greatly exaggerated .
 The odds that President Kennedy could face down Nikita Khrushchev and force him to withdraw the weapons were overwhelmingly in Kennedy's favor . From the moment the United States discovered that the Soviet missile emplacement was underway, the odds that the U.S. would face down Khrush
 You need to examine the facts that were available to both sides, either explicitly or implicitly, overtly or subliminally, at the time . At the time, both sides were at the center of the debate, whether or not .
 This did not make the missiles in Cuba acceptable, but it surely defined the threat as psychological . The threat was essentially psychological, a potential blow to America's psyche and a probable inconvenience .
 The first recommendation of a majority of the president's advisers (the Excomm of the National Security Council) was to blast out the missiles and their emplacements with airstrikes . The Excomm recommended airstrikes .
 The president wondered whether any American action, either an airstrike or blockade, might precipitate yet another Soviet action against the Western presence in Berlin .
 U.S. and NATO forces in Europe would have to surrender or retaliate with nuclear weapons . The Soviets knew that any act that sought to depose the West would set overwhelming Soviet land forces against the 200,000 United States forces .
 Soviet Union possessed at that time as few as 75, and no more than 300, strategic missiles . The Soviet Union had as many as 75 strategic missiles, according to the report .
 The United States could target and deliver perhaps as many as 5,000 nuclear warheads . The U.S. could target or deliver as many of those warheads .
 To some American theorists this passed for a ""parity"" of sorts, but surely it could not look like that to Moscow, even without factoring in Soviet paranoia . To some U.S. theorists this . passed for . some Americans this passed . for some Americans . to some
 If Khrushchev were so lunatic as to launch a first strike and kill thousands of Americans, it would be but a terrible prelude to having his country wiped off the face of the earth .
 Khrushchev was impetuous, bombastic, reckless, reckless; he was also a bluffer . Eisenhower faced him down over Berlin in the 1950s .
 "I never heard anyone, not even CIA analysts, suggest that he was insane. But in my several years of experiences in and out of government, I never heard him be insane," he says .
 In the most crucial of the messages he exchanged with Kennedy, he said ""only lunatics or suicides, who themselves want to perish and to destroy the whole world before they die,"" would push the confrontation to conflict .
 There was no other way to translate that message except as a plea from a man who knew he'd gone too far . The message was "I'm sorry for what I've done"
 North Korea has shown a willingness to use a nuclear weapon against human beings, CNN's John Sutter says .
 It seemed to be that all those factors dictated a peaceful settlement . "It seemed to me during those 13 days, as it does today," he says .
 There can be miscalculation of even the most carefully calculated risk in the world . The risk of miscalculating risk can be fatal, even if the risk is calculated carefully carefully .
 In the 35 years since, the participants on both sides of the confrontation have continued to say that it was . In the past 35 years, the confrontation has continued to be remembered as one of the greatest moments of American history .
 They have held three conferences at which they exchanged information, traded theories and canonized each other for having saved the world .
 In 1992, Russian general said Soviet troops in Cuba had authority to fire nuclear missiles at the U.S. if they felt the need to . At the most recent one in Havana, in 1992, a Russian general went so far as to say that Soviet troops were given authority by Moscow
 The general was a pompous windbag, and his claim proved to be patently untrue . McNamara returned to the mainland to state that we had come ""even closer to nuclear war than he had believed in October of 1962 .
 Even selfless participants in a dangerous confrontation can come to see it as more threatening than it was, thereby making the defusing of it more heroic . The defuse of a confrontation can be heroic, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 French daily Le Monde carried what it said were the most extensive excerpts ever published of Castro's account of the crisis . The French daily said it carried out extensive excerpts of the White House meetings during the standoff .
 French academic who obtained a copy of Castro's secret account in Cuba and found the Kennedy passages in newly declassified tapes . Vincent Touze, a French academic, said the documents showed how little control Castro had over Soviet arms .
 The crisis began Oct. 1962, when U.S. spy planes spotted Soviet missiles on Cuba . The crisis ended when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev said they would be withdrawn from Cuba .
 Castro was less sure about his ally Khrushchev, who he says bungled from the start of the risky bid to deploy missiles just off the Florida coast, and admitted the Cubans were naive . Castro says the Cuban government was naive when it tried to deploy the missiles, but Kh
 Castro said Soviet troops' failure to hide missiles was so blatant some Cubans suspected it was done on purpose . Castro said the Soviet troops failed to hide the missiles so blatant it was thought to be intentional . Castro: "Some Cubans suspect it was intentional"
 Castro suggested 1,000 missiles when a Soviet field marshal visited Havana to propose deploying the weapons . Castro said he suggested the missiles when he suggested they be deployed in Cuba . Castro: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 Castro said he had wanted to inform Washington of the Soviet-Cuban defence agreement before the missiles could be spotted . Castro: 'I wanted to tell Washington of this agreement before it could be seen'
 The bombs will erase 15 U.S. cities from the map of the United States . They will be launched and erase 15 cities from their map .
 Kennedy, backed by defence secretary Robert McNamara, announced instead of a blockade of Cuba . Soviet ships carrying strategic missiles to the island turned back two days later .
 The excerpts show that Kennedy was still considering bombing or invading Cuba as late as Oct. 1962 . Kennedy was considering a bombing or invasion of Cuba but preferred to stick to a diplomatic showdown .
 Castro was less sure about his ally Khrushchev, who he says bungled from the start of the risky bid to deploy missiles, and admitted the Cubans were naive . Castro says the Cuban government was naive when it tried to launch missiles .
 Le Monde said the White House tapes were declassified in October, 1996 . The tapes showed America's leading military men pressing hard for an invasion of Cuba .
 The excerpts show Kennedy was still considering bombing or invading Cuba as late as Oct. 1962 . Kennedy was considering a possible invasion of Cuba but preferred to stick to a diplomatic showdown .
 Some Russian nationalists said the Russian leader should threaten the West with nuclear missiles . Nikita Khrushchev did during the 1962 crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Russia bitterly opposes plans to include former Soviet satellites in the NATO alliance . Russia tacitly acknowledges that it cannot stop the move .
 Yeltsin has been trying to limit expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . He has been under tough criticism from nationalist and Communist opponents at home . The Russian leader has been fighting to limit NATO expansion .
 The deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba triggered the 1962 missile crisis . The Cuban missile crisis was triggered by the deployment of nuclear weapons .
 Both sides considered the possibility of a nuclear confrontation, but eventually the missiles were removed . Both sides removed the missiles from the U.S.
 Russian ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky said yesterday that Moscow should use the same tactic against NATO now . He said Russia should use same tactic now .
 NATO wants an agreement with Russia before its July 8-9 summit in Madrid, Spain . The alliance plans to name its first members from Central and Eastern Europe . NATO wants to name first members of Central and eastern Europe .
 Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic are believed to be the leading candidates for the job . Poland and Hungary are said to be among the leading countries in the world's most populous countries .
 Yeltsin: "They also mustn't deploy weapons and military hardware, especially nuclear, in newly accepted NATO members" " They also shouldn't be deployed weapons or military hardware" in newly-accepted NATO members .
 Negotiators have agreed to create a Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice, but not a vote, in NATO decisions . The council will be created to allow Moscow a voice in NATO's decisions .
 NATO has said it has no plans to move nuclear weapons or combat troops to the territories of new members . NATO says it will not rule out such a move in the future, but that it won't rule out it .
 NATO also will not promise to refrain from building military infrastructure on those territories, including airfields, communications and air defense installations . NATO also won't say they won't build military infrastructure .