 I'd like a simple summary, maybe a page to a page and and a half . Clarification of Question by top19-ga .
 I'd like to include quotes that Kennedy and his advisors recorded as saying . Also I'd also like to show quotes from Kennedy and advisors .
 If you need anymore clarrification, please don't hesitate to ask again. If you want more information, please contact us on Twitter .
 In the early sixties, the Cold War (the tense, conflictive status-quo between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that lasted from the aftermath of WWII through the fall of the USSR) was in its height .
 The Soviets had reached a considerable technological and war industry development . They were slightly ahead in the space race since they had put a man to orbit the Earth before United States did . They exerted a strong control over Eastern Europe; the Chinese giant was consolidating its own way of communism .
 One of the most successful insurrections in history was the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban Revolution was a paradigmatically successful one, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Cuban exiles trained by the CIA trained to carry out failed invasion of Cuba . Bay of Pigs was a failed attempt to invade Cuba . U.S. economic sanctions by the U.K. led to the failed invasion .
 Cuba and the USSR found that they had quite a few converging interests besides ideological similitude . In this context, Cuba and USSR found a lot of converging interest in each other . Cuba and Russia found each other a common interest .
 The USSR knew that US already had many nuclear missiles spread over Europe and Turkey aiming at Soviet targets . The USSR, which was some steps behind the U.S. in the nuclear weaponry race, knew that the US .
 Soviet military aid to Cuba had already begun by sending troops, scientists and conventional weaponry . The Cuban government had begun sending troops and scientists to Cuba .
 John McCone, director of the CIA, warned President Kennedy that some of the ships were probably carrying missiles . McCone was told by French Intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba, and so he warned him .
 Kennedy relied on claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba, nor any plans to place any, and that the Soviets would not start an international drama that might impact the U.S. elections in November .
 A U-2 flight clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal . The SS4 site is believed to be the largest in the world .
 Reconnaissance data revealing Soviet nuclear missile installations on Cuba is shown to United States President John F Kennedy . President Kennedy was shown the data to President of Cuba .
 President Kennedy, in a televised address, announces the discovery of the installations . Kennedy proclaims that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union . Any attack would be considered an attack on Cuba by the Soviets .
 The word quarantine was used rather than blockade because a blockade would be an act of war . War had not been declared between the U.S. and Cuba, and war had not yet been declared .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union . Kennedy was in the midst of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 when he was in Cuba .
 First deal: Soviets offer to withdraw missiles in return for U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba or support any invasion . First deal was to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a United States guarantee . U.K. would not support any Cuban invasion .
 Call for withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey is added to the demands of the 26th .
 Kennedy responds by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Robert F Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to privately accept the second, but requesting Khrushchev to keep it out of the public domain, so that he would not appear weak before the upcoming elections .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announces that the installations would be dismantled . The installations were dismantled by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The Hot Line was a Cold War communications link between Moscow and Washington D.C. It was meant to have a way for the leaders of the two Cold War countries to communicate directly in order to solve crisis like the one in October 1962 .
 Zorin: 'I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and I do not wish to answer a question put to me in the manner in which a prosecutor does' Stevenson: 'You are in the courtroom of world opinion right now, and you can answer yes or no
 Krushchev made a quote about tightening a knot and then having to cut that knot in a letter to kennedy. Regards, Guillermo Request for Answer Clarification .
 For a $15 dollar bonus (its entirely up to you) please tell me in detail, exactly what happened between the time kennedy was shown the photographs, to him going onv. and announcing to the world about the missiles .
 I'm only interested in things that happened in front of Kennedy and in his prescence, much like the way 13 Days was filmed, he says . "I only want to know what happened to Kennedy," he says of Kennedy .
 As far as I could find, there seems to be no conclusive data regarding the missiles .
 I really enjoyed researching on this topic, and am glad that the outcome met your expectations . I really enjoy researching this topic and I'm glad that it met expectations .
 GIs in Germany were given yellow fever inoculations on 8.8.05 . The United States still wasn't sure that the situation had been settled, however .
 Answers are not intended to substitute for informed professional medical, psychiatric, psychological, tax, legal, investment, accounting, or other professional advice . Answers and comments provided by Google Answers are general information, and are general .
 Google does not endorse, and expressly disclaims, any product, manufacturer, distributor, service or service provider mentioned or any opinion expressed in answers .
 If you feel that you have found inappropriate content, email us at answers-support@google.com with the question ID listed above . Please read carefully the Google Answers Terms of Service .