 That was four years before the Iraqi war and 2Vz years before Bush was President . That was 4 years before Iraq War and 2 years before President Bush .
 On September 11, 2001,19 Muslim Arabs flew airplanes into the Twin Towers and the Pentagon, killing 3,000 innocent men and women at their jobs . On September 9,2001,19 Arab Americans flew planes into the twin Towers and Pentagon . 9/11 was September 11 .
 Japanese newspaper Sankei Shimbun published a government document dated December 20 about Japan's intention to develop small nuclear warheads in 2006 .
 There were more articles on my computer, but you get the idea... it wasn't ever a question of if, but only when and what . It wasn't always a question, but it was always a matter of if .
 I felt there would be some event that would loosen the strings on nations' nuclear arsenals causing a regional nuclear war and a respondent terrorist attack on the Great Satan, us, us . I felt the event would cause a regional nuke war, and a terrorist attack .
 There were several possibilities, including a Pakistan-lndia exchange or less likely, an attack by China . There were possible options, including an exchange or an attack on Pakistan .
 Nuclear winter probably lasted for thousands or 10 of thousands years . That produced an equivalent to nuclear winter that lasted thousands or tens of thousands of years .
 Our more recent exchange was nothing by comparison; hence the aftereffects wouldn't last nearly as long as long . The two sides would have been at odds for a long time, but not so long .
 "For my part, my life expectancy could be measured by the available medications. For my part of my life, I'm not sure how long I'll live, but I'm happy to live with my life . I'm glad I've lived with a life-threatening illness, but
 "I needed insulin, additional oral oral diabetic drugs, control for a sensitive digestive system and something to keep my hypertension in check," she says .
 Diovan HCT was found to be the best anti-hypertensives for years of trials . Actos and Amaryl can be substituted for Avandaryl, and Actos can be used to replace Plavix .
 My big worry was the Xanax, it was necessary to turn my brain off, hence was number one on my list of meds . Xanax was the drug of choice, and it was the number one one on her list of medications .
 Angiotensin II receptor blockers can be used to treat heart failure in some people who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors or who have kidney disease from diabetes and in people with diabetes .
 If we could establish an operating recovery system with the things to provide for our needs and reasonable security, we'd more or less be back where we started . We'd be back at the bottom of the line if we could provide the things we need and security . We need to be able
 "Just exactly where that would be on the evolutionary scale of civilization, I couldn't say. Just exactly where exactly that would have been on an evolutionary scale?" asks the author .
 As long as we could keep the machines running, it would remain close to our starting point, minus advanced communications and advanced medical treatments . It would remain a close-up point, without advanced communications, and advanced treatments .
 So many of our communications systems depended on satellites, I doubted we'd have our former level of phone service, or internet . So many communications systems depend on satellites . We would have to rely on satellites to maintain our phone service and internet .
 As long as hams could generate the necessary electricity, we'd have some communications . Conversely, as long as . hams can generate . electricity, they would be able to communicate with each other .
 "There was one string attached, I had to quit avoiding avoiding avoiding Aaron's efforts to see that my needs were being met," she says . "I had to stop avoiding avoiding him," she adds .
 "I also assigned a group of chores to him, cleaning the firearms, keeping the pickup ready to roll and taking care of Sharon’s and my horses," he says . "He's also responsible for keeping Sharon and her horses safe," he adds .
 He adjusted far quicker than I did; I was used to staying up until 1 am and getting up at 10am . He adjusted quickly than me did. "He adjusted far . quicker than me," he said .
 Aaron took to carrying the 'old man's medical kit' with oxygen, defibrillator, nitro tablets, and first aid kit . Aaron also carried a portable defibillator with him .
 He was trained to establish an IV with Ringer's or normal saline, and administer drugs like Lidocaine, sodium bicarb, epinephrine 1:1000, dextrose 25%, etc. getting instructions via radio . Getting instructions from radio .
 Out in the shed were several of those bioconverters that produced 55 gallons of biodiesel in 3 hours . The biodiesel was produced by several of the bioconversators .
 They were still in the shipping cartons, I'd never bothered to set them up. I found them in the cartons of shipping . I've never bothered setting them up, but they were still there .
 The replacement generator they found was also a Kohler, 2 150REOZJB, each capable of -417 amps of prime power . Each of the generators is capable of producing -417 amp prime power.
 Running three generators gave us -1,250 amps, more than enough for our expanding trailer park . Running 3 generators ran out of -1.250 amps . Running generators was a good way to get around the trailer park.
 Damon did that by reading the instruction manual for the new generator and determined that they were built in . It took a while to locate a synchronizer, Damon did it by reading an instruction manual . Damon says it took a long time to locate the synchronizer .
 Mary's cousin was a diesel mechanic and could rebuild anything, provided you could find the parts . One of Mary's cousins was a mechanic and can rebuild anything . Mary's family was able to rebuild anything with parts .
 I had a set for the smaller Kohler, and we went looking for parts for the larger genset . I had set for a smaller . Kohler . We went to the store for parts .
 They brought back drums of Methanol from both Tucson and Phoenix, once the radiation died down a little . Methanol was brought back from both Arizona and Phoenix .
 With that and a few cases of sodium hydroxide , I think we were set to go. With that, we were able to get some of the world's largest amounts of water . We hope to find a solution to the problem .
 Taking care of Dad was becoming more of a chore since he had gotten up from his chair and started shuffling around more . Taking care for him was becoming a chore, he said .
 Battle of wills was a perfect description of what he and I were doing, with poor Aaron caught in the middle . 'Battle of wills' was a 'perfect description' of what Aaron was doing, he said .
 "That asked a lot of discretion from a guy just now becoming a man who loved us both and didn't want us fighting over how much Dad was doing," he says .
 "Since we were one of the last bastions of democracy we needed an elected council to run things," says David Cameron . "We need to be more democratic and more democratic," he says .
 Dad nominated to serve as treasurer for the community . After a little organizing, he nominated Dad to be treasurer . "Dad is a great guy," he says .
 It made sense to me, seeing as he was already the de facto banker and richest man . It's not the first time I've heard from such a politician, it's a good thing for the world's richest man to be a banker .
 He was elected by 80% of the vote in a 5 way election, a landslide in every sense of the word . It didn't do him much good .
 Aaron's dad gave him a few hours of work to do in his newly elected office . Aaron's new job added a couple of hours of paperwork to his morning .
 The United States Marine Corps was organized as the land combat portion of the United States Navy . The Marine Corps is a land combat arm of the U.S. Navy . It was organized in the 1930s .
 This happened way back when there were only two branches, each had their own Cabinet secretary, and they were constantly fighting with each other over everything from funding to facilities . Each branch has its own Cabinet Secretary, and each has their own cabinet secretary .
 Army handles all aspects of land combat except amphibious assault, with a few exceptions . The Army handles most land combat, except amphibian assault assault .
 The Navy handles all aspects of maritime combat, again with a few exceptions . The U.S. Navy handles most of the military's maritime operations .
 The Marine Corps by its very nature, though, has to incorporate all three areas into its sphere of control .
 The primary purpose of the Corps is to punch a big hole in the coastal defenses of its enemy up to an operational depth of roughly 50 miles . The U.S. military says it has no plans to engage in combat against the enemy .
 The Marine Corps is usually the last on the list for new equipment and funding . Because of the ""limited"" nature of its sphere of influence, the Marines are usually last in the list of new equipment or funding . The Marines are considered the most powerful in the world .
 Every piece of equipment that the Army uses is evaluated for application to the Marine mission . The Army uses equipment that is evaluated to apply to the Marines mission .
 A typical Marine in the same situation will look for potential targets and shoot them . Marine in same situation would shoot potential targets . Marine is a typical Marine who looks for targets and shoots them .
 The removal of one step makes the Marines faster to react in combat and deadlier . Army soldiers are less likely to create collateral damage in combat, Army soldiers .
 If I knew I was going into an ugly fight I would want at least some Marines because they would kill an awful lot of my enemies in short order . "I would like to see some of the Marines in the Marines," says President Obama .
 If discretion was required, though, I wouldn't want them within a hundred miles of my operation . If discretion is required, however, I would be happy to have them in the UK .
 The big problem for all the jarheads in Iraq was that the U.S. public wanted discretion when we needed destruction . The American public, coached by the mainstream media, wanted discretion, when needed destruction.
 Dad and I probably disagree on this point because of the fourth generation war, but there you have it . Dad and Dad probably disagree over this point .
 Maybe more of those reporters should have come with us on convoys in Iraq, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The first time you have a roadside bomb nearly kill you and people that you are responsible for, it changes your way of thinking . From experience, you have to be very careful when dealing with a bomb that nearly kills you .
 Maybe then they would have concentrated less on the methods our boys and girls used over there and more on what we needed to do back home to fully support them. Maybe then the boys would have been more focused on what they needed to be doing back home .
 They had two BRDM-2 recon trucks with 14.5mm machine guns mounted, and a total of 8 troops between them . They were two recon trucks with 14mm . machine guns, with total of eight troops .
 The convoy reacted swiftly, though, opening up on them before they could bring their guns to bear . The convoy opened up quickly, opening fire on the convoy .
 Less than 15 seconds later both trucks were burning and the gunners were trying to stop shooting the survivors as they bailed out without much success . The survivors were shot in the head by the gunner as they tried to escape .
 There wasn't enough left of those Mexicans to identify as human beings, much less figure out which unit they were with . The Mexican soldiers were killed by the Mexican government in 2009 .
 The Mexican General decided to send out a search and rescue patrol . "We had to act fast, before that patrol was declared missing and the Mexican General declared missing," he said .
 "We loaded everything that we could, until the springs on the trucks groaned. We loaded everything from the truck to the truck," says the author .
 Everything else was transferred to three shelters and rigged up with C4 and det cord . Everything else else was moved out of the system .
 I spooled out a thousand yards of fuse for the charges and rigged it to light off all three charges at once . It was a thousand yard fuse that lit off the three charges .
 "It seemed to take forever, but the charges all went off as planned as far as planned," she says . The charges went off "as planned as well as I could tell"
 One of the gunners who didn't like earplugs had to be relieved while the medic treated him for a pair of ruptured eardrums . Even at a few miles of distance the shock wave was strong enough to push the trucks around .
 The Mexican army sent a telegram to warn of insurgents in the area . It was the first time they had been told of the presence of insurgents .
 He was using a tabletop trainer he had swiped before he left Iowa to hunt for a tank crew . He used it to train for the tank crew in Iowa .
 Remember to move the reticle to the target, dump your lead, lase, and blaze . Move the lead, dump the lase and blaze. Move the target to move your reticle. Move your lead and lase .
 Damon still seemed to think that Bill was a lower rank because he wasn't blood kin . Damon still seems to think Bill is a lower ranking because he's not blood kin to him . Damon seemed to still think Bill was lower rank .
 None of them was looking forward to another session with Bill’s acid wit and sharp comments .
 One by one, the group of hopefuls shuffled off, griping about the pointlessness of filling sandbags . The group of hopeful sandbaggers was left disappointed by the lack of sandbags in the sand .
 Remember to dump your lead by releasing and grabbing the palm switch again . Dump your lead and grab the switch again to dump the lead .
 The screen began to scroll as Mary scanned back and forth, looking for the telltale bright spot of a target signature . Mary scanned the screen looking for a bright spot on the screen .
 Bill noticed that she only missed it by a few seconds when it appeared and that it took less than the usual time for a new gunner to get on target and lase . Bill said that she missed the lase by a short time .
 She pressed the trigger and the screen jumped, just like it would in a real tank from the recoil of the main gun . The screen jumped from the gun's recoil, like it did in real tanks .
 On a real target, this would probably scare the bejeezus out of the crew inside but not destroy the tank . This would probably be a good idea on a target, but not destroying the tank.
 One limiter on the tabletop trainer was that the computer always awarded a kill on a second hit, even if the round would have glanced off a corner .
 You jerked the trigger both times, pulling the round up and right on the target . It was the first time you fired a gun at a gun range .
 "I couldn't see why Mary couldn't be a crewmember. Ain't no porta potty's in a tank," she says . "I'm not a crew member," she adds .
 I had stuck my head in a gutted out Sherman they had at EAFB for an observation post, but that didn't tell you anything, because of it being gutted . I'm not sure what happened to the Sherman, but I stuck his head in it .
 Derek said he didn't want anyone knowing we had it; it was an open invitation to the Mexican Army to invade the area . Besides, Derek said, "Derek said he wanted anyone knowing anyone knew we had"
 "Once they had the crew trained, they had to take it somewhere and fire it, crew orientation or whatever. Still, once they had had to . They had to fire it somewhere, fire it," crew orientation .
 "I was feeling somewhat constrained, they wouldn't let me off the acreage now. I was feeling ... constrained," she said . "They wouldn't be able to let me go ... now," she added .
 You'd have thought anyone with half a brain would have beat feet south. You'd've thought that anyone with a half-brain would have beaten feet south .
 They waited for the radiation to die down and continued their invasion . But no, they waited for it to happen and continued to invade .
 My Dad tells a story about a gopher snake and an air force buddy that always tickles me . My Dad always tells a tale about a snake and a buddy that tickles him .
 Dad and some others coiled up a dead gopher snake in a candy machine . The buddy in question visited every night and scared the guy half-death . Dad and others co-coiled up the dead snake in the candy machine that the guy in question was visiting .
 The reason I refer to this story is that it applies to keeping on your toes . The reason for this is that the story is important to keep your toes on your own .
 In Iraq we had to keep changing our schedule so that no pattern emerged. In Iraq, Iraq was so difficult to find a pattern that emerged. We had to constantly change our schedule to avoid a pattern emerged .
 Airman Second Class Dukes got frightened badly by a dead gopher snake . Airman Dukes was frightened by the dead snake .
 "All the activity we had going on in and around the compound set a pattern. All the activity was going on," says the team manager .
 Some bright eyed Mexican Sergeant had noticed that Fort Huachuca was too well defended for a deserted Army post . The Mexican Army post was a well defended post .
 It was just his bad luck that his lieutenant couldn't place an ambush in hiding very well, he says . "It was just a bad luck," he says of his lieutenant .
 One satchel charge, two HE and one WP 155mm shells, and a detonation rig that will function with a remote trigger . The device will be able to detonate with a controlled trigger .
 We rig it all to go on one clacker, so that the whole convoy gets hit at once . We rig all the equipment to go together, so we can get at once, says the driver .
 A few brave souls armed with antitank rockets and heavy machine guns to clean up the mess, and transportation to get them out of dodge . The mess was a mess of chaos, but the U.S. was able to pull out of it .
 Convoys and patrols that disappear are a big morale problem . It is sure to attract the attention of even the most idiotic officers . Convoy and patrols disappearing are a problem .
 "I got out all of my weapons and cleaned and oiled them, getting ready for the fight. We were bringing the war to us," he says . "We were getting ready to fight," he adds .
 I had my weapons lined up, but kept going back to my favorite, my original MIA Loaded . I had a list of weapons, including guns, but went back to his favorite, the original MIA .
 I must have loaded up about 60 of those 20-round magazines; we're not going to have much time to reload . We're going to need to reload quickly, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Nitromethane is racing fuel; you should be able to find it in and around Tucson . It's racing fuel and should be available in Tucson .
 "I was surprised to learn that Derek didn't want to drop the sides of all these attack sites to block the roads," says Drexler . "Drexler is not sure if he wants to use the roads to protect himself and others."
 I guess that he wanted to keep the roads easily repairable for some reason . The roads were built in the 1970s and 1980s .
 "Sometimes I think that the only one who knows what's in that kid's mind is him. Who knows, sometimes I think ... that's the only thing I know is him"
 "Even with all the Claymores we set, there would be very little overlap between them," says author . "There would be no overlap between the two"
 "I flipped the safety down and clicked the detonator three times, just like he showed me," she says . "It's a good sign that I'm not going to be in trouble," she adds .
 I stuck my head up and aimed my rocket launcher at the biggest chunk left . I stuck his head up, aimed his rocket launcher . He aimed it at the largest chunk left, then aimed it back at the other .
 "Around me, all of Derek's guys were doing the same thing or raking anything that moved with .50 caliber machine guns," he says . "All the guys around me were raking things that moved," he adds .
 I remembered all those little things Derek was fond of talking about when his mind wandered back towards tanks . "I remembered all these little things," he said of Derek, who was fondly fond of tanks . I remembered Derek's fascination with tanks .
 "They were the only things that I think he was afraid of when inside his tank. They were the things that he thought he would be afraid of," he said .
 The only real difference between the ground tank and a ground tank is that it flies . The only difference between them is that they fly, the only difference is they fly .
 It has good armor, carries a butt load of ordnance, and can attack from a good ways off . It's good armor and good ordnance; it can attack a good way off .
 When tanks see them, they can only freeze and hope that they can point the big gun at them because even the .50 cal will bounce off . Even the smallest guns can't be fired at tanks .
 "Derek might have his tank, but if those Hinds showed up we were in a lot of trouble," he says . "We were in the middle of trouble. Derek might have . his tank," he adds .
 "I figured if we could teach the Mujahedeen to shoot them, we had enough talent we could get them assembled and learn to aim them," says Taliban leader .
 I did have part of the manual, in document form (Stinger FM Excerpt.doc), I just didn't realize it at the time . "I did have one of the manuals, but I didn't know what it was like," says author .
 It was in the subdirectory titled Field Manuals and was the sole document file . The document file was found in the basement of the basement . It was the only document file in the directory .
 At least it gave them a fighting chance, provided they wanted to take it . At least they were given the chance to win the game .
 "I can bounce the signal through a couple of calling center switchboards and they will be chasing me all over Omaha," he says . He says he can bounce through a few of the switchboards .
 I bet Dad was having a fit over his harvest, which wasn't half done yesterday when I left . I bet him was having an fit over the harvest .
 Bill grabbed the computer and we headed out the back to where the pickup was parked . The truck was parked in the back of the truck .
 "We had deliberately come in a civilian vehicle to keep a lower profile," says police officer . "We were deliberately coming in civilian vehicles," he says .
 The rotors were getting louder and I could see 2 black dots coming in from the west . Hopefully it would work because the rotors are getting louder .
 It takes a while to train a chopper pilot, and not even all pilots can learn how to fly one . Not even all chopper pilots are able to learn to fly them .
 The pair of them set down one at a time in the Safeway parking lot . Sure enough, they did .
 The crews popped the canopies and headed for the liquor store next door to the main grocery store . Once the rotors spooled down, the crews headed to the liquor shop next door .
 Dad bought it for me a while back so that I would quit ""borrowing"" his . Dad bought the toy for me so I would stop "borrowing" his. It was bought for me to stop using his .
 Bill eased his Lee-Enfield forward and drew a bead on one of the rear Mexicans . Bill eased the gun forward and fired a shot at the Mexican .
 "Even after years off of tanks we both used the same crew fire commands to talk to each other. Even after years of tanks, we used to use the same crews fire commands," he says .
 The other two whipped around in short order, bringing their pistola's up . "The other two came around in a short order," the man said .
 Bill says it took him a few hours to load up several cases of Glen Fidditch from the abandoned store . The store was abandoned in 2007 and has since been abandoned .
 Some of the remainder of the vegetables came in, but in smaller quantities . The rest of the veg came in .
 We got enough wheat to produce a few tons of flour, but it will have to be whole grain . The wheat is enough to be used to make whole grain, but not whole grain.
 Bill and I killed the pilots and I detonated thermite grenades in them to destroy them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The pilots were killed by the detonation of thermite bombs .
 I suppose I didn't mind being pushed aside, it looked like we had a war going, and war is a young man's game . "I suppose I was pushed aside. I suppose . I didn’t mind being pushing aside," he says .
 According to 2006 Census Bureau estimates, the population of the city is 4,934 . The city is home to a population of 4, 934 people .
 The city was founded in 1880 when the Southern Pacific Railroad came through . It was founded when the railroad came through the city .
 It was named after Judge William B Benson, a friend of the President of the railroad . Benson was a judge who was friends with the railroad's president .
 The city is perhaps best known as the gateway to Kartchner Caverns State Park . It is located near the state park where the caverns are located .
 According to the Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 92. km 2 , none of which is covered by water . The Census Bureau says the city is located in an area that has no water .
 As of the census of 2000, there were 4,711 people, 2,084 households, and 1,346 families residing in the city . The census of the city was conducted in 2000 .
 The racial makeup of the city was 89.32% White, 19.85% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), 1.29% Native American, 0.72% Black or African American . 0.47% Asian, and 0.13% Pacific Islander .
 There were 2,084 households out of which 18.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.5% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.4% were non-
 The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size of 2.72 . The average family is 2.73 percent .
 The 2010 census was never tabulated and between the disease and the war, the population was seriously reduced . The population was reduced between the war and the disease .
 CNN.com's John Sutter talks about the trust fund . The trust fund is one of the largest in the world's history .
 I told him that I didn't like the looks of things and suggested, rather timidly, that they get very conservative with the investments . I suggested that the investments should be very conservative, he said .
 For all I cared, the bank could eliminate all nonIowa investments and keep the money local . For all, it could be easy to keep all the money in the state of Iowa .
 "I told him that we didn't want the trust to disappear, just because the market collapsed," she said . "We don't want it to disappear just because of the market collapse," she added .
 That was during the period associated with the first terrorist attacks . That was in the early days of the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan .
 For a long time, we didn't associate the plagues with a second set of terrorist attacks . Ultimately, the third world war made the mission of those submarine delivered terrorists moot moot .
 "Putting that gold and silver into circulation, was the best idea that Jerry ever had," he says . Putting that gold into circulation was the 'best idea' he ever had .
 "We basically doubled the value of our holdings. With me setting . fixed exchange rates at $30 an ounce for silver and $1,500 for gold, we basically doubled our holdings," he says .
 I suggested that Derek simply locate the trailers and rent them from the owner's if they could be located . Derek would be able to rent the trailers from the owners' if they were located .
 We'd be taking a total of 6 vehicles, 2 pickups, 3 HMMWVs and the fuel hauler . We'd also be taking 2 HMMwVs and a fuel truck .
 I figured we could pull 5 trailers and that should provide sleeping accommodations for as many as 20 people, maybe more . I figured it would be as big as 5 trailers, maybe 20 people .
 Mary said she was coming along to drive the fuel hauler; Derek had given his power of attorney to her . Derek gave her his will-power of attorney, Mary said .
 MSN Maps and Directions provides a route for the shortest trips from Whetstone to Charles City . Charles City is a small town in Charles City, Missouri .
 After we hit Iowa, I wouldn't really need the map, but had it just in case . "I wouldn't need it, but I wanted it just to make sure," she says .
 Aaron continued his role and drove Sharon and me in our pickup with Damon bringing his pickup . Damon brought his pickup with extra stores . Aaron continued to drive Sharon and Sharon in their pickup . Sharon and Damon drove Sharon to stores .
 We'd find other areas of construction, especially as we got further north . They wouldn't be accurate .
 Armed military vehicles fill the bank's parking lot with armed military vehicles . "I couldn't help but think of the reaction we'd get when we pulled into the bank in Charles City and filled their parking lot," author says .
 Floyd County, Iowa, is very conservative, and that even goes for the Democrats . Floyd County is a very conservative county . It's very conservative .
 Shortly after the outbreak of those plagues, we cashed out all of your securities and converted it to gold and silver . Shortly after that outbreak, your securities were converted to gold or silver .
 With the price of gold and silver what it is now, the trust has appreciated significantly . The trust has been in touch with the public for more than a decade .
 "Down in Arizona, I've pretty much become the local banker because we converted half of our lottery winnings into gold and silver," he says . "Half of our winnings were converted into gold, silver and gold," he adds .
 We took 21 ounces of gold and the balance in silver, 1,035 ounces, all in one ounce coins, -86.25 pounds . The balance was 1035 ounces of silver and 21 of gold .
 The bank had taken a fee of 0.9% per year for managing the gold and silver . The bank took a fee from the bank of $1.2 billion .
 Gold and silver were converted when gold was at $900 an ounce and silver was $18 an ounce . They converted it at $18 per ounce and $900 per ounce .
 The boys would each get $322,000 and the girls would get $161,000 . If you're interested in the numbers, the boys would receive $322K . The girls would also receive $161K .
 A more fair distribution would have been to give each of the 4 of them $241,500,000 . The 4 men should have been given a fair share of the money they received .
 We had talked it over on the way back from Iowa and had decided we'd even it out with our money, giving each of the girls $161,000 and then dividing the estate 4 ways . We decided to give each of our daughters $160,000 .
 The kids got together and said that they wanted to merge their money with ours, especially since we were earning -15% a year . The children got together in the hope of merging their money and their parents' money .
 I thought it would be dangerous to keep any of the gold and silver in the house, thus it ended up stored in the armory . I thought I would be too scared to have any gold or silver in my home .
 The armory had emptied out a little when I finally gave the remaining Mauser’s to residents in Benson . Residents in Benson received Mauser's .
 Early ammo sales went at 25b a round, $225 a case, $250 a case . Considering what I'd paid for it, I get most of my money back on the rifles .
 If a product shortage occurs, its price rises, creating a profit margin that creates an incentive for others to enter production, eventually curing the shortage . The price of a product increases, creating an incentive to others to join production .
 There would be incentives to produce goods and services, as well as costs of production, including compensation for the owner's labor, are also built into the price of the goods . Even as profits are zeroed out at the ""natural price"
 If prices dip below a zero profit, producers would drop out of the market . Producers would enter the market if prices were above a profit, they would enter .
 Smith believed that while human motives are often selfish and greedy, the competition in the free market would tend to benefit society as a whole by keeping prices low, while still building in an incentive for a wide variety of goods and services . Smith believed the competition would benefit society by building in a
 In microeconomic theory the partial equilibrium supply and demand economic model was developed by Alfred Marshall . It attempts to describe, explain, and predict the price and quantity of goods sold in competitive markets . The model was originally developed by Marshall in the 1930s .
 It is one of the most fundamental models, widely used as a basic building block in a wide range of more detailed economic models and theories .
 The theory of supply and demand is important in the functioning of the market economy . It explains the mechanism by which many resource allocation decisions are made .
 Supply schedules in this partial equilibrium model are fixed, as the long run reciprocal relationship between demand and supply is ignored . Unlike general equilibrium models, supply schedules are fixed .
 Marshall's theories are dominant in universities today, but other economists have disagreed with it . Marshall's theory is dominant in university today, although other economists disagree .
 One theory counter to Marshall is that price is already known in a commodity before it reaches the market, negating his idea that some abstract market conveying price information .
 Modern producers often have market studies prepared well in advance of production decisions . However, misallocation of factors of production can still occur .
 Keynesian economics also runs counter to the theory of supply and demand . Keynesian economists also run counter to supply-demand theory .
 In Keynesian theory, prices can become 'sticky' or resistant to change, especially in the case of price decreases . Prices can become "sticky" or "resistant to change" especially in case of decreases .
 Modern supporters of Keynes, such as Paul Krugman, have noted this in recent history . Boston housing market dried up in early 1990s, with neither buyers nor sellers willing to exchange at the price equilibrium .
 "There's a lot of a lot I still need to teach you about the big, bad world," he says . Stick around a while, there's still a lot to learn about the world .
 Life is a learning experience. 20 years of life's experiences are equal to a 4-year college education . Life is an experience that is equal to an entire life's experience .
 A Master's degree is equal to about 25 years of life and a PhD to about 40years of living . A PhD to a Master degree is about 40 years of living. A PhD is about 25 to life expectancy .
 All schooling really does for you is offer you other people's life experiences, condensed, like the soup, only much more condensed . All schooling does is offer people a life experience, like soup, like a soup .
 I know from personal experience that you can't directly apply the book learning; it's only a tool to help direct you . You can't apply it directly to yourself, but it's a tool that can be used to help you learn .
 One of the most important things a person can learn in a school is how to think, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The book will be released in September 2015 . It will be available in the U.S. military .
 "Back in '06, when they came to visit for Christmas, we took my new rifle to a range," he says . "We took them to the range. Back in 2006, they took them out on a range. They took them on the range."
 We first set up a target at 50 yards and ran 60 rounds through the rifle . We then ran 60 shots at a 50-yard target at a target .
 "I don't know why Mary was shooting left handed, but she shouldn't have," she said . "She could barely hit the target. She should have shot left handed. She shouldn't, she should have."
 "Our ammo was some of the South African surplus, I wish I had bought more. Our ammo was South Africa surplus," says the author .
 We count down seven ways in which the world as we know it could meet an abrupt and untimely end . From a mammoth asteroid strike to the eruption of a super volcano, there are seven ways to come to an end .
 Scientists, experts, and witnesses describe vividly pictured disaster scenarios . From super bugs created in secret labs to black holes that could suck earth into oblivion .
 Using state-of-the-art computer-generated graphics and interviews with the world's top scientists, we will leave viewers pondering humanity's place in the universe . We will reveal the most terrifying truth of all that our greatest enemy is ourselves .
 Maya Maya made stunning prediction more than 2,000 years ago . Ancient Maya made this stunning prediction two centuries ago . Maya made the prediction in ancient Maya writings more than two millennia ago .
 Journey back to the ancient city of Chichen Itza, the hub of Maya civilization deep in the heart of Mexican's Yucatan Peninsula . Discover the truth about this prophecy .
 The Maya were legendary astronomers and timekeepers their calendar is more accurate than our own . The Maya calendar is based on the Mayan calendar, which dates back to Mayan times .
 By tracking the stars and planets they assigned great meaning to astronomical phenomena and made extraordinary predictions based on them many of which have come true . Many of these predictions have since come true.
 In insightful interviews archaeologists, astrologers, and historians speculate on the meaning of the 2012 prophecy . Archaeologists, astrologicalists and astrologists speculate on meaning of prophecy .
 At 7:15AM on June 30, 1908, a giant fireball, as bright the Sun, explodes in the Siberian sky with a force a thousand times greater than the Hiroshima bomb . The fireball was as bright as the Sun . At 7.15AM, the fireball explodes with a
 It decimates 1,200 square miles of forest over half the size of Rhode Island . The biggest cosmic disaster in the history of civilization, it was the biggest .
 Over a hundred theories surround what is called the Tunguska event, varying from asteroids and comets to black holes and alien spaceships .
 Most scientists agree the Tunguska event will happen again, and next time, the human toll could be unimaginable . Next time, it will be unimaginable.
 NASA and others race against time to stop the next planet killer before it ignites Armageddon . NASA and other organizations race to stop planet killer .
 You really should have watched TV; it's gone now, along with the radio stations . The stations are gone along with TV, radio stations, and TV stations .
 "I'm their fall back plan, I'm the fall-back plan, if the bad guys overrun us. Still, it seems that I have guard responsibilities," he says .
 "It could all be in my head but it doesn't matter because I didn't have any venison in my stomach," says the author . "I didn't think it was in my own head. It could be in the head, but it's in the stomach."
 According to the Mayan Calendar, the world ends this year on December 21st . The Mayan calendar states that the world will end on the 21st of the year .
 A nuclear summer is a hypothetical scenario resulting from nuclear warfare that would follow a nuclear winter . A nuclear winter would be followed by a nuclear summer . A summer summer would be the result of a nuclear war .
 In this scenario, the amount of water in the stratosphere would increase, causing greenhouse warming of the surface . The amount of the water in this scenario would increase causing greenhouse heat of the planet .
 The nuclear detonations would also produce oxides of nitrogen that would then deplete the ozone layer around the Earth . The detonations could also deplete ozone layer .
 This layer screens out UV-B radiation from the Sun, which causes genetic damage to life forms on the surface . The layer screens the Sun out of the Sun's ultraviolet rays, which can damage life forms .
 Possibilities of any existing species to survive in this extreme condition will be less, scientists say . Possibilities are less than those of existing species, they say .
 The absorption of ozone also results in a heating of the stratosphere, which leads to a further contribution to greenhouse heating . The absorption also leads to an increase in greenhouse heating, scientists say .
 The only problem was that they weren't as efficient when relative humidity reached 50% and above . Relative humidity was higher at 50% .
 "I thought about it and couldn't imagine what it would be like to be really hungry," she says . She says she's not afraid to go hungry .
 "I'd seen fuel crisis, like in 73, so I knew we'd have to have fuel for the vehicles and our generator," she says . She says she knew there would be a fuel crisis so she knew she needed fuel .
 Bad things happen in threes and we've had at least four; that means that means we're going to get nine . "Bad things happen to be bad things," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Most of the country has been destroyed and it will take years to get manufacturing reestablished, if ever . Manufacturing will never be able to be fully recovered from the devastation of the Iraq war .
 The state of California probably invested that money in Treasury Notes . It's not known what happened to the money .
 Don't confuse salvaging with salvaging, unless the property you recover is actually owned by the state of California . Don't forget that .
 If you feel like driving out there, you could dig around and see how much gold and silver you could find . If you want to find it, you can find it in the streets .
 I read that they had an expansion project that wasn't scheduled to be completed until 2011 -12 . The expansion project was supposed to be finished in 2011-12, but was not until 2011 .
 There should be equipment sitting there that you can load up and bring home, says CNN.com .
 They had been on a kick pushing florescent bulbs that screwed into regular light bulb sockets . They were on a mission to find out how to use the bulbs in regular light bulbs .
 Most of the time, nobody bothers to turn off the garage lights and they made sense . "They made sense. They made sense," the author says of the garage lighting .
 Costing about 8 times as much as regular bulbs, the bulbs lasted 10 times longer . Costed 8 times more than regular bulbs and lasted 8 times longer than regular ones .
 This 4Vz n tall, 13 watt mini compact fluorescent light bulb saves energy, last longer and is equivalent to a 60 watt standard bulb . The bulb is 4.5 inches tall and 13 inches wide .
 This bulb lasts up to 8,000 hours and will save you more than $45.00 in electricity over the life of the bulb . This bulb can last up to eight,000 years .
 Every time you turned on the light switch, you saved 47 watts of energy and it does add up . You save 47 watts every time you turn on the switch .
 "We also got our portable generator from Costco right after we won the Lottery," says L.A. couple .
 Onan Homesite Power 6500 was on sale for $200 off the regular price through January 31, 2007 .
 56 V80, 1.80 megawatt wind turbines were found in original packaging at Tehachapi . 56 times 1,80mw will produce 100.8mw.
 We'll have an earthen mound to hide behind, if the Latino's come calling, if they come calling . The mound will be used as a place to hide from the sun .
 There are 1,100 homes in Whetstone and 2,900 in Benson . Assuming that the average home uses 12kw, we only need 4,000 times 12kw or 48mw .
 If you install half of the turbines, you'll have 28 times 1,8mw or 50.4mw . You can install half the turbines with half the power .
 If you tell them that they'll only get lights if they help, that will put most folks in the position of volunteering . Mind you, I don't know if it's a good or bad idea, but if you tell people that they will only get light if they volunteer, that
 Some people won't be able to contribute physical labor, but there ought to be something for everyone to do . There should be something to do for everyone, says CNN.com .
 A very large share of the liberals was sitting in the major cities waiting for the government to save them . A large part of the liberal movement is in need of a government solution to the problem .
 It seemed obvious that I wasn't needed for the moment so I went down to the shelter, that's a real pain in the butt you know, and turned on the radios . "It seemed obvious ... that I was not needed," he says .
 We had our lottery winnings in gold and silver, money from the Charles City bank and what we'd saved . We had a gold, silver, silver and a gold ring, and a bank account .
 If they had been forced to recover our money from the mint in silver, they would have needed a train to haul it . If they were forced to haul the money in silver they would need a train .
 Derek's family was at the centre of the search for his missing son . He said they had gone with Derek and the rest of the family were at the scene .
 'Precious metals' have no intrinsic value, they’re just rare and people want them . Realistically, 'precious metals’ have no . intrinsic value . They’ve no intrinsic . value, just rare . and people . want them.
 A man dying of thirst might part with an ounce of gold for a canteen of water . A gold canteen might be worth more than a gold coin .
 Even a domestic animal sometimes has value, even if it's not a big animal . It might not be to the person that had lots, but even domestic animals sometimes have value .
 One couldn't flood the market with gold and silver or it would lose its value . Gold and silver cannot be flooded with gold or silver in the market . One of the main reasons for the gold market to be flooded is that it would be hard to sell .
 He could also use the gold and silver to purchase labor, at a fair rate . He could use the money to buy labor, and use it to purchase goods .
 The real problem arose when he overvalued the metal and undervalued what he took in exchange, he says . He says, "The real problem is that he over valued what he got in exchange"
 The value of an hour of labor had to equal something that a person was willing to work an hour to acquire . Everything had to maintain the proper relationship, ergo, according to the law .
 Seed seeds had an intrinsically high value because they were a source of food . Seeds had an intrinsic high value due to their value as a food source . Seed seeds were found in the seeds of the world's oldest seeds .
 I caught the tail end of a conversation between two hams on the west coast . I caught a bit of the conversation on the West Coast .
 As near as near as I could tell, one was from Spokane and the other was from Yreka . The two men were arrested in the early hours of Thursday morning .
 "I just caught the tail end and they were talking about the quake and the water," she said .
 "It's a good thing you can't really die from curiosity, or I'd have been on the floor of the shelter shouting, It’s the big one Elizabeth," she said . "I'm not going to die, but I'm going to live in the shelter,"
 "I got in my chair and raised myself back to ground level and went into the house. Didn't happen so ... didn't happen," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I was a little hungry so I popped 2 poppers of that popcorn we got from Sam's Club," she says . "I popped two poppers, popped 2 popcorn, popped popcorn and popped popcorn," she said .
 It was just under $12 for a 50 pound bag and it was fair to middling popcorn . The popcorn was a fair price tag at $12 per bag .
 We only had about 5 bags left, I made a note to myself to try and grow some next year . We were able to grow some of the bags we collected .
 I caught the back end of a conversation from a guy in Kalifornia and another in Washington, D.C. The conversation was overheard from two men in Washington .
 It was a Sunday, if I remember and they had that problem in Miami with that semi semi. It was Sunday, and it was the first time I've seen that Miami had a problem. I remember it was Sunday .
 All it was was was old footage and some guy speculating about the semi they'd stopped at 8am. All the footage is old footage, but it's not clear what happened to the truck . It's not the first time they've been stopped in a semi.
 Then a tornado warning was issued to Alabama and they had 2 breaking news alerts . Then they had two more alerts . Alabama was hit by two tornadoes in the past week .
 Before it was over, a subway train derailed, I think in DC, and they had 3 breaking news alerts . The train was derailed, and it derailed in DC .
 The Lavi fighter fighter development began in October 1982 under the help of the United States . The aircraft made the first flight in December 1986 .
 The U.S. was not prepared to finance an aircraft that would compete in export market with the F16C/D and F/A-18C-D . A dispute arose on the final cost of the aircraft, and the United States was unable to finance it .
 The Israeli Government was unable to finance the project alone . The development program was finally cancelled in 1987 .
 The Lavi technologies including its aerodynamic design and software for the ‘fly-by-wire’ system were later transferred to Chengdu to help the J-10 development .
 With the help of the Israelis, the ‘Project 8610’ entered full-scale development . The project is based on the idea of a Russian-built robot that could be used in the U.S. market .
 Russia became involved in the J-10 development program by contributing its LyulkaSaturn AL-31F turbofan engine . Russia also contributed to the development of the plane .
 Chengdu engineers had to go through a major redesign on the aircraft’s rear fuselage as well as the air-inlet shape to accommodate the bigger-size AL-31F engine .
 "They had to do a first strike before we got enough of our ABM missiles in place," he says . "Plus they had to . Plus they had . done a first . strike before they had enough of their ABM . missiles in . place," the author says .
 Between the bombings of our cities, the plagues and WW III, I'd guess we must have lost 70% of our population, he says . The bombings, plagues, WW III and WW II must have killed 70%, he writes .
 President Obama says the U.S. must no longer rely on nuclear weapons as a foreign-policy tool . He believes the United States should not rely on nukes as foreign policy tools .
 It is time well past time for the U.S. to cease its Cold War-style reliance on nuclear weapons as a foreign-policy tool, says author .
 "I would characterize current U.S. nuclear weapons policy as immoral, illegal, militarily unnecessary, and dreadfully dangerous," author says .
 "The risk of an accidental or inadvertent nuclear launch is unacceptably high," says President Obama . The risk of a nuclear launch by accident or an accident is "unacceptable"
 Bush administration has signaled that it is committed to keeping the U.S. nuclear arsenal as a mainstay of its military power . That commitment is simultaneously eroding the international norms that have limited the spread of nuclear weapons and fissile materials for 50 years .
 Much of the current U.S. nuclear policy has been in place since before before I was secretary of defense . "It has only grown more dangerous and diplomatically destructive in the intervening years," former Secretary of Defense says .
 Today, the United States has deployed approximately 4,500 strategic, offensive nuclear warheads . The U.S. has deployed approximately 4,500 strategic, offensive nuclear warheads .
 North Korea now claims to have developed nuclear weapons . U.S. intelligence agencies estimate Pyongyang has enough fissile material for 2-8 bombs .
 The average United States warhead has a destructive power 20 times that of the Hiroshima bomb . The average U.S. warhead is 20 times the destructive power of a nuclear bomb .
 Of the 8,000 active or operational U.S. warheads, 2,000 are on hair-trigger alert, ready to be launched on 15 minutes’ warning . The U.N. has more than 7,000 nuclear weapons, the U.K. says .
 The U.S. has never endorsed the policy of ""no first use,"" not during my seven years as secretary or since . "No first use" policy has never been endorsed by the United States, she says .
 We have been and remain prepared to initiate the use of nuclear weapons by the decision of the President against either a nuclear or non-nuclear enemy whenever we believe it is in our interest to do so .
 For decades, U.S. nuclear forces have been sufficiently strong to absorb a first strike and then inflict ""unacceptable"" damage on an opponent . The United States has been able to absorb first strike, then inflict 'unacceptable' damage .
 "This has been and must continue to be the foundation of our nuclear deterrent," says President Obama . President Obama says the U.S. is committed to a strong deterrent in the world .
 The President always had at hand nuclear release codes in the so-called football . The football is a briefcase carried for the President at all times by a United States military officer .
 The SAC commander’s orders were to answer the telephone by no later than the end of the third ring . The commander of the SAC was ordered to be at the phone number three . The phone number was the last ring of the phone call .
 If it rang, a nuclear attack of enemy ballistic missiles appeared to be under way, he was allowed 2 to 3 minutes to decide whether the warning was valid . Over the years, the United States has received many false warnings, and if so, the U.S. has gotten many
 He was given approximately 10 minutes to determine what to recommend, to locate and advise the President, permit the President to discuss the situation with two or three close advisors (presumably the secretary of defense and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff) and to receive the President's decision and
 He could decide to ride out the attack and defer until later any decision to launch a retaliatory strike . He could also decide to wait until later to make a decision to take action .
 He could order an immediate retaliatory strike, from a menu of options, thereby launching U.S. weapons that were targeted on the opponent’s military-industrial assets . Or, he could launch an immediate retaliation strike, or launch United States weapons . The options include an immediate
 On any given day, as we go about our business, the President is prepared to make a decision within 20 minutes that could launch one of the most devastating weapons in the world .
 To declare war requires an act of congress, but to launch a nuclear holocaust requires 20 minutes' deliberation by the President and his advisors . To launch a nuke holocaust, the President has 20 minutes of deliberation .
 With very few changes, this system remains largely intact, including the ""football" The President's constant companion.
 My colleagues and I started arms control talks; we installed safeguards to reduce the risk of unauthorized launches . We eliminated the vulnerable and provocative nuclear missiles in Turkey . We added options to the nuclear war plans so that the President did not have to choose between an all-or-nothing response and
 "I wish I had done more, but we were in the midst of the Cold War, and our options were limited," she says . I wish I'd done more. "I'm not going to be able to do anything more," she adds .
 The United States and NATO allies faced a strong Soviet and Warsaw Pact conventional threat . The U.S. and its NATO allies were faced by a strong . Warsaw Pact and Soviet Union conventional threat was a threat .
 Many allies felt strongly that preserving the U.S. option of launching a first strike was necessary for the sake of keeping the Soviets at bay . Many of the allies believed the United States option was necessary .
 More than a decade after the end of the Cold War, the basic U.S. nuclear policy is unchanged . What is shocking is that today, more than 10 years after the war, nuclear policy remains unchanged . The U.N. nuclear arms control in the United States has been
 Plans and procedures have not been revised to make the U.S. less likely to push the button, officials say .
 At a minimum, we should remove all strategic nuclear weapons from "hair-trigger" alert, as others have recommended, including Gen. Gen. David Cameron .
 A simple change would greatly reduce the risk of an accidental nuclear launch . That simple change is needed to prevent an accidental launch, experts say .
 The move would signal that the U.S. is taking steps to end its reliance on nuclear weapons . It would also signal to other states that the United States is ending nuclear weapons reliance .
 The U.S. is focused, for understandable reasons, on persuading North Korea to rejoin the treaty . The United States is also negotiating deeper constraints on Iran’s nuclear ambitions .
 NPT states must keep promises they made when they originally signed the NPT that they would not build nuclear weapons in return for access to peaceful uses of nuclear energy .
 The attention of many nations, including some potential new nuclear weapons states, is also on the U.S. But the attention of those nations is also focused on the United States . The United States is the focus of attention for many nations .
 Keeping such large numbers of weapons, and maintaining them on hair-trigger alert, are potent signs that the U.S. is not seriously working toward the elimination of its arsenal . It raises troubling questions as to why any other state should restrain its nuclear ambitions .
 The destructive power of nuclear weapons is well known, but given the U.S. continued reliance on them, it’s worth remembering the danger they present .
 A 2000 report by the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War describes the likely effects of a single 1 megaton weapon . Dozens of such weapons are contained in the Russian and United States inventories .
 Within one second, the atmosphere itself ignites into a fireball more than a half-mile in diameter . The fireball is more than half a mile in diameter and can be seen in the sky .
 The surface of the fireball radiates nearly three times the light and heat of a comparable area of the sun . It extinguishes in seconds all life below and radiates outward at the speed of light, causing severe burns to people within one to three miles .
 A blast wave of compressed air reaches a distance of three miles in 12 seconds, flattening factories and commercial buildings . The blast wave can be seen from three miles away in a 12-second blast .
 At least 50 percent of people in the area die immediately, prior to any injuries from radiation or the developing firestorm . At least half of those killed in the disaster will die immediately .
 Of course, our knowledge of these effects is not entirely hypothetical . We are aware of the effects of the climate change in climate change .
 Nuclear weapons, with roughly one seventieth of the power of the 1 megaton bomb, were twice used by the U.S. in August 1945 .
 Around 80,000 people died immediately; approximately 200,000 died eventually . Around 200,00 people died eventually; around 80,00 died immediately . About 200,500 people died in the first year .
 Nagasaki became a city of death where not even the sound of insects could be heard . Nagasaki was known as the 'death city' by the end of the war .
 After a while, countless men, women and children began to gather for a drink of water at the banks of nearby Urakami River . Their hair and clothing scorched and their burnt skin hanging off in sheets like rags .
 Their annihilation, though not the objective of those dropping the bombs, was the inevitable result of the choice of those targets . Their annihilation was not their objective of dropping bombs, but their annihilation was inevitable, the author says .
 The statement that our nuclear weapons do not target populations per se was and remains totally misleading in the sense that the so-called collateral damage of large nuclear strikes would include tens of millions of innocent civilian dead . The statement was misleading, the president said .
 "They indiscriminately blast, burn, and irradiate with a speed and finality that is almost incomprehensible," says the author of the book .
 This is exactly what countries like the U.S. and Russia, with nuclear weapons on hair-trigger alert continue to threaten every minute of every day in this new 21st century . The United States and Russia are among the most powerful countries in the world .
 I have worked on issues relating to U.S. and NATO nuclear strategy and war plans for more than 40 years . No Way to Win is CNN.com's new book, No Way To Win .
 "I have made this statement in front of audiences, including NATO defense ministers and senior military leaders, many times," says President Obama .
 To launch weapons against a nuclear-equipped opponent would be suicidal, says U.S. President Barack Obama . To launch nuclear weapons against an opponent is suicidal, Obama says .
 "To do so against a non-nuclear enemy would be militarily unnecessary, morally repugnant, and politically indefensible," he says .
 I reached these conclusions very soon after becoming secretary of defense secretary, he said . "I reached these decisions very soon," he said. "Very soon after being Secretary of Defense."
 Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson shared my view, but it was impossible for any of us to make such statements publicly because they were totally contrary to established NATO policy .
 After leaving the Defense Department, I became President of the World Bank . After leaving, he became President . He became President. of the Bank .
 During my 13-year tenure, from 1968 to 1981, I was prohibited, as an employee of an international institution, from commenting publicly on issues of U.S. national security . During that time, he was prohibited from publicly commenting publicly .
 After retiring from the bank, I began to reflect on how I, with seven years' experience as secretary of defense, might contribute to an understanding of the issues with which I began my public service career .
 At that time, much was being said and written regarding how the U.S. could fight and win a nuclear war with the Soviets . At the time of the Cold War, there was much being written about how the United States could win a war .
 I decided to go public with some information that I knew would be controversial, but that I felt was needed to inject reality into these unreal discussions about the military utility of nuclear weapons . Having studied these views, I decided .
 In articles and speeches, I criticized the fundamentally flawed assumption that nuclear weapons could be used in some limited way . I have also criticized the flawed assumption of nuclear weapons being used in limited ways .
 There is no way to effectively contain a nuclear strike to keep it from inflicting enormous destruction on civilian life and property . "There is no guarantee against unlimited escalation once the first nuclear strike occurs," author says .
 We cannot avoid the serious and unacceptable risk of nuclear war until we recognize these facts and base our military plans and policies upon this recognition . This recognition is critical for the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 "I hold these views even more strongly today than I did when I first spoke out against the nuclear dangers our policies were creating," says President Obama . "We need to be careful of the dangers we are creating," he says .
 I know from direct experience that U.S. nuclear policy today creates unacceptable risks to other nations and to our own . I know that United States nuclear policy creates unacceptable risk to others, our own,’s own .
 Among the costs of maintaining nuclear weapons is an unacceptable risk of use of the weapons either by accident or as a result of misjudgment or miscalculation in times of crisis .
 Fidel Castro asked the Soviet ambassador to Cuba to send a cable to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stating that Castro urged him to counter a U.S. attack with a nuclear response . At about the same time, Cuban President Fidel Castro .
 There was a high risk that in the face of a U.S. attack, which many in the United States government were prepared to recommend to President Kennedy, that the Soviet forces in Cuba would have used their nuclear weapons rather than lose them .
 The four Soviet submarines trailing the U.S. Naval vessels near Cuba each carried torpedoes with nuclear warheads . Only a few years ago we learned that the four . Soviet submarines trailed by the United States each carried .
 The subs were out of communication with their Soviet bases, and they continued their patrols for four days after Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba . The situation was even more frightening because, as the lead commander recounted to me, the subs were .
 The lesson was made at a conference on the crisis held in Havana in 1992, when we first began to learn from former Soviet officials about their preparations for nuclear war .
 Castro asked if he would have recommended Khrushchev use weapons in the face of a U.S. invasion . Castro said he thought the United States would respond to such a threat . Castro: "If so, how would the U.K. respond?"
 I hope that President Kennedy and I would not have behaved as Castro suggested we would have. Castro suggested that we should have behaved differently. I hope President Kennedy would have behaved more like Castro did. Castro said that Kennedy and Castro would have .
 Had we responded in a similar way the damage to the U.S. would have been unthinkable, he says . "Had we responded to the United States. Had we . responded in such a way?" he asks. "It was unthinkable"
 If mistakes were to affect decisions relating to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no learning curve . However, if mistakes were made, they would have to be dealt with by the Government .
 The indefinite combination of human fallibility and nuclear weapons carries a very high risk of nuclear catastrophe . Human fallibility carries the risk of a nuclear catastrophe, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 There is no way to reduce the risk to acceptable levels, says author . Hair-trigger alert policy should be eliminated, he says . Nuclear weapons must be eliminated or nearly eliminated .
 The U.S. should move immediately to institute these actions, the author says . The United States should take action against Russia, he says .
 On Nov., 2001, President George W Bush announced that he had told Russian President Vladimir Putin that the United States would reduce "operationally deployed nuclear warheads" from approximately 5,300 to a level between 1,700 and 2,200 .
 This scaling back would approach the 1,500 to 2,200 range that Putin had proposed for Russia . This scaled back would be more than 1,000 less than what he had proposed .
 The Bush administration's Nuclear Posture Review was mandated by the U.S. Congress and issued in January 2002 . However, the review presents quite a different story . The review was issued by the Bush administration .
 It assumes that strategic offensive nuclear weapons in much larger numbers than 1,700 to 2,200 will be part of U.S. forces for the next several decades .
 The number of deployed warheads will be reduced to 3,800 in 2007 and to between 1,700 and 2,200 by 2012 . The warheads and many of the launch vehicles taken off deployment will be maintained in a ""responsive"" reserve .
 Its emphasis on strategic offensive nuclear weapons deserves vigorous public scrutiny . But its emphasis of strategic offensive weapons should be scrutinised .
 An exchange of 3,200 warheads (the United States and Russian numbers projected for 2012) with a destructive power approximately 65,000 times that of the Hiroshima bomb, is doubtful that survivors could detect a difference between the effects of such an exchange and one that would result from the launch of
 The Bush administration is planning an extensive and expensive series of programs to sustain and modernize the existing nuclear force . In addition to projecting the deployment of large numbers of strategic nuclear weapons far into the future, the Bush administration plans an extensive series of expensive programs .
 Production facilities for fissile materials would need to be built to support the expanded force . New production facilities would also be needed to expand the force .
 The Bush administration also announced that it has no intention to ask congress to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . The administration has ordered the national laboratories to begin research on new nuclear weapons designs and prepare the underground test sites in Nevada for nuclear tests .
 The Bush administration assumes that nuclear weapons will be part of U.S. military forces for at least the next several decades . Clearly, the Bush administration assumed that nuclear . weapons will remain in the United States military forces .
 The CTBT is a legal and political obligation of all parties to the NPT that entered into force in 1970 and was extended indefinitely in 1995 . Good faith participation in international negotiation on nuclear disarmament including participation .
 The Bush administration’s nuclear program, alongside its refusal to ratify the CTBT, will be viewed, with reason, by many nations as equivalent to a U.S. break from the treaty . Many nations will be concerned about the Bush administration's decision to not ratify
 If the U.S. continues its current nuclear stance, over time, substantial proliferation of nuclear weapons will almost surely follow . If the United States continues to pursue nuclear arms proliferation, it will almost certainly follow .
 Some nations as Egypt, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Taiwan will very likely initiate nuclear weapons programs . This increases the risk of use of the weapons and the diversion of fissile materials into the hands of rogue states or terrorists .
 Diplomats and intelligence agencies believe Osama bin Laden has made several attempts to acquire nuclear weapons or fissile materials . Bin Laden is believed to have tried to acquire the weapons or materials .
 Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood, former director of Pakistan’s nuclear reactor complex, met with bin Laden several times . It has been widely reported that bin Laden met with Mahmood several times. Mahmood is a former Pakistani nuclear reactor chief .
 Were al Qaeda to acquire fissile materials, especially enriched uranium, its ability to produce nuclear weapons would be great . Al Qaeda would be able to make nuclear weapons with enriched uranium .
 The knowledge of how to construct a simple gun-type nuclear device, like the one we dropped on Hiroshima, is now widespread . It's now widespread in the U.S.
 Experts have little doubt that terrorists could construct such a primitive device if they acquired the requisite enriched uranium material . Experts say terrorists could build such a device with the requisite material .
 Neither Bush administration, the congress, the American people, nor the people of other nations have debated the merits of alternative, long-range nuclear weapons policies .
 They have not examined the military utility of the weapons; the risk of inadvertent or accidental use; the moral and legal considerations relating to the use of the use or threat of use . The impact of current policies on proliferation on proliferation has not been examined .
 "We must move promptly toward the elimination or near elimination of all nuclear weapons," says President Obama . We must move quickly toward eliminating nuclear weapons, he says .
 For many, there is a strong temptation to cling to the strategies of the past 40 years . For many of the people in the U.S. there are still some of the same strategies that have been used for 40 years.
 "To do so would be a serious mistake leading to unacceptable risks for all nations," says President Obama . But to do so is a 'serious mistake', he says .
 Imagine replacing a fine weapon like the Ml 4 rifle with a Mattel toy gun . Imagine replacing it with a toy gun that can be used to shoot a rifle .
 I can understand adopting it as a second gun, much like we did during WW II when we had Ml Garand MBR and the Ml Carbine . The Ml 911 provided a bit more power than the original 911 . I can also understand adopting the gun .
 The Ml 4 wasn't well suited for the jungle, but that didn't make it a bad rifle . The rifle is now available for sale in the U.S.
 The U.S. Army's Ml Garand rifle was originally developed to chamber a lighter .276 round . This design feature was cancelled in the early 1930s, delaying the introduction of the rifle until 1936 .
 The Ml Carbine was developed in the 1930s in response to dissatisfaction with submachine guns and rifles . This, along with lessons learned during earlier wars, observations of conflicts during the 1930's, contributed to the development .
 Troops in the rear, paratroopers, or frontline troops required to carry other equipment had found older full-size rifles too cumbersome, and pistols and revolvers to be insufficiently accurate or powerful .
 Much the same constraints applied to airborne infantry, a concept that was also under consideration at the time .
 A submachine gun like the Thompson was also much more expensive than pistols and most rifles of the period . Prior to the development and issue of submachine guns such as the M3 ""Grease Gun"", a sub machine gun was also expensive than a pistol or rifle .
 The .30-06 Garand, then entering into service in the late 1930s, was as heavy and cumbersome as the existing service rifles . It was the heaviest and cumbersome weapon .
 A carbine version of the standard-issue semi-automatic rifle was considered, but the .30-06 round for which the Ml Garand was chambered was found to be too powerful . The Mm Garand is considered to be the most powerful rifle .
 The requirement was for a weapon lighter and handier than the Garand, with less recoil than the rifle, but at the same time, greater range, accuracy, and effective stopping power than the Ml 911A1 pistols currently in use .
 The Ml Carbine was intended for use by soldiers who required a more compact, lightweight defensive weapon . The carbine was designed for soldiers who did not utilize an infantry rifle as their primary arm .
 The carbine was soon issued to infantry officers, machine-gun crews, paratroopers, and other frontline soldiers . Nevertheless, the carbine soon became a standard standard standard .
 Some infantrymen and Marines preferred the carbine over the Ml Garand because of the weapon's small size and light weight . The carbine is a small, light and small weapon that can be easily loaded .
 The carbine also gained generally high praise from airborne troops who were issued the folding-stock Ml A1 . The folding stock was also praised by airborne troops .
 The carbine's exclusive use of non-corrosive primered ammunition was found to be a godsend by troops and ordnance personnel serving in the Pacific . Some soldiers reported misfires attributed to bad primers in Europe .
 In comparison, a .357 Magnum revolver fires the same weight bullet at about 1,300ft/s for about 41 Oft-lbs of energy . The .357 is of larger diameter and often equipped with an expanding bullet design .
 Reports of the carbine's failure to stop enemy soldiers are well documented in individual after-action reports, postwar evaluations, and service histories of the U.S. Army and Marine Corps . Nevertheless, reports of carbine failures are documented .
 Katharine Lee Bates, the author of ""America the Beautiful,"" could not have been referring to the expanse of the U.S. nuclear arsenal when she penned the lyric .
 The U.S. nuclear arsenal continues to sprawl across the country, with thousands of weapons deployed from the coast of Washington State to Georgia and beyond . Though it is the smallest it has been since 1958, the United States nuclear arsenal is still sprawling .
 The U.S. deploys and stores nearly 10,000 nuclear weapons at 18 facilities in 12 states and six European countries . In total, we estimate that the United States deploys . and stores . nearly 10 million nuclear weapons .
 The Pentagon developed this extensive network of installations over the past six decades to ensure the survivability of its nuclear arsenal . The Pentagon says the installations are designed to ensure its nuclear weapons are survivable .
 Pinpointing the whereabouts of all U.S. nuclear weapons is fraught with many uncertainties due to the highly classified nature of nuclear weapons information . The United States has no idea where all nuclear weapons are located .
 Such images are available to anyone with a computer and internet access . Google Earth and commercial satellite imaging companies such as DigitalGlobe have satellite images .
 This development introduces important new tools for research and advances citizen verification . The development introduces new tools to research and . advances citizen . verification .
 The statistics contained in this article represent our best estimates . The statistics are based on many years of closely following nuclear issues .
 The nuclear weapons network shrank during the past decade, with the Pentagon removing nuclear weapons from three states . The size of the stockpile decreased from about 12,500 warheads to nearly 10,000 warheads .
 The Pentagon withdrew nuclear weapons from 10 states and several European bases in 1997 . The total stockpile decreased from 18,290 to 12,500 warheads in that period .
 Approximately 62 percent of the current stockpile belongs to the Air Force and is stored at seven bases in the United States and eight bases in six European countries . The Navy stores its weapons at two submarine bases, one on each coast .
 The ballistic missile submarine base at Bangor, Washington, contains nearly 24 percent of the entire stockpile . The base contains some 2,364 warheads, the largest contingent of the nuclear arsenal .
 The Bangor installation is home to a majority of the navy's nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines . A large number of surplus W76 warheads that will eventually be retired and disassembled will be retired .
 Kings Bay Submarine Base in Georgia is the third-largest contingent, with some 1,364 warheads . Its counterpart on the Atlantic coast, Kings Bay submarine Base, is the second-largest, with 1,363 warheads .
 Kirtland AFB in Albuquerque, New Mexico, stores more than 1,900 warheads . The warheads are either part of the inactive/reserve stockpile or awaiting shipment across Interstate 40 to the Pantex Plant outside of Amarillo, Texas, for dismantling .
 During the Cold War, the United States deployed a large percentage of its nuclear weapons in other countries and at sea . The U.S. deployed many of the nuclear weapons at sea and elsewhere .
 At its peak arsenal size in the late 1960s, the United States stored weapons in 17 different countries . The U.S. stored arms in 17 countries at its peak .
 By the mid-1980s, there were about 14,000 weapons in 26 U.S. states . 6,000 more at overseas United States and NATO bases, and another 4,000 on ships at sea .
 The U.S. withdrew all nuclear weapons from South Korea in 1991 and thousands more from Europe by 1993 . It withdrew all of its nuclear arms from the South Korea and thousands from Europe in 1993 .
 The Army and Marine Corps denuclearized in the early 1990s . In 1992 the Navy swiftly offloaded all nuclear weapons from aircraft carriers and other surface vessels .
 By 1994, the navy had eliminated these ships' nuclear capability, and many Air Force, Navy, and Army bases and storage depots closed overseas as a result . Many Air Force and Navy bases closed overseas .
 "Based on current trends, a nuclear terrorist attack on the United States is more likely than not in the decade ahead," he says .
 Developments in Iraq, Iran, and North Korea leave Americans more vulnerable to a nuclear 9/11 today than we were five years ago . Americans are more vulnerable today than they were in 2005, experts say .
 Former Defense Secretary William Perry has said that he thinks he thinks that I underestimate the risk . William Perry said he thinks former Defense Secretary thinks he underestimates his risk .
 In the judgment of most people in the national security community, former Sen. Bob Corker says the decision was a mistake . He says it's a mistake for the U.S. national security forces .
 The risk of a terrorist detonating a nuclear bomb on U.S. soil is higher today than was the risk of nuclear war at the most dangerous moments in the Cold War . Sam Nunn says the risk is higher now than in the 1950s .
 Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte and the director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, Lt. Lt. John N. Gen. Michael Hayden . Defense Intelligence Director John Defterios is also a member of the CIA .
 Michael Maples testified before Congress that the threat of a terrorist attack with WMD was ""more likely"" than an attack by any state, including Iran and North Korea .
 Nearly 40 terrorist organizations, insurgencies, or cults, have used, possessed, or expressed an interest in chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear agents or weapons . Negroponte reported that nearly 40 terrorist groups have used or possessed such weapons .
 The most well-communicated United States nuclear threat was made prior to the U.S. intervention during the 1991 Gulf War . The threat was the most well communicated by the United States in 1991 .
 I suppose the hands of the Doomsday Clock are frozen in perpetuity at 3 minutes to midnight . The Doomsday Clock is frozen at the moment of midnight .
 "I'd like to figure it all out before I go, so my family will understand what happened," he says . He says he wants to figure out what happened before he leaves .
 Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it, says Santayana . Those who can't remember the history are condemned by repeat it .
 "That bunk about the Mayan Calendar didn't bother me, it simply started over," says author . "That doesn't bother you. That bunk about Mayan calendar didn't bothers me," he says .
 The trigger event was probably the Israeli bombing of those Middle Eastern countries, the author says . Israel bombed those countries in the Middle Eastern region .
 "It took time for our military assets to return to the AO where the Latinos were operating," says President Obama .
 Ml A3E3 was an experimental tank; nonetheless it would have been good to have 3 more so we could have a full Tank Platoon . The tank was a prototype tank .
 I strongly suggest in my notes that Israel's attack had probably led to the war, Russia had agreed to protect Iran . Russia had probably agreed to help Iran in the 1980s, writes Peter Bergen .
 Had I not been forbidden to participate in the attacks Derek's group was making on the Latinos, I wouldn't have had the time to figure it all out, he says . Had he not been banned from participating, he would have had to figure out what to do, he writes .
 "After that nuclear summer event, I noticed that it cooled more than usual," he says . After that nuclear event, he says, "I noticed that . It cooled more often than usual"
 "We had 80 acres, plus we had a good well and could irrigate, if we had to," she says . "We could adjust, after all, we had 80 acreage, and we could adjust," she adds .
 Arizona doesn't get many earthquakes, that was the first one I'd felt since we'd moved . The earthquake was Arizona's first since moving to the state .
 Every place seems to get an earthquake periodically, in Kalifornia, it was an hourly occurrence . The earthquake was the largest earthquake in California history .
 Because nothing was damaged, I didn't include it the list of 9 disasters . Because nothing damaged, it was not included in the 9 disasters.
 More than 20 earthquakes with magnitudes greater than 5 have occurred in or near Arizona since 1850 . Arizona is home to more than 20 quakes with magnitude greater than five since then .
 Sonoran earthquake of 1887 caused 51 deaths in Sonora and extensive property damage throughout southeastern Arizona . The earthquake was centered about 40 miles southeast of Douglas .
 Substantial damage occurred in the Yuma area as a result of the magnitude 7.7.0 magnitude . Substantial damages were caused by the earthquake in Yuma .
 Flagstaff area experienced moderate damage three times during the early 1900's because of magnitude 6 earthquakes . The area was hit by a magnitude 6 earthquake three times in the early 1800's .
 "I got on the radios in the shelter and started listening to the ham net, sooner or later someone, somewhere, would mention the shaking and we could begin to narrow down where it occurred," says survivor . "The shaking was shaking. It was shaking, shaking. I got on
 Any mention of a Category 6 tropical cyclone is fictitious or incorrect . There is no such category on this scale, and any mention is fictitious .
 The Saffir-Simpson Scale is designed to measure the potential damage of a hurricane to manmade structures . According to Robert Simpson, there is no reason for a Category 6 on the scale .
 New technologies in construction leads some to suggest that an increase in the number of categories is necessary . However, the result of new technology in construction has led some to question the need for an increase .
 A ham in Greeley, Colorado, reported that the shaking tipped over cabinets . The shaking tipped cabinets over in his area .
 Long Valley Caldera blew its top, a fellow in Truckee, California, said he thought it blew it top . Long Valley Caldera is a popular tourist attraction .
 All of the sudden, I was beginning to miss cable news, they over reported everything and you were left guessing. All of a sudden, it was starting to feel like I was missing cable news .
 Sometimes the media speculated so much you couldn't sort fact from fiction from fiction . I guess that's not totally true, sometimes the media speculates so much . Sometimes it's so much speculation that you can't sort facts from fiction.
 WW I was The War to End All Wars; WW II should have been The War that Ended All Wars . WW III was, in fact, the War that ended all Global Wars . World War III was the end of all wars .
 We were experiencing falling temperatures, in contrast to global warming just 5 years before . We were . experiencing falling . temperatures, compared to . just five years before, we were experiencing . falling temperatures .
 Long Valley or Yellowstone erupts in Long Valley, Yellowstone . Ham bands erupt in Yellowstone or Long Valley .
 Cascadia had subducted the previous week and what had been left of Seattle was first hit with an earthquake followed by a major tsunami . Seattle was hit by an earthquake and a tsunami .
 Yellowstone and Long Valley erupts in northeastern Colorado and California . Hams are believed to have erupted in Long Valley and Yellowstone .
 "All of our problems were coming from the west and the south," says CNN's John Sutter . "I contacted a ham in New Jersey; he said they hadn't seen any water," he says . Sutter: All of the problems are likely to be coming from west and
 2 million man army from South and Central America hadn't given up . 2 million people were killed in the battle for South America .
 They'd simply broken into smaller units and were raising Hell everywhere . "They'd just broken into small units and raised Hell everywhere," says one of the survivors .
 'It occurred to me that this was becoming Biblical, like the flood and Sodom and Gomorrah. It occurred to be becoming Biblical,' says the author of the book . 'This is becoming Biblical. It's like Sodom, Sodom ... Sodom or Gom
 Maybe I should take my pal Clarence's advice and keep an eye on the sky .
 Perhaps God was mad because we destroyed His planet and killed about half of its inhabitants, perhaps because of the way we destroyed it . Perhaps God's wrath was because of our destruction of His planet .
 If Long Valley and Yellowstone let loose, that made 7. and if Cascadia subducted, that would make 8. If Long Yellowstone and Yellowstone released, that could be 7.5 billion cubic miles of water . That would make up 7.6 billion cubic meters of water
 If both the San Andreas Fault and the New Madrid Fault let loose, we'd reach 10 . Oh no, if both the two faults let loose we'd hit 10 .
 The Cascade Range, it sounded like it was going to erupt and that got us to 9 without any major earthquakes on the 2 major faults . The two major faults are located in the Cascade Range and the East Coast .
 "We were up to our butts in something, but there weren't any alligators in Arizona," the author says . "There were no alligators" in Arizona, he says .
 The scales of recent winters are more modest but their effects can be significant . Recent winters have been more modest than recent ones .
 Ben Franklin blamed the unusually cool summer of 1783 on volcanic dust coming from Iceland . Laki volcano had released enormous amounts of sulfur dioxide, resulting in the death of much of the island's livestock and a catastrophic famine which killed a quarter of the population .
 Temperatures in the northern hemisphere dropped by about 1 °C in the year following the Laki eruption . Laki erupted in 2011 . Temperatures dropped about 1°C .
 In 1883, the explosion of Krakatoa also created volcanic winter-like conditions . The explosion of the volcano also created a volcanic winter like conditions .
 The next four years after the explosion were unusually cold, and the winter of 1888 was the first time snow fell in the area . The explosion occurred in 1888 .
 Pinatubo, another stratovolcano, in the Philippines cooled global temperatures for about 2-3 years, interrupting the trend of global warming which had been evident since about 1970 . The trend had been apparent since 1970 .
 So it appears we could still be in an overall period of global warming and have cold temperatures at the same time . So it appeared we appeared to be in a period of overall global warming, scientists say .
 Nearly as I can tell, we've now had 9 disasters without a major earthquake . Nearly as well as as you can tell from the earthquake, the U.S. has not had a major quake in over a decade .
 Texas Rangers currently operate as the elite investigative branch of the Texas Department of Public Safety . The Texas Rangers are the state's premier investigative branch .
 Fort Fisher was established in 1837 along the banks of the Brazos River in Texas . It is part of the recreated Fort Fisher, a Ranger outpost established in the 1837 era .
 The museum includes exhibits tracing the history of the Rangers, including audiovisual presentations, dioramas, and paintings . Fort Fisher is now the headquarters of Ranger Company F .
 There is also a library, a collection of memorabilia and gun collections . Ranger memorabilia is also available at the base .
 On page 5, it shows all the tuff beds, 3 from Yellowstone and 1 from Long Valley . 3 of the beds are from Yellowstone, 3 of Long Valley, and 3 of Yellowstone's tuff beds .
 If Long Valley erupted, it would be more likely that it was an explosive eruption, says author .
 "There's been lots of carbon dioxide in the soil out there, trees been dying for years," says CNN.com's John Sutter . There's been a lot of CO2 in soil, trees have been dying, he says .
 Measurements of the total discharge of carbon dioxide gas at the Horseshoe Lake tree kill area range from 50150 tons per day . They say .
 Total gas flux coming to the surface at Horseshoe Lake has remained at these relatively high levels since 1996 . There is no obvious trend of either increasing or decreasing gas flux at this area .
 Terrorist attacks, sickness, bad weather and now the possibility of volcanic ash . What a mess... terrorist attacks, surrounded by the South American Army, most of the major cities and several military bases destroyed, sickness .
 "They wouldn't let me go on patrol. Worse, I had the best rifles in the area," he says . He says he was not allowed to patrol .
 I could carry more ammo than I'd ever shoot, 10 magazines loaded with 18 rounds, plus one battle pack of South African . I could also carry 10 magazines full of 18 rounds plus one South African battle pack .
 To keep the load light, I only carried one LAW and almost always use my original Loaded Loaded . I only always use the original Loaded .
 That Super Match with its fancy scope was too temperamental while the iron sights on my original rifle were all but indestructible . The iron sights are indeligructible while the Super Match is temperamental and temperamental .
 The McMillan TAC-50 was a better sniper rifle, but it weighed too much . It was a much lighter version of the TAC 50 . The TAC50 weighs too much and was too heavy .
 In those days, a man could buy an HK91, HK93, FN FAL and several different main battle rifles for a grand or less . The HK91 and HK93 were among the most expensive rifles available in the world .
 Today the same guns were worth 5-6 times as much and the prices of ammo had probably gone up about as much . Today those same guns would be worth about 5 times the same amount of money today .
 The UN got involved in the small arms trade and we couldn't buy surplus ammo any more . Then, the damned UN got . involved in . the trade, we couldn’t buy surplus ammunition any more. Then, we had to buy . surplus ammo .
 South Africa was obligated to spend more money and demil it . Instead of shipping 10s of thousands of rounds of .308 NATO to the US, South Africa spent more money . South Africa had to buy more ammunition and ammunition .
 The Lake City had been ok, when you could get it and provided is wasn't mixed lot ammo . Lake City was OK when it came to the Lake City, when it was available .
 The 'eruption' at Yellowstone was a very large and violent hydrothermal explosion, independent of associated volcanism . The good news was that the eruption was not associated with volcanism.
 We wouldn't be seeing an ash cloud from Greeley, Colorado . The ham says he wouldn't have seen a cloud of ash from there .
 Long Valley erupted, but for some strange reason, they weren't getting ash in Truckee . He said that Long Valley had, indeed, erupted . Long Valley erupts, but not in the area .
 Southern Arizona is a very good place to be in the event of a nuclear or volcanic winter .
 The only downside I could see was that Latin Army and they hadn't proved to be effective, he said .
 While we didn't have them out gunned, we could make them wish they'd tried hitting an easier site . We're not out-gunned, but we can make them feel better .
 Sharon and Sharon had built a substantial physical plant, 450kw of electricity, more with the soon to be installed wind turbines . A large underground shelter, underground diesel and propane tanks, a large multiuse building called the machine shed, a barn with livestock .
 "I wasn't buying it, but if they needed a 72-hour bag, just in case, that was fine with me," she said . "I'm not buying it. I'm not sure if they need it."
 I'd taken Flight ER Doc's advice and rotated my ammo . The vibration broke down the grains of gunpowder and caused excessive pressure .
 Derek wouldn't let us go anywhere beyond Whetstone and Benson without a convoy of at least 3 HMMWVs and a fuel hauler . "Derek wouldn't be able to go anywhere else with a convoy," he says .
 According to the ham net, California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, Idaho, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas got some of the ash . The heaviest ash fall was in northern Arizona, Arizona and Utah .
 "After I got out, or was that because of the Air Force turned into a real military service," he says . "I got out of the air force, but I'm glad to see my son back in the military," he asks .
 There was a time, before the Vietnam War, that only SAC maintained real discipline . SAC maintains real discipline before Vietnam War .
 I sure that must have applied to TAC, but I never saw any of them at Edwards . TAC was a good place to go, but it was a bad place for TAC to go .
 "I had wanted to reenlist, back in '65, but my Dad made me an offer I couldn't refuse," he says . He says he wanted to return to the U.S. Army .
 "To stay in, I would have to quit drinking and probably smoking. Besides, to stay in," he says . "I would have had to quit smoking and drinking," he adds .
 "They adopted new physical standards and I would have to shed 25 pounds, began exercising and even jogging," she says . "I would have had to have to lose 25 pounds," she said .
 If I had it to do over, I wouldn't have started drinking in the first place, she says . "I didn't know I was an alcoholic," she says of her alcoholism .
 "I'd have probably died from a heart attack at age 42, like my father almost had. On the other hand, I'd probably die from a . heart attack, like his father almost did," he says . "I'm not going to die at 42, but I'm
 Two other sites, a heavy water plant at Arak and a uranium conversion plant at Isfahan, would be targeted with conventional bombs, the Sunday Times said .
 The UN Security Council voted unanimously last month to slap sanctions on Iran to try to stop uranium enrichment that Western powers fear could lead to making bombs . Western powers also fear that Iran could make nuclear material that could be used to make bombs .
 Tehran insists its plans are peaceful and says it will continue enrichment . Tehran insists it will not stop enriching Iran's oil reserves .
 Israel has refused to rule out pre-emptive military action against Iran along the lines of its 1981 air strike against an atomic reactor in Iraq . Many analysts believe Iran's nuclear facilities are too much for Israel to take on alone .
 Israeli plan envisages conventional laser-guided bombs opening ""tunnels"" into targets . The newspaper said the Israeli plan was envisaged conventional laser guided bombs .
 Nuclear warheads would then be used fired into the plant at Natanz, exploding deep underground to reduce radioactive fallout . Nuclear warheads then would be used to detonate deep underground .
 Israeli pilots have flown to Gibraltar in recent weeks to train for the 2,000 mile round-trip to Iranian targets . Three possible routes to Iran have been mapped out including one over Turkey .
 A nuclear strike would only be used if a conventional attack was ruled out and if the U.S. declined to intervene . Sources say a nuclear strike is only if the United States declines to intervene in the region .
 Disclosure of the plans could be intended to put pressure on Iran to halt enrichment, paper says . Disclosure of plans could also be aimed at putting pressure on Tehran to stop enrichment .
 Washington has said military force remains an option while insisting that its priority is to reach a diplomatic solution . The U.S. government has said it has no plans to use military force in Syria .
 Israel is widely believed to have the Middle East's only nuclear arsenal . Israel has said it will not allow Iran to acquire nuclear weapons .
 "I can't explain why it didn't show me Long Valley blowing its lid, maybe it's tuned to nuclear war," she says . "I'm not sure why it doesn't show Long Valley blow its lid," she asks .
 A nuclear war is inevitable because the number of nuclear powers keeps increasing, says Vladimir Putin . Putin says a nuclear war will be inevitable because of the nuclear power's number of nukes .
 When there were just 5 of us, and 90% of the weapons were in the hands of Russia or the Americans, it was manageable . "It was manageable. It was manageable," she says of the time .
 "It wasn't much, an inch or two, but you'd have thought it was worse than Denver," she says . "It was just a few inches," she adds . "I'm not surprised. It was a little bit better than Denver"
 Those who say the greatest danger is a global climate change are right . Those folks, who say climate change is right, are right. Those folks say they're right .
 A few nukes set off in some cities, followed by WW III, will change the atmosphere for a very, very long time . You don't have to be a rocket scientist to realize that a nuke attack will change Earth's atmosphere .
 That's a whole lot of dust in the air and there has to be a lot of carbon dioxide floating around . That's not just dust, but carbon dioxide is a big problem for the atmosphere .
 ANDAIR air filter won't do you much good; you need a carbon dioxide scrubber to clear the air . AndAIR air filters can be used to clean the air from the air, but don't need an air filter .
 Only then did they nuke Iran and while they did it, they nuked some of their neighbors . The U.S. nuked Iran only then then nuked their neighbors.
 That probably led to those Muslim extremists nuking our cities and releasing a plague or two, says Simon Tisdall . That probably also led to the release of a plague .
 "In some ways, I was about the closest thing as we had to a rocket scientist," he says . "I was about to be about the best thing as I was," he adds .
 Instrumentation Technician was a Rocket Scientist . Although, it was really stretching things to say that an instrumentation technician was a rocket scientist .
 Phelps Dodge trained people to be Instrumentation Technicians at their place in Thatcher, AZ, or they used to . Phelps Dodge now trains people to work as Instrumentation Techs .
 "I doubt they were really trained in the same things we were, but technology had changed so much," says the former soldier . "Technology has changed so many things. I doubt they would have been trained," he says .
 When it came to pure electronics, Damon was far better trained than I was, he said . Damon was 'far better trained' than he was, and he said, 'Damon' was 'better trained'
 Derek was about the closest thing we had to a pure soldier; him and his friends, to be accurate . Derek was Derek's best friend, and he was about to be a soldier .
 "I could shoot fair, but he embarrassed me when we went shooting together at the range," she says . "He embarrassed me," she said of her husband .
 Of course, anyone but blind man could shoot well with Tac-50, Night Force scope, MUNS and Jet suppressor . "Anyone but a blind man can shoot well"
 NATO sources say they have for weeks been watching Israeli warplanes running flights the length of the Mediterranean to Gibraltar . Nobody expects an Israeli strike on Gibraltar .
 The transfer of Admiral William ""Fox"" Fallon from Pacific Command to run Central Command startled the Army and Marines, who had seen these as ground wars . In Washington, Washington, the transfer of Adm. Fox to Central Command was a surprise .
 Fallon's appointment comes as the White House wants to increase the military pressure on Tehran . Fallon is the latest official to be appointed by the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Fallon is heading to the region with some heavy reinforcements of two aircraft carrier strike groups, led by the USS John C Stennis and the state-of-the-art new USS Ronald Reagan .
 Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak is appalled by the fate of fellow Sunnis in Iraq . Mubarak is one of the Sunni leaders appalled at the growing prospect of a Shiite alliance led by Iran . Mubarak has suggested a Sunni alliance with Iran .
 The abrupt resignation of the Saudi ambassador to Washington, Prince Turki, reflected the sharp debate in Riyadh over the best way to respond to the Iranian threat . The ambassador's abrupt resignation last month reflected a sharp debate .
 Prince Turki's predecessor in Washington, Prince Bandar, is now acting as the Saudi equivalent of the national security adviser in Washington . He is convinced that the Saudi monarchy must rally the Gulf States and the Sunni nations against the prospect of a Shiite empire led by Iran .
 Prince Turki was a dove, who wanted dialogue and negotiations and feared that military strikes against Iran would set the entire region ablaze . Turki feared that strikes would set Iran ablaze and set the region on fire .
 Pessimists among Saudiwatchers say that he lost; optimists say he returned to Riyadh to continue the argument . Optimists say that the king returned to Saudi Arabia to continue his argument with the Saudis .
 Steny Hoyer declared a nuclear-armed Iran would be unacceptable . The new House majority leader gave an interview to the Jerusalem Post .
 On the possible use of force to end any Irani ambitions to deploy nuclear weapons, Hoyer said, "I have not ruled that out" Hoyer also said he has not ruled out using force against Iran .
 The Iranians, for their part, seem to be closing ranks against what they perceive as the mounting threat of military action . The Iranians are closing ranks in response to what they see as the threat of a military strike .
 Rafsanjani warned the ""arrogant powers" against launching a new crisis in the Middle East . Rafsanjanjani also warned the 'arrogants powers' not to launch a new Mideast crisis .
 Many top Iranian officials make little secret of their distaste for the rhetoric and populism of Ahmadinejad . This closing of the ranks in Tehran is significant, since many top Iranian official make little .
 Ahmadinejad's statements that Israel must be wiped from the map, or that the Holocaust was an ""invention of the Zionists,"" have found him to be an embarrassment . However much they may sympathize with his statements, they have found them to be a embarrassment .
 Supreme Leader Khamenei endorsed Ahmadinejad's skepticism of the Holocaust and Israel's right to exist . Supreme Leader AN Khamenei sent message to pilgrims to Mecca to celebrate the Haj . Khamenei's message endorsed skepticism of Holocaust, Israel's rights to exist and the Holocaust .
 Khamenei has not spoken in such extreme terms for some years, and his rhetoric points to the nervousness, perhaps even verging on panic, which seems to be gripping the Tehran leadership .
 Iran had not abrogated the nuclear nonproproliferation treaty, Larijani said . Iran has not stopped its cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency, he added . Iran is also cooperating with the IAEA, he said .
 Iran remains open to negotiations, Larijani says . Iran's economic ties with China symbolized by the privileged role China now enjoys in helping to develop Iran's oil and gas reserves . Iran remained open to talks with China, he says .
 Political mood in Tehran does not seem conciliatory, and military pressure is building ominously . Yet the political mood in Iran seems to be growing, with the military pressure on Iran .
 The Israelis were ready for whenever they needed to conduct the mission to Tehran . The Israelis are ready to conduct a mission to Iran .
 The difference was the difference was they intended to use low yield nuclear weapons this time, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "My only explanation of why they didn't ... is that someone changed his/her mind. My only explanation is that I don't know what happened to them is that they changed their mind. I'm not sure what happened," he said .
 If Israel used nukes, it would be the first time since 1945 that any country used nuclear weapons, other than testing them . Israel would be first country to use nukes since 1945, not tested them .
 Russia had finished building the Iranian reactor and they couldn't be expected to act like the French after the Israelis destroyed the reactor they built for Saddam Hussein . Russia couldn't expect the French to act as the French did in the case of Saddam Hussein.
 The Chinese could be expected to be involved because they needed the Iranian oil . Moreover, the Chinese could also be involved in the deal, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 I keep going back to the war because I wanted to understand what WE did to anyone to get them to attack us. I wanted the war to help us understand why we were attacked by anyone, he says .
 Saddam fired Scuds at Israel during Desert Storm . Iraq prevented Israel from retaliating against Iraq when Saddam fired at Israel . Israel was hit by Scuds in Desert Storm.
 I know my tales wander around from here to there and back again, but wait until you get senile and trying writing a cohesive story . I know this is not the first time I've written a story .
 This story started out to be about how Sharon and Sharon would prepare when we won the lottery . Sharon says she and Sharon are going to be prepared to win the lottery this year .
 It didn't take long for that to go to hell; I couldn't remember the story line. "I'm not sure what happened," he says .
 You want food, see TOM; ammo, that too; and, precious metals we have a lifetime supply . You want to see more of TOM; see TOM, TOM and ammo .
 "We hadn't been secure in our home since '82 when we moved to Kalifornia. We weren't secure in their homes, but that was nothing new," said the author of the book . "That's nothing new, that's how we're going to survive," said
 "We moved from the middle of the terror zone to somewhere out of the . middle of nowhere in Arizona," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Built our dream shelter, got the barn, machine shed and a few miscellaneous outbuildings . Built ourselves a dream shelter .
 Springfield Armory had to put on a second shift for a week when I got to buying rifles . McMillian Brothers were happy to sell another of their fine rifles . Springfield Armory put on second shift to buy rifles .
 "I don't know if it's an analogy or a metaphor, but the closest I can to describing the way life had been running is a funnel," says author . "The closest thing I can do is to describe the way my life has been running"
 The world's trouble seemed to get closer and closer with the passage of time, ah, the information age . The information age has become more and more prevalent .
 "When we didn't know for a couple of days about things happening in a far off land, it wasn't a big deal," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It wasn't big deal. It was a big mistake," says Sutter.
 "If some world leader broke wind, we all knew about it before the smell was gone," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: If some world leaders broke wind it would be a disaster .
 Several cable news network’s sprang up, each one trying to outdo the others . After that came the competition and several cable news networks’ sprang up .
 When there was a shooting, they finally got to where they were speculating on the types of bullets used . "When there was an incident there were speculations on what bullets were used," she says .
 "I sometimes got the feeling that we'd have been better off if we'd nuked 'em and let God sort 'em out," he says . "The uproar in the media wouldn't have been any worse. We'd have had to nuke 'em," he adds .
 "Some guy would go postal and the media would speculate about his motives," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not unusual for a person to go postal. Some guy would have gone postal and speculate about their motives"
 The media pressured the terrorists into committing terrorist acts and finally the major nuclear powers to go at it . Eventually, the media pressure the terrorists to commit terrorist acts . The media pressure led to the nuclear arms race .
 We had a 10 year supply of propane and enough diesel fuel to wear out the engine . We also had enough propane for a 10-year supply of diesel and propane .
 Terrorists pulled off at least 3 attacks that we knew of, bombings and two different bioweapons . Except... the terrorists pulled off three attacks that were not known to exist .
 Hugo Chavez wasn't content to create a Marxist Country, he wanted to export it . Hugo Chavez was not content with creating a Marxist country but wanted to exporting it . Chavez wanted to be able to export his ideas .
 The Israelis got tired of worrying about their neighbors and eliminated most of them . The Israeli government has eliminated many of their neighbors in Israel .
 Most of the world lay in ruins, the weather sux and nature decided to go on a rampage . Now most of the . world lay . in ruins . The world is in a state of chaos .
 Cascadia adjusted, Yellowstone sort of burped and Long Valley went postal . Bottom line was Cascadian adjusted . Yellowstone sort-burped . Long Valley goes postal .
 That was after the bombings of the cities and before the bioweapon release. That was before the release of bioweapons . That was in the early days of World War II .
 At the moment we still didn't have an interesting summer the following year, which led to an interesting the summer the next year . At the time we still had to wait for a summer to find out what happened .
 Derek's patrols kept the Latinos off our back and we got through the winter without any action . Derek's patrol kept the Latino off their back and kept it quiet, he says .
 Walt had a dairy cow he kept for milk, hogs he raised for meat and a couple of feeders that he butchered and shared with his sons . Walt also kept a dairy milk cow and hogs for meat .
 He said they kept six hens and when they quit producing, they became baking hens . He said when the hens stopped producing they were turned into baking chickens . The hens are now part of a family tradition .
 Walt said he leased out most of the land and just grew a little, he was semi-retired . Walt said most of his land was leased out and he just grew up a little . Walt says he is proud of his family's legacy .
 When he had his heart attack, he turned the farm over to his oldest boy and moved to Benson . The farm was turned over to him when he had a heart attack and he turned it over to the boy .
 He'd run into Derek in Benson and learned that I was from Iowa, wanted to know what I thought of the coming growing season . He wanted to talk about the upcoming growing season, and asked what he thought .
 Long Valley is in the Owens Valley of eastern Kalifornia, it blew its top, a massive volcanic eruption . Long Valley was in the . Owens Valley . The Owens Valley is a volcanic region in eastern . Kalifica .
 He's the one who came up with the wind turbines and has overseen getting them installed . He says he's overseen getting the turbines installed .
 APFSDS-T round, DM53, with a longer rod penetrator . It permits effective use of a new APFS DS-T . round, which has a longer penetrator, to be effective .
 As to your original question, I have no idea what to expect this next growing season, I'm not sure . I'm looking forward to a new crop crop in 2015 .
 "There was no way that I'd tell a man I just met that we had to convert one of the bedrooms in the shelter into a vault to hold the gold and silver," says the shelter's owner . "There is no way" to tell the man he just met, says
 We had $45 million in gold and silver . Or, that valued at $600 an ounce for gold, we had $600 per ounce . We had a total of $45million in gold .
 In fact, we kept about a million of it in the house because the vault was full . The vault is full, and we kept a million in it .
 With our new standard price of $1,500/$30 an ounce, we were on our way to catching up to Bill Gates . With $1.500/30, we would be catching up with Bill Gates, we could be catching him .
 I knew we were going to have devil’s food cake tonight, if I was lucky, with coffee frosting . I knew it was going to be devil's food cake . If I'm lucky, it would be a coffee cake with a frosting, she said .
 I knew that Aaron had gotten our hand cranked ice cream freezer; I was hoping he turn out some vanilla to go with the cake . I knew he had gotten some ice cream from our freezer .
 If we limited the 'celebration' to family only, we could get by with a single cake and one freezer of vanilla .
 When they come out right, one cake will feed at least 20 people, large servings . One cake can be served to 20 people .
 "I never counted, but between the diesel tankers and the JP-8, we weren't short on fuel. I never counted," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not counting, but we're not short of fuel"
 We had gotten short on PRI-D, but a trip to a marina solved that, they bought it back by the 5 gallon pail .
 13.13 was revealing itself to be a solar maximum, ergo, communications were awful . Between keeping the no-man’s land clear and salvaging, we were busy whenever the weather permitted .
 There are 2 theories on that, the eleven year cycle described by Schwabe-Wolf and the 22 year cycle . Babcock's theory is that the cycle is 22 years old .
 Some radio frequencies are absorbed and others are reflected, leading to rapidly fluctuating signals and unexpected propagation paths . Some radio waves absorb and others reflect radio waves, resulting in rapid fluctuations .
 TV and commercial radio stations are little affected by solar activity, but ground-to-air, ship to-shore, shortwave broadcast, and amateur radio are frequently disrupted by solar radiation .
 Radio operators using high frequencies rely upon solar and geomagnetic alerts to keep their communication circuits up and running . Radio operators use high frequencies using high frequency to keep communication circuits running .
 I was totally shocked when the sky cleared enough that I saw them, it was one heck of a birthday present . I was shocked when I was able to see them. It was one of the best birthday presents I've ever seen .
 You know, I should have figured on creamed cheese frosting, she bought 2 cases of it at Costco, way back when . She bought two cases of frosting at Costco back in the days .
 "I had wanted to go to the range today; it was too cold and then Walt showed up," she says . "It was too bad for Walt to show up, but he showed up"
 Even though I have a parka, I seem to have trouble keeping warm, must be my poor circulation, says author .
 "That's one I haven't figured out, my bp is normal, 110/70 and I take aspirin to keep my blood thinned out. That's one of the things I'm still trying to figure out."
 "I take Prevacid to keep the aspirin from giving me my ulcers back," she says . Plus Prevacid keeps her ulcers from giving her back ulcers .
 We had a real problem finding extra disposable insulin syringes and I started doing like my Dad, using one syringe for a week at a time . We had to do like his dad, using a single syringe at a week .
 Missy passed in '08, effectively doubling the number of syringes I had . Missy's death in 2008 "effectively doubled the amount of syringe she had," she says .
 I began to notice I was running short and asked both Damon and Derek to keep an eye out for 3/1 Occ (30 unit) insulin syringes . I asked both of them to keep a watchful eye out of the supplies . I also noticed that they were running short
 "They gathered what they could find and used up the larger syringes first," she says . "They gather what they can find and I used them first"
 You can't use those short needled syringes for IM injections and at 31 gauge, they're almost too fine for IV use . At 31 gauge they are almost too small for IV IV use and are almost impossible to use .
 They happen once in a while, but I don't know if it's on an 11-year or 22-year cycle . "They happen once a while," says the author of the book .
 One degree of latitude equals 60 nautical miles and each second 1 nautical mile . Each second is a degree of nautical mile .
 1 nautical mile equals exactly 1.852 kilometers and 1 statute mile equals 1.6093 kilometers . The conversion factor for kilometers is 1.2 kilometers .
 Wiki used to be a table on Wiki that allowed you to look up units of measurement . There is no measurement table on Wikipedia that allows you to use the number of units .
 She wanted to get out of Kalifornia so badly, she could taste it . Yes, both of us, she wanted to leave California so badly .
 "If I had a dollar for every time I heard her wish we could move, I wouldn't have needed the lottery ticket. If I had every time she'd wished I could move I would have needed a lottery ticket, she'd never needed it .
 We hope to start planting a garden in mid-April, possibly later, that depends on the weather . The garden is expected to be planted by mid-February .
 We've increase our herds of livestock slightly, it wasn't easy because we hadn't started out to have herds . We've increased our herds slightly, but it's not easy to do so because we didn't start out of having herds. We've also increased our numbers of livestock .
 The chickens were the easiest part; we stopped gathering eggs for a while . The chickens are the easy part; they were easy to gather .
 Damon and Aaron came up with more hogs, cattle and horses . Aaron and Damon looked around some of the hogs and cattle in the area .
 It was never intended to be a row crop tractor and was too small to mount much equipment on . The tractor was never meant to be used as a crop crop tractor . It was designed to be able to use as much as a tractor for a crop .
 We could mount a mower, pull a manure spreader or a wagon and not much else . We were able to pull manure spreaders or pull a wagon . We used to be able to ride mowers and pull manure spreadsers .
 We'd get grain and bedding from the oats and wheat, livestock feed from the corn and alfalfa . We'd also get bedding, bedding and livestock feeding from the grain and wheat . We would get grain from oats, wheat, grain from wheat, alf
 Some of the corn could be turned into people food, corn meal and the like . The corn could also be used for people food .
 We weren't the only family planning on some sort of farm; I think maybe Walt was going to give it a try . Walt was planning on a farm; maybe he wanted to try .
 "From then until we won the lottery, my health continued to fail, little by little," she says . "I had to wait until I had a chance to see my family again. From then until I won't be able to see them again," she adds .
 By the time we'd gotten settled in here in Whetstone, both of us were getting around much better . By the end of the year, we'd both been able to get around much more easily .
 I can remember telling Sharon that the war in Iraq had cost the Republicans the White House in '08 . "I can remember . telling Sharon," she said. "I'm not sure what happened to her."
 Bill O'Reilly had it right, one last shot and then regardless of the outcome, come home . Bill O’Reilly was right, he had one final shot to come home.
 I doubt anyone expected Hugo to do what he did; thank God the troops were home . "Thank God God God was home. Thank God, thank God for the troops being home," he said .
 We'd have been better off if they'd gotten that Ml A3E3 beyond the testing stage, they'd have made a difference on the border, they say .
 The new tank was still the basic Ml A2 with a new gun, engine and fire control system . It wasn't that big of a deal, it wasn't the new tank .
 DOD was looking at a 5-6 year conversion, beginning after they approved the new model . The new model is expected to cost $1.5 million .
 They had to license the L55 gun from the Germans, get Honeywell to build the engines . Honeywell also built the engines and probably General Dynamics to build new fire control systems .
 I half wonder if Derek could get the parts and convert 3 of the A2s to the new A3E3 . The A2E3 is the latest in a long line of A1s and A3s .
 There probably hadn't been one survivalist who hadn't seen the war coming . "There were no signs that this was going to be a disaster," says CNN's John Sutter .
 "I knew I should get to the range and practice, but it was almost to Saugus and I didn't drive at that time," he says . "I didn't want to get to that time. I knew I wanted to practice," he adds .
 "I just wanted to leave a record of how things were both before and after. I just wanted a record," she says of her life .
 "I guess the real focus has to be WW III, which was the real turning point," he says . "The real focus is to be the WW III," he adds .
 "The first attack was in '93, when some Muslims tried to blow the place up," he says . The first attack on the U.S. was in 1993, he says. "It's not the first attack. It's the first attempt to blow up the place,"
 The second attack wasn't Muslims at all, just some wanttabe bad guy named McVeigh who blew up the federal building in Oklahoma City . The second attacks wasn't Muslim at all .
 Four of the planes were flown into the WTC towers, one into the Pentagon and the fourth crashed in Pennsylvania . Two of them were flown in WTC towers and one crashed in the Pentagon .
 First we went into Afghanistan, looking to find and kill Osama bin Laden . First we were looking for and kill bin Laden, but then went to find him .
 It took a while, but we found him, the Iraqis tried him and they hanged him . He was hanged by the Iraqi government, which hanged him in 2007 .
 The problem was we didn't have a good plan of what to do with Iraq when we beat them, says Obama . "We didn't know what we would do when we won't beat them," he says .
 In '07, just before we won the lottery, Dubya decided to ignore everyone and increase our troop presence over there . Dubya ignored everyone and increased our troops over there, he says .
 Survivalists around the country knew what was coming, they just didn't know when . The survivalists knew what to expect, but they knew it was coming soon .
 It had somehow turned into a religious war, the Muslims against the infidels, the Muslim leader said . It was the Muslims vs. the infidsels, he said .
 Chavez accuses the U.S. government of attempting to turn Colombia into Venezuela's adversary . Rumsfeld had suggested that Colombia and other countries would be concerned over Venezuela's recent military purchases .
 Dubya imposed sanctions on 3 Russian firms... like Russia really cared . Dubya imposes sanctions on three Russian firms, like Russia did .
 China protested sanctions we imposed on some of their firms over arms sales . I pretty much knew we were getting close. When I read that and the article about China protesting sanctions, I pretty well knew we would get close. I think it was getting close .
 Mexico went with the version of the H&K G36, it was a 5.56x45mm cartridge . I must say, I was happy when Mexico went . with the . version of . the . G36 cartridge .
 The Venezuelans used 7.62x39mm cartridge in their AK-103s . The 5.56mm cartridge was used by the Venezuelans, not the 5.5mm .
 The principal problem was that the earthen embankment only went across the front of the acreage . It was the principal problem .
 "If these people were coming cross country, they could hit us from the flank or back," says the team . "They could hit them from the left or right, or back. If these people came from the right or left, they would hit us," she says .
 "That's some heavy duty stuff and I was certain that those artillery shells could probably reach out and touch someone, like Derek," says Derek . "I'm certain that these artillery shells can probably reach ... touch someone," he says .
 Some of them had G3 rifles, some the G36, some G36 and the rest either FX05s, AK-47s or AK103s . Some of the rest had AK47s and AK-74s, not to mention plenty of RPGs and RPGs .
 The maximum effective range of the Mk19 and Ma Deuces notwithstanding, Bill and the others never let them get really close to . The best range is the range of a weapon that can be fired at a range range .
 The firefight no more got going then Derek and his patrol showed up, creating a crossfire . Derek's patrol then showed up and created a firefight with the firefight .
 I suppose the thing that helped us the most was the defensive positions I hadn't known about. The defensive positions helped us to win the World Cup . I suppose it was the most important thing I knew about .
 "I was trying to follow the action on the radio, but they were too busy shooting to talk much," he says . He says .
 I heard the boom of the M256A1 and figured they were probably using HEAT rounds . Then, I heard . I thought they were . probably using . HEAT . rounds . I heard them boom .
 The round provides effective rapid lethal reaction against massed assaulting infantry armed with hand held anti-tank and automatic weapons at close range thereby improving survivability . The round is intended to be used in the combat of massed assault infantry .
 The round significantly increases the tank's lethality and enhances the tank crew's survivability . Additionally, the round significantly increased the tank tank's . survivability and lethality of the tank .
 The additional capability gives the Abrams Tank the ability to survive RPG ambushes and to fully support friendly infantry assaults . The tank can also be used in support of friendly attacks .
 "It didn’t sound any different than any of the practice rounds they'd fired," said the shooter . "It’s just like any other rounds they’d fired," he said .
 Derek stuck his head through the shelter cover and said we could leave . It was late afternoon before the firing died off and the fire died off .
 When I got topside, they were busy stripping bodies of anything useful and loading them on the 4 trucks . The bodies were taken from the ground and loaded into the trucks .
 "I noticed right away that there was a growing pile of weapons and munitions," she says . "There were growing piles of weapons," she adds . "It's not just a pile of arms and munitions"
 I pulled my coat tighter and stood there guarding the collection . It was fresh meat for the table, as good as money in the bank . I pulled his coat tighter .
 World War III, or the Third World War, was a term used to describe a hypothetical conflict on the scale of WW I, WW II or larger . It was used to refer to a hypothetical war that would be larger than WW I or II .
 Most usages of the term assumed the use of weapons of mass destruction such as nuclear weapons, biological or chemical weapons . The term was used in reference to nuclear weapons and biological weapons .
 Before the collapse of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War, an apocalyptic war between the U.S. and the USSR was considered likely .
 Some American politicians suggested an invasion of East Germany, however Truman was dissuaded from this by analysts saying that the risk and fallout of WWIII would be too great .
 The conflict pitted Egypt against an alliance between the French, the United Kingdom and Israel . Egypt was ruled out of control by Egypt and the French .
 Lester B Pearson feared a larger war when the USSR threatened to intervene on behalf of Egypt . Pearson persuaded the British and French to withdraw from Egypt . The Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs convinced the British to withdraw .
 Eisenhower administration, fearing a wider war, had applied pressure to the United Kingdom to withdraw . Eisenhower administration had threatened to create a currency crisis by dumping U.S. holdings of British debt .
 The conflict pitted the United States against an alliance between the USSR and Cuba . The U.S. was involved in the conflict between Cuba and the USSR .
 USSR was attempting to place several launch sites in Cuba in response to the U.S. installation of missiles in Turkey . The USSR was responding to the United States installation of missile bases in Turkey in Cuba .
 For a brief while, the United States military went to DEFCON 3, while SAC went to DeFCON 2 . The United States went from DEFCon 3 to DEFON 2, while the U.S. military went from deFCON 1 to deFC
 The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot over Cuba and another flight over Russia was almost intercepted when it strayed over Siberia . Curtis LeMay had neglected to enforce orders to suspend all over flights .
 Soviet threat to intervene on Egypt's behalf caused the U.S. to go to DEFCON 3 . As the Yom Kippur War was winding down, the United States feared a Soviet intervention in Egypt . The United States went to DEFON 3 as a result of
 The Soviets quickly detected the increased American defense condition, and were astonished and bewildered at the response . The Soviets were astonished by the response to the increased defense condition .
 Brezhnev decided that the Americans were too nervous, and that the best course of action would be to wait to reply . The Soviet leader decided to wait until the Americans replied .
 The next morning, the Egyptians agreed to the American suggestion, and dropped their request for assistance from the Soviets, bringing the crisis to an end . The next day, the Egyptian government agreed to a U.S. request for help .
 NORAD saw on-screen indications that a full-scale Soviet attack had been launched . The U.S. made emergency retaliation preparations after the attack . The United States made emergency preparations after seeing indications of an attack .
 NORAD realized that a computer system test had caused the display errors . No attempt was made to use the ""red telephone"" hotline to clarify the situation with the USSR . NORAD later realized that no such launch had taken place .
 A Senator inside the NORAD facility at the time described an atmosphere of absolute panic . Senator inside NORAD Facility described the atmosphere as 'absolute panic'
 GAO investigation led to the construction of an off-site test facility, to prevent similar mistakes subsequently . A GAO probe led to construction of the facility to prevent future mistakes .
 In the panic the U.S. government had confusion on who was in control . The United States had confusion over who had control of the government .
 The DEFCON status status was raised and intelligence showed movement of Soviet forces . The Soviet Union was in the midst of the Second World War II .
 Soviet early warning systems showed that a United States ICBM attack had been launched . The attack was the first time the U.S. ICBM had ever been launched by a Soviet ICBM . The incident occurred in the 1980s .
 Colonel Stanislav Petrov, in command of the monitoring facility, correctly put the warning down to computer error and did not notify his superiors . Petrov did not alert his superiors to the warning .
 The USSR mistook a test of NATO's nuclear release procedures as a fake cover for a NATO attack . The USSR mistakenly raised its nuclear alert level after the test was thought to be a false test .
 It was not until afterwards that the U.S. realized how close it had come to nuclear war . The United States was not aware of the danger of nuclear war until after .
 At the time of the exercise the Soviet Politburo was without a healthy functioning head due to the failing health of then leader Yuri Andropov, which is thought to have been one of the contributing factors to the Soviet concern .
 A Norwegian missile launch for scientific research was detected from Spitsbergen and thought to be an attack on Russia . It was launched from a submarine five minutes away from Moscow .
 Russian Defense Ministry had neglected to notify those monitoring Russia's nuclear defense systems . Norway had notified the world that it would be making the launch, but Russia did not .
 In addition to the above there are two other points during the Cold War that could have resulted in a world war . The Cold War could have ended in a war .
 These, however, are not generally listed as they do not relate to the United States-Soviet Union rivalry, but rather the events following the Sino-Soviet Split of 1960 . The events following that split of 1960 are not listed .
 The ideological split between Maoist and Stalinist communists divided the entire communist movement worldwide . Maoist communists (represented primarily by China) controlled governments or significant rebel factions on most continents . Maoists and Stalinists were represented in China and Russia .
 A war between China and the Soviet Union may well have resulted in world war, while not necessarily involving the U.S. and the capitalist west .
 At the time there were almost one and a half million troops deployed along the border . Pro-Soviet Vietnam invaded pro-China Cambodia and removed Pol Pot in 1979 .
 China in turn invaded Vietnam in retaliation . The Soviets denounced this action strongly, although it fell short of taking action . China invaded Vietnam, but the Soviets did not take action .
 The next year the Soviets invaded Afghanistan and the Chinese claimed this was a continuation of a strategy of encircling China with Soviet allies that had begun the previous year with the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia .
 I had as many things wrong as I had right; still we did confirm the nuclear winter theory . Still, it appeared to confirm the volcanic winter theory and appeared to be confirming the volcanic .
 The thing about terrorists is they don't always tell you when they do something, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Terrorism is not always telling you when something is going to happen," he says .
 They spread the primary pneumonic plague and smallpox without a word . They didn't announce those two pandemics; they just spread the main pneumonic plague .
 As we were soon to learn, there were 3 pandemics, not 2 and nothing could protect us from the third . No amount of isolation, no amount of antibiotics, nothing could stop the third pandemic . As we learned, we had to learn that there were three pandem
 I'm not telling you because I'm waiting to receive the explanation from Gassville, Arkansas, Arkansas . I'm still waiting to hear the explanation .
 I believe the longest barreled cannon is the German PzH 2000, a 155mm selfpropelled cannon with a 52 caliber barrel . The longest barrel barrel is the 155mm artillery gun, a German 155mm .
 Nobody asked, but I think we should buy our self-propelled howitzers from the Germans, theirs seem to be better . The Germans seem to have a better way of shooting than the British .
 The maximum range on the Ml09 is 30km , but it only has a 39 caliber gun . The maximum of 30km can be reached by the gun .
 Rather than let the Germans build our weapons, we could license theirs . We could license their weapons, the U.S. could license them, says David Cameron .
 We licensed the L55 gun for the Ml A3E2 and H&K was working on the XM8 and 25mm XM25 . The L55 was licensed for the A32 and the Xm25 .
 The XM25 precisely delivered air-bursting munitions in all conditions, including MOUT and complex terrain . The weapon was designed to deliver air-burnt munitions in a range of conditions .
 It's five times more lethal at the M203's maximum range than the maximum range . It provided lethality well beyond its maximum ability . The weapon is five times lethal at its maximum range and provides lethality beyond the range .
 The thermobaric round and Flechette round have been perfected by the team .
 In my very first story, I proposed using flechette rounds in Thumper, my 12 gauge Gatling gun . In his very first article, I suggested using flechete rounds .
 "They punch right through soft body armor. It's ok, I have some, I just don't talk about it anymore," he says .
 Soft body armor is available that is stab resistant, but used primarily by prison guards . Soft body armour is available for prison guards, mainly used by inmates .
 Next time I talk to Derek, I'll ask about getting some of the XM25 grenade launchers and all of the rounds .
 I have a gun rack on my wheelchair that resulted from modifying a commercial gun rack . I'm a wheelchair wheelchair user who uses a modified gun rack to store guns in his wheelchair .
 I used a shrouded brass brass 177D Master padlock with 4 numbers set to the 2 nd 5 th digits of my SSN . Most of the time I don't lock the padlock, although most of the . time I do not lock it .
 Derek will just run down to the hardware store and Benson and buy some . Right, Derek will run down and Benson will go and buy them .
 The first one has to figure out how to dismantle them, clean them and reassemble them . Wrong, longer... first one must have to figure how to do it . Wrong: "First one must figure out ... how to ... dismantle them"
 By the time I had the guns cleaned and put away, they were planting the garden and the crops . By the end of the day, they had already been planting the crops and the garden .
 I claimed the weapons as trade goods and was told I could clean them myself. I claimed they were trade goods . I claimed to have cleaned them myself, but was told to clean them up .
 The attackers had multiple cases of ammo, hand grenades, RPGs and ammo for their machine guns . The attackers also had hand grenades and hand grenades in hand grenades .
 I used FM 3-23.30 to identify the various grenades, it was quite the assortment, although, most of them were RGD-5 fragmentation grenades .
 I didn't like them because a person could only throw them 40 meters and they had a blast radius of 15 meters . They became trade goods so they became a trade goods . The blast radius was 15 meters and a 40-metre thrower could throw 40 meters .
 The folks in Whetstone and Benson were more than ready to trade off Mauser’s to get real assault rifles . The folks were ready to get a real assault rifle .
 I let the grenades go for 5 ounces of silver per, the RPGs for 5 . ounces and replacement rockets for 2 ounces, plus a trade in for any rifle . The grenades are worth 5 ounces per .
 I traded the ammo, round for round; the Mauser’s wouldn't do me any good without ammo . "I traded the ammunition round for rounds," he says . "Mauser's won't do anything good without ammunition"
 We were doing a lot to get the economy up and running in hopes of maintaining the system of capitalism . We were trying to maintain the system, he says .
 "I also wanted to get politically active, but at 70, wasn't sure I still had the energy," she says . "I wanted to be politically active. But at 70," she said .
 About 3 years after the war we had virtually no idea who was running the country . Interestingly about 3 years later there were virtually no clues as to who was in charge of the government .
 Most folks, myself included, expected FEMA to come dragging in sooner or later and try to take over what remained of the country . FEMA is expected to try and take control of what remains of the nation .
 Benson and Whetstone are the only rural locations in the U.S. to get help from the government . The government says the big cities needed more help than little rural locations like Benson and .
 "Those stupid SOBs didn't even realize we had 7 train loads of military equipment and supplies," says President Obama . "We have 7 trainloads of military supplies and supplies" says Obama .
 Derek's friend Joe had made that possible, it was just a shame he couldn't get here . Derek's friends had made it possible, but it was too late for him to get to see his friend .
 If you can find an old map of Arizona, you'll soon realize that it was mostly desert and mountains . Arizona is mostly desert, mountains and deserts .
 We could have had enemy combatants hiding anywhere and if they were wearing civilian clothes we may never have known . If they were in civilian clothes they could have been hiding anywhere, they may never be known .
 "It was a life and death struggle, our primary enemy being Mother Nature, not the Latinos. You're half right, don't beat yourself up," he says .
 One thing you can say about nuclear winter and volcanic winter is that they're not over until they're over . One thing to say is that nuclear winter is not over .
 The effect of the caldera eruption served to contain the nuclear summer, keeping the weather cool . It was almost too cold to grow crops where we were .
 "I did get a combat wheelchair, the one I had couldn't support me, my gun rack and the weapons," he says . He says he did get the wheelchair, but the one he had "wasn't able to support me"
 "I even had a small trailer to hold my spare ammo, rockets and grenades," says the author .
 Bill or Derek had replaced that standard wheelchair battery with a big one giving me as much as 12 miles cruising range compared to my previous range of ~5 miles . The new battery gives me a range of 12 miles, compared to the old range of 5 miles .
 "I was more concerned about another group like the last one showing up and trying to take what we have," says coach . "I'm not worried about the last group showing up," he says .
 "I know there's enough food to get through for 2-3 years. As far as the acreage goes, I know there is enough food," says author . "There is enough acreage for 2 to 3 years," he says .
 Only solace was more liberals died off than conservatives; maybe there's still time to save our Republic . We already had about as much as we could take as a nation, says author .
 "There were forces out there that were going to 'save' us. I should have pulled my head out of the sand," he says . "I should have 'pulled my head' out of sand, he writes .
 A few countries managed to avoid any serious damage from the war and were just now getting their act together, preparing to help us . A few . countries managed . to avoid serious damage . The war is now over and the world is getting ready for help .
 This is not the disaster I was referring to; it first appeared in late summer . Sorry, that's not the same thing I was talking about .
 Our crops were doing so well, right up until the plants began maturing when something hit them, some kind of a blight of some kind . The crops were maturing before they were hit by the blight, which hit them in the spring .
 Derek or Damon can explain it better than I; we'll get their input in a minute . Perhaps Derek, Damon, Derek and Damon will explain the situation better than me .
 At a particular point, each crop began to die off leaving us with nothing . At the time of each crop died off, it was the only crop left of nothing .
 According to the ham bands, this was widespread, affecting the entire country . The ham bands say ham bands were responsible for the widespread problem .
 U.S. troops back on our southern border, this time erecting a blockade . Suddenly, we had troops back in the U.K. Suddenly, they had troops .
 Canada did the same thing, hoping against hope that whatever was ruining our crops didn't get theirs . Worse, Canada tried to hope against hope it wouldn't get their crops ruined .
 Blight refers to a specific symptom that can be expressed by plants in response to infection by a plant pathogenic organism . Blight is the symptom that plants express by responding to an infection .
 It is simply a rapid and complete chlorosis, browning, and then death of plant tissues such as leaves, branches, twigs, or floral organs .
 Most blights are caused by a fungus or a bacterium, each different according to the plant species involved . Most of the blights were caused by the plant, but not the fungus .
 If he'd have taken his tank, I'd have accused him of being out playing Patton, a man we both admired, he'd probably said . He'd have been playing Patton in his tank .
 They left the tank and the artillery units sitting right where they were, they could always call back if they got in trouble . The tank and artillery units were left sitting where they sat .
 Most of the time they had 3 HMMWVs, equipped with the Mk19, a Ma Deuce and an M240 . Most of them were equipped with Mk19 and the M240s . The crew of the HMMwVs was equipped with an M19 and a
 That's about as much firepower as they had on the Swift Boats back in 'Nam, hopefully it would be enough . That's not the same amount of firepower that they had back in the '60s .
 I could be wrong, but I believe that's when they came up with what evolved into the Mk19. Patrol Craft, Fast Swift Boat, Eighty-four Mark I . The Mk19 was the first of its kind and is now being used in the UK .
 Dad always figured that I was too busy being a soldier to worry about civilian concerns, he says . Dad always thought that he would be too busy with his job as a soldier for civilian concerns . He says he's not worried about his military career .
 Civilian concerns become military concerns when they affect the safety, security, and stability of the region . The U.S. military says it is concerned about the safety and security of the area .
 Iowa farm boy instincts homed in on the corn crop Dad was raising, a little investigating caused him to go for a little trip . So when his finely-honed Iowa farmboy instincts hommed in on his dad's corn crop, he went for a trip .
 Corn, wheat and rice accounted for 87% of all grain production, worldwide, in 2003 . 43% of food calories in 2003 were consumed by corn, wheat, rice and rice .
 Several developing nations depend almost exclusively on cereal grains for their food supplies . The cereal grains are used in almost all of the world's food supply .
 All major cereal grains grown in North America are cereal grains except buckwheat . Buckwheat is the only cereal grain grown in the United States .
 Grasses are grasses just like sorghum, sugar cane, and bamboo . That means that they are grass, just like Sorghum and sugar cane . The grasses are also grasses .
 Around 50% of the world’s calories come from cereal grain and sugarcane . Around 50 per cent of cereal grain comes from cereal grains and sugar cane .
 That twitch that got me was a premature firing of the corn, before the ears had fully formed . That twitch got me, I said. That twitch was a pre-conceived twitch .
 Poalic Grain Blight was a broad-spectrum disease that killed any plant in order Poales . It was the first disease to kill any plant from Poales.
 "From what I was seeing on the way up to Iowa, it looked like we had an honest-to-goodness epiphytotic on our hands"
 God could certainly manage to come up with such a disease, but I’m pretty sure that man came up with this one .
 It was more effective than aflatoxins in that it was self-propagating . It ruined the entire annual crop of cereal grains in North America in a matter of weeks .
 Biotech hybrids allow farmer to directly spray them with Round-Up . The scientists at the University of Iowa are always figuring out the newest developments in agriculture .
 The anthrax strain involved in the mail-order terrorism several years ago was the Ames strain first identified at the USDA veterinary facility in Texas . The Ames strain was taken from a Texas beef .
 I figured that if anyone knew what was going on, the eggheads at Iowa State would if it was still there, it would still be there . I'm not sure if it's still there .
 I gathered as much data as I could on the move, including samples of crops affected by the disease . Along the way, I gathered samples of various crops affected . The disease is believed to be the biggest threat to farmers worldwide .
 My military ID was still valid so I pretended to be one of the National Guardsmen ordered to gather samples and learn whatever I could . I pretended I was a National Guardsman ordered to collect samples .
 The disease was not very effective at self-propagation through a hard freeze since it destroyed the seed in more than 90% of the cases . Hard freeze destroys seed in 90% cases .
 The seed heads that showed signs of ergot-like growth could not be eaten or used for anything . The growth was a composite of carbon left over from the metabolism of starches and toxins .
 Any livestock that consumed the toxin was inedible even if they did not die due to accumulated toxins stored in body fat . The toxin is stored in the body fat of any livestock .
 Infected livestock had to be slaughtered and the carcasses destroyed to prevent further circulation of the toxins in the food chain . The carcasses of infected livestock were destroyed to stop the spread of toxins in food chains .
 Before I was so rudely interrupted by the storyline, I was talking about the Mk19 . The Mk19 is the latest in a series of vehicles to be unveiled in the UK .
 The first version of the Mkl 8 grenade launcher was a hand-cranked multiple grenade launcher . The first weapon was handcranked by hand cranked by a handcranker .
 In 1966, the need for more fire power inspired the development of a self-powered 40-mm machine gun . The Mkl 9 MOD 0. was the first machine gun to be developed in the UK .
 This model was neither reliable enough nor safe enough to use as a military gun . The gun was neither safe enough nor reliable enough to be used in a military weapon .
 Only six MOD 1 MOD 1 were made . MOD 1 was released in 1972, with only six being produced . MOD 2 was the first MOD 1 .
 MOD 1 performed effectively in Navy riverine patrol craft, and broader applications for the Mkl 9 were found . The MOD 1 was found to be effective in the Navy's riverine patrols .
 MOD 2 featured improved reliability, safety and maintainability . MOD 2 was developed in 1973 to improve reliability and safety of the MOD 2 . MOD 3 was developed by the U.S. Navy in the 1970s and 1980s . MOD 1 was released in 1973 .
 In 1976, a complete redesign resulted in the Mkl 9 MOD 3, which the Army adopted in 1983 . The new version of the MOD 3 is based on the original design of the original MOD 3 .
 The Army uses the Mkl 9 within the tactical environment for defense, retrograde, patrolling, rear area security, MOUT, and special operations . The Mkl . 9 is used by the U.S. Army in the field .
 If I had it right, the corn, wheat and oats were a total loss, but the alfalfa was ok . If I'm not sure what happened, I'm sure it was a loss of corn, oats and wheat .
 Alfalfa is a legume so that means we'd get beans but the guy growing the rice was out of luck . The rice is a rice grown from a plant that's grown in the U.S. State Department .
 As far as our garden crop went, it appeared we'd be ok, only losing the corn . The corn was the only crop to be affected by the drought .
 He went on and on, talking about growing cotton, flax, Mulberry trees and what not . He also talked about growing flax and flax .
 It really gave me a headache because I had no idea what Mulberry trees had to do with anything. 'I'm not a Mulberry tree,' she said. 'It really gave her a headache,' she added .
 Mulberry leaves, particularly those of the White Mulberry, are also economically important as the sole food source of the silkworm . The cocoon of the cocoon is used to make silk, which is made from the leaves .
 "When I was his age, I was always about a decade ahead of where I needed to be," he says . When I was younger, I always had to be ahead of my own, he says. "I was always a decade away from where I need to be"
 "I explained that I saw it on the History Channel... how you make denim out of cotton," she said . She explained that she was inspired by a recent episode on the history channel .
 History Channel, Discovery Channel and National Geographic should be required watching for would be survivalists . The History Channel and Discovery Channel are required to watch for survivalists.
 If you need to break it up a little, watch the Military Channel, I did. If you want to break up the story, watch it up .
 "It was about troops in Afghanistan and Iraq and made me happy I didn't go there," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm glad I'm not going to go there. It was about soldiers in Afghanistan"
 The livestock would have to eat leftover feed and fresh hay . At least it wasn’t a total disaster; the livestock would need to eat some leftover feed .
 We wouldn't have wheat or oats and the man down the road wouldn't get any rice. We would have no rice, no wheat, no grains or oats, and no rice. The man in the road would not get rice, he says .
 The terrorist attacks took place almost 4 years ago, so I'm not so sure about that . However, the terrorist attacks on 9/11 took place in 2001, almost four years ago . The attacks were the first to take place in the United States .
 The biggest military threats to democracy in the last century came from atheists . That's sort of ironic, since the biggest military threat to democracy came from atheist .
 Five years into the ""global war on terror,"" the evidence suggested that Islamic radicals were real good at blowing each other up, but not so good at projecting power abroad . Five years later, the evidence suggests that Islamic radicalism is not as good as projecting power overseas .
 As long as western nations maintained halfway decent domestic security arrangements, the fundamentalists seem to be hobbled in repeating their one major success of Sept. 11 .
 Five years and counting without a second big terrorist attack in America . Maybe we ought to be paying more attention to the kinds of state-based challenges that roiled the world .
 No one gave much thought to Russia's vast nuclear arsenal, which could still obliterate America in a few hours, even though that nation was reverting to authoritarian rule . Russia is still capable of obliterating the U.S. in just a few days .
 Nobody seemed to care about China's buildup of naval forces, its development of long-range missiles, or its new fighter fighter . China's new fighter is the latest in a long line of military developments .
 Nothing had been done to prevent North Korea's march towards an indigenous nuclear arsenal . And nothing was done to stop the march towards a nuclear arsenal, experts say .
 Each of these countries wielded far more destructive power than the handful of nuts scattered across Arabia that we call al-Qaeda . Al-Qaeda is not only a handful of small groups scattered across Saudi Arabia .
 The capacity of U.S. forces to cope with state-based challenges was allowed to atrophy . But because al Qaeda was a current irritant and other concerns seem less pressing, other concerns were less pressing . The capacity for the United States forces to deal with the challenges of state
 The decay was most pronounced in the United States Air Force . Air Force would have to take the lead in coping with urgent threats posed by Russia, China and other nations .
 After 20 years of neglect, the Air Force's fleet of combat aircraft was older than the Navy's . Air Force fleet of aircraft is older than Navy fleet of warships .
 Dick Cheney killed the service's cold-war fighter programs, terminated the next-generation B-2 bomber at a mere 20 planes . He also slashed the future C-17 cargo plane program, and decimated every other facet of U.S. air power . Cheney's four-
 Clinton's defense secretaries added back some planes that Cheney had cut . The next-generation F-22 fighter was the centerpiece of plans for future air dominance . The planes were added back, but delayed and decreased .
 President Bush's long-serving Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld launched the entire U.S. Department of Defense on a leap-ahead trajectory to military transformation . Defense ignored air power for another six years . Air power was ignored by the Pentagon for six more years .
 The U.S. Air Force flew 45-year-old aerial refueling tankers using a plane retired by commercial airlines a quarter-century ago . Its F-22 fighter program had been cut 75 percent even though the aging fighters it would replace were so old they operated under flight
 The only bright spot on the horizon was the tri-service F-35 Joint Strike Fighter . Navy efforts to slash funding for JSF suggested the Air Force can't count on that program going forward .
 David Deptula was flying his F-15 over northern Iraq in 1999 when cockpit gauges went haywire and fuel reading plummeted to zero . Deptula says he was flying over Iraq when the fuel reading plunged to zero in the cockpit .
 It turned out insulation on the plane's wiring had rotted away with age, shorting out the electrical system . The plane's electrical system was shorted out by the accident .
 Deptula was flying the same F-15 he had flown 20 years earlier as a young captain . Deptula flew the same plane as he did 20 years ago as a Navy captain .
 Deptula's son, a first lieutenant, is now flying the same plane in the Pacific nearly 30 years after it was built . Deptula: "The plane was built in the 1980s, and it is still flying in the ocean"
 Maybe it's time the Air Force finally gets some new planes, before a real threat comes along . The Air Force should get new planes before real threats come along, Air Force says .
 Dust off is the term those in the military use to describe a helicopter rescue of a wounded soldier or Marine . Dust off refers to the rescue of wounded soldiers or Marines .
 The pilots are flat out crazy, flying into the face of death to extract the wounded . The pilots of the U.S. Marines have been involved in the Iraq War .
 97% of our wounded soldiers survived in 'Nam. Nevertheless, it was a capacity that resulted in 97% surviving . The capacity was the capacity that led to the survival of 97% .
 By Desert Storm and the 2nd Gulf War GWOT those figures had been increased, primarily due to the medical staffs available when the injured soldier or Marine reached the hospital . The figures have been increased since Desert Storm, and the GWOT .
 It was, in 2013, mostly a fleeting memory; we didn't have a pilot to fly the old, worn Huey we found . The Huey was, for the first time, an old Huey, was a pilot .
 The pilot was a former Army dust-off pilot, no less . The pilot is a former Air Force pilot .
 He claimed he didn't say anything because he wasn’t current, no longer had a flying license and had too many Huey's shot up in 'Nam. He said he wasn't current and didn't have a license .
 We persuaded a mechanic familiar with the Iroquois to go over the bird and come up with a list of parts he'd need to get the bird in 'near perfect' condition . The Iroquois is the largest American-made aircraft in the world and has been restored to
 Dillon Aero M134D includes one magazine with a capacity of 4,400 rounds of linked 7.62mm percussion primed ammunition . The ammunition storage system for the new Dillon Aero has a storage system that can hold up to four magazines .
 It is a crew served, electrically driven, 6 barreled, rotary action, percussion fired weapon, with a maximum rate of fire of 6000 rounds per minute . The weapon is a 6-barreled rotary-action, percussion-fired weapon . It has a
 The rate of fire is selectable at either 2000 or 4000 rounds per minute . In the current crew served application the rate is selected at 2000 to 4000 rounds a minute . This is the current application .
 The XM214 Automatic Gun was developed for use mounted in and on helicopters and light aircraft . It was developed to be mounted in helicopters and aircraft .
 Like most GE Gatling gun type weapons it had six rotating barrels and the potential for an incredibly high rate of fire . The weapon was designed by GE and was designed to be able to fire at a high rate .
 It was electrically driven, and had a firing rate that could be adjusted from 1000 rpm to 6,000 rpm . The firing rate was adjustable from 1000rpm to a 6k rpm firing rate .
 It could be set to fire bursts from 30 to 1000 rounds . In addition to that, it could also fire bursts of up to 1000 .
 A real drawback to the higher rates of fire was the huge ammunition usage (166 shots per second) and the power requirements . It required some 3.3 hp to drive the barrel assembly .
 First seen in the movie ""Predator"" in 1987, the hand-held Minigun has captured the hearts of He-Men everywhere, be it in games or in real life .
 Hand-held Minigun would be a great asset for clearing out landing zones real fast . Special Forces guys saw Predator and realized that a Minigun could be a good asset .
 Having ample access to the needed equipment, they started experimenting . They started experimenting with their own experiments .
 The Minigun weighed in at thirty pounds, which was heavy, but carryable . The Miniguus weighs in at 30 pounds, and is heavy but not heavy .
 A backpack with a thousand rounds of ammunition and a linkless belt to the Minigun weighed in at another thirty-five pounds . The Minigun weighs in at about 35 pounds .
 Backpacks with two thousand rounds weighed in at sixty-five pounds, and were totally unrealistic in size in size . Backpacks weighing in at 60-35 pounds .
 In the movie, the power for the Minigun had been supplied by a pair of truck batteries through a cable that simply ran over the ground, and up into the minigun . The second was that in the movie the power was supplied by truck batteries .
 And this amount of force increases geometrically in proportion to the rate of fire . The force of the fire is greater than the speed of fire in a firefight .
 Firing a large burst would result in the gunner being spun around by his weapon, and spraying everything around him indiscriminately with bullets . The gunner would have to be spun around, spun around and sprayed indiscriminately .
 After some experimenting it was realized that the gun would simply be too heavy and cumbersome to be ever used in real life combat, and the concept was abandoned .
 "Hadn't seen Ron and Clarence since '07, figured they were probably both dead by now" "Ron and Clarence" was "Clarence" in 2007 .
 Palmdale wasn't that far NE of LA, 70 miles from downtown and about 50 miles from the Valley . Palmdare was 70 miles north of downtown and 50 miles away from Valley Valley .
 She and her sister were down at Ports of Call Village shopping for Christmas presents . She was shopping for presents with her sister .
 "I don't get out much and don't know most of the people in Whetstone or Benson," she says . "Even though I got a driver's license and have a pickup, I don't like to get out," she adds .
 We didn't really get much fallout from the terrorist bombs and once they got everyone quarantined during the pandemics, both the pneumonic plague and smallpox died out . We didn’t really get enough fallout .
 By the time the war came, I'd pulled the swimming pool and replaced it with a shelter . By the . time the . war . came, he'd pulled it back and replaced the pool with the shelter .
 Scrounged around Palmdale and the Antelope Valley and found enough to get by . "Scrounging" was the best way to survive in the desert desert .
 Clarence and Clarence and I decided to see if there was anything left of the country. Anyway, Clarence and . Clarence and  Clarence decided to . see if . there were anything left . of the . country .
 We cleaned gun stores and several other places out because they were abandoned . The gun stores were cleaned up because they had been abandoned .
 A few of the leftover Latinos from the border war are still around . It isn't really safe to be out without an escort, but a few of them are still alive .
 We sorted through the leather we'd collected and both found gun belts, holsters and scabbles for their carbines .
 I suppose we sat there most of the day talking about old times and how things had all turned out . "I suppose we spent most of that day talking to each other," he said .
 Mary and Amy looked and found a pair of new trailers we can pull in, if we decide to stay . Mary, Amy and Amy found a new trailer they could pull in .
 There were times when I'd have killed for a drink, but it wasn't available . There are times when you'd have been tempted to have a drink but it was not available .
 Those people in town will have to get by on MREs when they run out of food, don't worry, we have plenty . We have plenty of food to spare . We're happy to provide food for those who need it .
 "You'd better talk to Derek. Before the two of you try to go see the country," Derek says . Derek: "Before you go to the country, you'd better think to Derek"
 A bunch of them went out to check on the crop situation and checked out much of the Midwest . The crop situation in the Midwest is critical .
 From the time the good citizens of Kalifornia passed Prop 13, it wasn't a good place to live . From the start of the time, it was a bad place for people to live in California . Prop 13 was passed by voters in 2003 .
 That was back in 78, just before he moved to Davenport for the Department of Revenue . That was just before I moved to . Daugenport .
 "I had wanted to return to Kalifornia because I remembered what it was like in the '60s," says author . "I wanted to go back to the place I remembered when I was there," she says .
 "By the time we made it in '82, Kalifornia was reaping what they'd sowed," says John Sutter . "Kalifornia is reaping its sown. By the time they made it, it was a big success story."
 The schools went from being tied with Iowa as the best in the nation to 50th place . The schools are ranked 50th in the country .
 Half of the homes in our housing tract were occupied with illegals . By the time Sharon and I won the Lottery, half of our homes had been occupied by illegal immigrants .
 One of the symptoms of what was happening was the 'white flight' to places like Reno, Las Vegas and Phoenix . "White flight" was a white flight to places such as Reno and Las Vegas .
 Both Nevada and Arizona had reasonable gun laws . The laws are similar to those in both states .
 From what I've heard, the bottom of Lake Mead must be solid steel, what with all the guns that got lost on fishing trips . The bottom of the lake is solid steel . The lake is a popular fishing destination .
 If we hadn't had the terrorist attacks and WW III, Obama would have succeeded in trying to seize many of the weapons, he says . "I'm rather certain that if we hadn’t had . had we . hadn't . had the . terrorist attacks, WW III and
 "They could have my guns only when they pried them from my cold, dead hands," he says . "I'm not going to let them take my guns back," he writes .
 To do so now, they'd have to get by the 155mm artillery and several trainloads of equipment and ordnance . The U.S. would have to use 155mm and several trainsloads of ammunition .
 Arizona is known for its exceptionally hot summers and mild winters . Arizona is also known for exceptionally hot winters and unusually mild summers .
 Less well known is the pine-covered high country in the north-central portion of the state . The pine high country contrasts with the lower deserts of the lower desert region .
 One of these days, we might get in the diesel Beemer and go sightseeing . One of the best-known cars in the world is a diesel Beamer .
 Fleataxi gave us the name, The Three Amigos, probably based on the movie of the same name . The Three amigos are the name of a band based on a movie based on The Amigo .
 A well-meaning doctor had put Fred on Prednisone and it eventually killed him . Fred's death was the result of the medication . Fred was put in a hospitable home in New York .
 Prednisone is a drug that must be used cautiously . It affects the adrenal glands and affects the Adrenal glands . It can be taken with caution .
 Steroids, such as prednisone, are often used to treat asthma, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and other inflammatory conditions . Steroids are used in the treatment of asthma and lupsus and lupuses .
 When taken for more than a few months, steroids can cause bones to become brittle and break . Steroids can cause bone to break if taken for a long time .
 The ER frequently gave me epinephrine, another of ACTH and an Rx for 20 tabs of prednisone . Back when I developed food allergies from too many years of drinking too much coffee, the ER often gave me a shot .
 I'd start with 4 tabs the first day, 3 per day for the next 2 days . 2 tabs the next 3 days and 1 a day for 4 days . The next 4 days will be 1 tabs a day a day .
 I have some, although I'd have to think twice about using it, it raises a diabetic's blood sugar level . I'm not a diabetic, but I'd like to use some of the products .
 I suppose if I got a several allergy attacks, I might do the 20 tab routine . I suppose I got an allergy attack .
 I had a 6 month supply of everything before we won the Lottery. Speaking of drugs, I had to buy a 6-month supply before winning the lottery .
 "I'd take in the empty Vicodin bottle and my doctor would write me a new Rx. I'd take it in and get a new prescription," she says . She says she'd take the empty bottle and get the new prescription .
 Sharon's stash built up after I had my stash built, we started in doing the same thing for Sharon . Anyway, it worked for me .
 Ron and Clarence were driving a Nissan Titan, a flex fuel vehicle with the 5.4 liter V-8 Titan engine . Ron was driving the car with a 5.8-litre V-6 engine . Clarence and Ron were driving the Nissan Titan .
 No corn meant no alcohol which meant no E-85, this year . We had a problem though; no corn means no alcohol . No alcohol meant no corn, this meant no beer, no corn .
 After WW III, the odds favor the elimination of much of technology after the war . Most of you know that after WW III. The odds favor eliminating much of the technology .
 In time, satellites will stop working or fall to earth, no one will be building automobiles and there will be few food processors . Satellites will no longer be building cars or food processors, but satellites will fall to Earth .
 For the prepared person, the transition will be mild, depending, of course, on your age . For those prepared, it will be a mild transition, depending on age .
 We seniors won't see a whole lot of the change, but with any luck we'll get you younger folks started on the road to self-sufficiency . We seniors will see a lot of change and with any . luck, it will get you young folks started in the process .
 "My vision of the future doesn't see a lot of effective government for a very long time," he says . "I don't believe in effective government in the long run," he adds .
 The same vision sees at least two-thirds of the population eliminated . That same vision would see at least 2,700 people eliminated from the population .
 You can't make it on your own, while a small to middle sized group might . Small to middle-sized groups might be able to make it their way to success .
 With that comes a certain amount of insecurity, presuming there is in-fighting . However, with that comes an insecurity, it is likely there will be in-between the pair .
 If there is a major disparity between the haves and have not's, there is sure to be trouble .
 The reason I brought that up was what I learned from Jerry D Young in Percy's Mission . I brought up the topic of Percy's mission in the first episode of this series .
 While Jerry and I may not agree on what weapons to include in our survival packages, we do agree on including guns . Jerry and Jerry agree that guns should be included .
 "Even back in Palmdale, I got a rifle and a couple cases of South African. Even back in . Palmdare, California," he says .
 "I had enough oil to change the oil in my 7kw portable genset at least 10 times," says Bob Greene .
 Our shelves were fairly well stocked with enough food to last 6 months . Our shelves had enough food for 6 months, according to the charity .
 The LDS Church recommends a 1 year supply, but a person has to start somewhere and I'm a Methodist . The church recommends a one year supply of alcohol .
 "No one man or woman can know everything there is that a person needs to know," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With age comes patience and let me say, right here, now, that the value of patience can never be overestimated . With age, patience is a sign of life, says President Obama .
 I'll admit that I probably should have done more to get ready, but that woman I was married to could be more stubborn than you can ever imagine . "I'm not going to get married. I'm not sure what I'm going to do," he says .
 "When you didn't have a gun to your name, you had to buy a second and eventually a third gun safe," says father . "I had to have a second gun safe, a third safe safe, and a fourth gun safe"
 There was a time when, if my rifle hadn't been leaning against my wheelchair, I'd have ended up dead . I'd been in a wheelchair, and I'd ended up in a car accident . I'm not afraid to go to the hospital, but I'm scared to go
 After they'd gone to the motel the previous evening, I'd returned to the shelter and got the last 2 remaining remaining Loaded model Ml As, 2 Tac-Force chest harnesses and 18 loaded magazines . After the night, I went back to get the last remaining loaded model M
 "I put 3 grenades each of the end pockets and took everything up to the house. I put three grenades in each end pockets," he says . "I don't know how much of it is going to be," he adds .
 You have 8 mags in the vest, one in the rifle and 3 hand grenades in each end pocket . You also have a rifle, rifle and hand grenades .
 Condition 0 A round is in the chamber, hammer is cocked, and the safety is off . Condition 1 also known as 'cocked and locked', means a round is . in the . chamber, the hammer is . cocked and the manual thumb safety is applied . Condition 2
 "I have a couple of the Super Match Ml As and they have very good scopes. I have a few of them," says the author of the book . "They have a very good scope," says author .
 Clarence admitted he still kept an eye on the sky, a person could never be too careful . Clarence admitted to still keeping an eye out of the sky .
 I told him that I'd never completely given up hope and as far as coffee went, when you're a millionaire, you can afford to stock up on the important things . When you are a millionaire you can't afford to buy coffee, he said .
 I’d given them each a carton of Marlboros the day before, primarily to keep them from bumming my Kool’s . “I’ll give them each one of my own,” he said. “They’
 "Out in the shed were several cases of cigarettes but we didn't announce the fact," says the owner of the shed . "We didn't admit the fact that we had several cigarettes," he says .
 Cigarettes were almost worth its weight in gold, it had to be cigarettes . If you wanted something that was almost worth a gold, you had to buy cigarettes . Cigarettes are now worth more than a million dollars .
 After breakfast, I made sure the boys were properly dressed, ergo armed, and we went to check on their new trailers .
 The girls had stocked each trailer with food, ammo, smokes, linens and several pairs of jeans available so the fellas could dress in western attire . The girls were very busy, they'd stocked each other trailers with food and ammo .
 It was the official hat everyone wore, especially the cavalrymen whose hats were soaked in beer to break them in . The cavalrymen's hats were different in that they were black and had been soaked in .
 "There was nothing wrong with the black hat I had. Just to be contrary, I didn't wear my Stetson," she said .
 It's a combined pistol and rifle range, you can shoot from 7 meters out to 1,000 meters . The range can be used to shoot 7 meters from a distance of 7 meters . It's the first time the range has been used in a rifle range .
 "It seemed like the 3 of us were all moving slower, I'd met Ron in '92 and Clarence in '95," she says . "I've met Ron, Clarence and Clarence. It seemed like they all moved slower," she said .
 I had just quit my job with Iowa and was working for a CPA in San Francisco . I was working in the U.S. when I decided to move to San Francisco, California .
 I was the numbers guy; Ron knew propane and Clarence road construction and repair . Ron knew Propane, Clarence road repair and road construction . I was a numbers guy. Ron knew a lot of things .
 We harvested all the food that could be saved from the blight and relied on stored goods to fill in the grass crops that had been destroyed . We used stored goods instead of grass crops to fill the void .
 "In a way, the blight had done us a favor, highlighting how precarious our situation truly was," says the mayor . "It was a good thing for us to be in the midst of this crisis," he says .
 Most of the things we took for granted would soon be totally unavailable things like pharmaceuticals, all manufactured goods . Most of those things we take for granted will soon be unavailable . All manufactured goods will be manufactured goods.
 "One of these days none of us would have the drugs that were keeping us alive. Basically that meant that one of this days ... we would have to rely on drugs that kept us alive."
 The Army considers the life of a pair of BDUs to be 6 months . He told CNN.com that the Army. considers the . life of the . BDUs .
 Typically I kept 3 pairs of jeans so I always had something clean to wear . I kept a clean pair of jeans for every day .
 I had taken to wearing golf shirts a number of years ago and had plenty of them . I had to wear golf shirts to keep up with my golf shirts, I said .
 By the fall of 2013, our clothes were beginning to look a little threadbare . Still, by the fall, our clothing was starting to look threadbare. Still, we still have a lot of fun with our clothes .
 You don't hear about the worst tornado in Iowa history much, but I wrote National Geographic Channel anyway, asking if they were biased or ignorant . The National Geographic channel has been criticized for its coverage of the tornado .
 Every one of the calamities I've described has the potential of happening, the real issue is timing . The real issue of timing is timing.
 800,000 years ago, Long Valley blew its top . We've had terrorist attacks, wars with Mexico, and terrorist attacks .
 Cascadia has subducted before and half of the fault line was locked, just waiting to let loose again . The fault line has been locked for more than a decade .
 Like most Americans with a bent toward preparedness, I did what I could do to get us ready . "Like most Americans, I was prepared to prepare for disaster," he says . "I did what it could do," he adds .
 Considering the odds of winning the Lottery, everything else in this story pales in comparison . The story is not about winning the lottery .
 "By now you all know me well enough that you know how I'd spend the money, I'm just confirming it," he said . "I'd spend it. By now you know me . well enough," he added .
 Kalifornia doesn't much seem like it is part of the United States anymore . The state of California has been home to the U.S. since 2001 .
 When we moved to Palmdale, we lived in a nice little housing tract, just a typical middle class neighborhood . We now live in a suburban neighborhood in the city of Los Angeles .
 "In 2006, we couldn't speak to most of our neighbors, we didn't speak Spanish," says Tania . In 2006, most of the country's Spanish neighbors were Spanish-speaking citizens .
 After the border war, there were the local Hispanics, soldiers from south of the border and the illegals . The border war was a war of war between the U.S. and Mexico .
 The soldiers must have known in advance about the planned attack, they moved south before the missiles started to fly . They moved south south before missiles started flying .
 I really had no idea how many of our cities, military bases and infrastructure had been nuked, it had to be considerable . It had been considerable. It was not clear how many cities and military bases had been destroyed .
 Ron and Clarence seemed to think that as many as a dozen locations in Kalifornia had been nuked . Ron seemed to believe there were more than a dozen nuked locations in the state .
 "I used one of those measuring things that you use to measure medicine for kids," she says . She says she used a measuring device to measure the effectiveness of medicine for children .
 We emptied the house out, got it repainted and sodded and came looking for a place in Arizona . We emptied out the house and moved to Arizona .
 Sharon talked to a realtor in Tucson; that's where she found the listing . Sharon found it in Tucson, Arizona, and found it online .
 "We started out with 20 acres then added another 20 and finally another 40," says owner . "It's a great job for the family, but it's not easy to get back in touch with the community," she says .
 If you wanted, we could put together a mission to go and look for them, says CNN.com.com . "We're looking for them. We're looking to find them," she says .
 Unless we know almost exactly where they ended up, we might never find them . Unless you know exactly exactly where the disappeared, they might never be found again . We may never be able to find them.
 As far as meds goes, we probably have some of what you take, we cleaned out several pharmacies . We probably have a lot of what we take, as well as some of your meds .
 "We have to take one or two fuel haulers, a couple of supply trucks, the Hummers plus several operators," says the driver . "We're going to try and get the best of the best out of the situation," says driver .
 'If she's willing, we'd have to run it by Derek, he's in command of the military group. If she'd be willing, she's in charge of a military group,' she says .
 Ron and Clarence will only stay for a while and then they plan to move on . Clarence and Ron say they will only be there for a few years . Clarence says he and Ron will only move on with Ron . Clarence: "Ron and Clarence plan to only stay a while"
 Clarence pointed out that we had Hummers with machineguns for security . Clarence pointed to Clarence as a security guard . Clarence said he had Hummer with machine guns for security. Clarence pointed at Clarence . Clarence .
 You’d need either a tanker or two HEMTT fuel haulers, food supplies and another for ordnance . You would also need a tanker for food supplies .
 "That diabetic neuropathy took out my taste buds," he says . "All tastes about the same," he adds . "Diabetic neuropathy" took out his taste buds, he said .
 "I looked at the map and figured if we got as far as El Paso, we'd be doing outstanding," says coach . "We're doing outstanding. We're going to do outstanding," he says .
 It was hard to tell from the map, but most of the journey looked like open desert . Most of the desert looked like an open desert, but it's not clear how much of it is .
 "I'd have rather taken a sharp stick in the eye than see America. Truthfully, I'd have been rather taken in a sharp eye than America," he said .
 In the 3 years since the war, there hadn't been much done to clean up Tucson . It's hard to judge the country from one city, but in the past 3 years there had been much to do .
 What was left had been thoroughly picked over, about the only reason to go there was for spare parts for a vehicle, if you could find them .
 Soy beans are a legume, we'd have biodiesel but no crops to produce alcohol . Soy beans can be used to make biodiesel, but not to make alcohol . We'd like to see if we could make alcohol from soybeans .
 "We'd finally set up those biodiesel converters and were running them 24/7. We'd finally run them 24-7. That's what we're doing now," he says .
 Given the transition time, that meant about 5 loads a day times 4 or 20 loads of 55 gallons a day . Given the time of transition, that would mean about 5 times a day, times 4 loads of . 55 gallons per day .
 "By the time we had the soybean oil converted, we were out of storage places," says the owner of the company . "We're going to have to wait until we can get the oil ready," he says .
 "The way Derek's bunch was running through fuel, it was a temporary problem," says Derek . "Derek's bunch ran through fuel. It was a short-term problem," he says .
 After batting it back and forth Derek announced that he couldn't provide an escort for us to tour the county . After batting the question back, Derek decided to give us a tour .
 He would provide Ron and Clarence a fuel trailer with 1,000 gallons of fuel and enough rations to last them for the trip . He said he would also provide them with enough fuel and rations .
 From here to San Antonio, you'd only go through a couple of large cities, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I looked at the map and from here to . San Antonio," he says. "You'd only be able to go through the map"
 I told Mary to clean up the trailers and keep them ready for the fellas return, although I had little confidence I'd ever see them again . I told her to keep the trailers ready, but I was doubtful they'd ever return .
 Apparently that blight was a one-time deal intended to starved us all to death . Apparently that was intended to starve us all of us to death. Apparently this blight was one of many things .
 Starting that fall we got many more people coming into the area trying to find food . Starting that year, we got more people looking for food in the area .
 There is a limit to Christian charity, although it's hard to say exactly what that is .
 If someone is honest and says they're starving but are willing to work to earn food, one might be inclined to find some work . Perhaps if someone was honest and said they were starving but were willing to earn money, they might find work .
 Guns come in guns first, they get an entirely different reaction . On the other hand, when they come into guns first they get a different reaction.
 I burned through the South African surplus and was now using Lake City surplus . "Lake City surplus" is now being used as a storage solution .
 The grapevine also must let them know that we were more than willing to fight to keep what we had . We must also tell them that we are more than ready to fight for what we have .
 Sometime just before Christmas 2013, a very large group came in on 1-10 from the west . A large group of about 1,000 people came in from west .
 The freeway and ditches had been blocked with portable concrete medians . The ditches and freeway ditches were blocked with the medians, officials say .
 It was a short shot for the Paladins and a medium to long shot for Ml A3E3 . It was the first time the A3 E3 had a shot at the top of the world's top flight .
 "Our artillery was pre-sighted for several distinct locations, like every place we had barricades and troops," says President Obama .
 A Paladin is capable of a maximum rate of fire of 4 rounds per minute . A Paladin can fire at a sustained rate of 1 round per minute and 4 rounds a minute . The Paladin is a Paladin capable of firing 4 rounds in a single minute .
 I can't tell you because the Air Force didn't have cannons when I was in. The Air Force had cannons when it was in the air force . "I don't know what I was doing," he says .
 "To put it bluntly, that meant there was a free area free of artillery fire that these bad guys were all trying to crowd into," he said . "That meant there were no artillery fire," he added. "That means there was no room for artillery fire"
 The artillery was working its way back in the column and the tank was mowing down those in the front . The tanks were working their way back to the front of the column .
 While it was possible to destroy an Abrams with a rocket, you could only do it from the side or the back . The Abrams could only be destroyed with a side or back strike .
 "I figured this was our practice battle, when Obama figured out we had food, we'd be fighting the United States Army," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I thought this was a practice battle"
 The opposing force had about a 50% fatality rate from the initial combat and a 100% death rate after we'd checked the wounded . "We had about 50% of the enemy's death rate from initial combat"
 I think Derek said that about half of their wounded would have died without treatment . Derek said: "About half of them would have been killed without treatment. The wounded would probably have died if they were not treated."
 After Derek's secret trip to Iowa (it was a secret to me) we pretty much knew what we were facing . Derek's visit to Iowa was a surprise surprise for the family .
 As long as we used our seed, we'd be ok unless the wind brought in that what-you-call-it toxin, Poalic Grain Blight . The toxin is caused by the use of grain in grain .
 One model of the MIA rifle is known as the 'White Feather', the M25 . The MIA rifle has been used in the U.S. military .
 Dennis Haysbert was the announcer for CNN beginning in 2004 . He was the voice of James Earl Jones for CNN . He is now a voice over announcer .
 Jonas Blane played Jonas 'Snake Doctor' Blane in The Unit . He used to do Allstate ads and did The Unit ads . He also played Jonas in the Unit .
 FBI upstart Eric O'Neill enters into a power game with his boss, Robert Hanssen . He was ultimately convicted of selling secrets to the Soviet Union . Breach is based on the true story .
 The U212 submarine is capable of long-distance submerged passage to the area of operation . U212 sub can also be fitted with a submarine that can be fitted to the U.S. Navy .
 HDW is responsible for the bow sections and TNSW for the stern section . HDW has been responsible for both the bow and stern sections of the US Navy .
 HDW is assembling the first and third vessels, TNSW the second and fourth . HDW will assemble the first, third and fourth vessels . The first and second vessels will be assembled at HDW's request .
 U31, the first of class, was launched in March 2002 and commissioned in October 2005 . U31 is the first ship of its class to be launched .
 U33 was launched in September 2004 and commissioned in June 2006 . U33 is the third U33 spacecraft to be launched in 2007 .
 U34 was launched in July 2005 and was scheduled for delivery by the end of 2006 . U34 is scheduled to be delivered to the UK by end of the year .
 In September 2006, the German Navy ordered two further U212 submarines, to be delivered in 2012/2013 . Two further submarines were ordered in September 2006 .
 The new vessels will have improved network-centric communications, combat system and sensors . New vessels will also be equipped with improved communications, sensors and communications .
 Two U212 submarines are being built by Fincantieri for the Italian Navy . Two submarines are currently being built for Italy .
 The first, S526 Salvatore Todaro, was launched in November 2003 and was commissioned in June 2005 . The first launched in June 2003, the first was launched on November 2003 .
 The second, Scire, was launched in December 2004 and was commissioned in 2007 . Scire is the world's second most successful art form of its kind .
 The submarine is equipped with the DM2A4 heavyweight torpedo weapon system from Atlas Elektronik . The submarine has been fitted with a range of torpedo weapon systems .
 EADS Systems & Defence Electronics and Thales Defence Ltd have been awarded a contract to develop the FL1800U electronic warfare system for the German and Italian Navies' U212 submarines .
 The 1800U is a submarine version of the FL1800 S-ll which is in service on the Brandenburg and Bremen Class frigates . It is the same version of a FL1800S-ll that is used on Brandenburg Class frigats .
 A consortium led by ATLAS Elektronik and ELAC are responsible for the development of the TAU 2000 torpedo countermeasures system . A consortium is responsible for developing the system .
 TAU 2000 has four launch containers, each with up to ten discharge tubes equipped with effectors . TAU2000 has up to eight launch systems, each of which can be used to launch satellites .
 The effectors are small underwater vehicles, similar in appearance to a torpedo . They are similar to small underwater effectors, similar to torpedoes .
 Effectors are jammers and decoys with hydrophones and acoustic emitters . The effectors include jammers, decoys and hydrophones . The effects of the effectors are being used in the U.S.
 Multiple effectors are deployed in order to counter torpedoes in re-attack mode . Multiple torpedoes are deployed to counter torpedo attacks . The torpedoes can be fired at a range range of torpedoes .
 The active high-frequency mine detection sonar is the Atlas Elektronik MOA 3070 . Atlas Elekronik is based in the Netherlands . The sonar has been used in the past to detect mine debris .
 The propulsion system combines a diesel generator with a lead acid battery, and an Air-Independent Propulsion system, used for silent slow cruising, with a fuel cell equipped with oxygen and hydrogen storage .
 The system consists of nine PEM fuel cells, providing between 30kW and 50kW each . The system has nine fuel cells capable of providing up to 50kWs .
 For higher speeds, connection is made to the high-performance lead acid battery . The device is connected to a high performance lead acid lead battery .
 An MTU 16V-396 diesel engine powers the generator from Piller GmbH for charging the battery installed on the lower of the two decks at the forward section .
 The diesel generator plant is mounted on a swinging deck platform with double elastic mounts for noise and vibration isolation . Double elastic mounts are used to isolate noise and isolate the noise .
 The propeller motor is directly coupled to the seven-bladed screwback propeller . It is powered by a motor motor and a propeller shaft .
 The first, Papanikolis, was built at the HDW Kiel shipyard and launched in April 2004 . The first ship was built in 2004 and was launched in 2004 .
 Hellenic Shipyards will build the second and third vessels at Skaramanga, for commission in 2008-09 . Hellenic shipyards are expected to build the first and second vessels .
 A fourth vessel, Katsonis, was ordered by Greece in June 2002 and is expected to commission in 2010 . Greece has ordered four vessels, one of which is due to be commissioned in 2010.
 South Korea has also ordered three Type 214, to enter service in 2007, 2008 and 2009 . The Type 214 will enter service from 2007 to 2009 .
 The first, called Admiral Sohn Won-il, was launched in June 2006 . The first launched in 2006 .
 The Black Shark is a dualpurpose, wire-guided torpedo fitted with Astra active / passive acoustic head and a multi-target guidance and control unit incorporating a counter-countermeasures system .
 It has an electrical propulsion system based on a silver oxide and aluminum battery . It has a system of electrical propulsion systems based on an aluminum and silver oxide battery .
 Performance of the AIP system has been increased with two Siemens PEM fuel cells which produce 120kW per module . The fuel cells will give the submarine an underwater endurance of two weeks .
 The Integrated Sensor Underwater System ISUS 90, from ATLAS Elektronik integrates all sensors, command and control functions on board the submarine . The system is based in Germany and Austria .
 The sensor suite of the U214 submarine consists of the sonar systems, an attack periscope and an optronic mast . The U214 was the first submarine to carry out a submarine mission in the world .
 The submarine's electronic support measures system and global positioning system sensors are also installed on the optronic mast . The submarine is equipped with a range of sensors and sensors .
 It's the quietest submarine in the world when it's running on fuel cells . Submarine is quietest sub in world when running on power cells .
 The first operational submarine was built by the U.S. in the eighteenth century .
 A second was built during the nineteenth century and Holland made them work in the early twentieth century . Holland made one of the first of the world's first wooden buildings .
 Ron is the oldest followed by Clarence and Clarence, Clarence and I am the youngest. I can't remember anymore, but I think Ron was the oldest . Clarence is the youngest, Clarence is also the youngest .
 'After the shoot out last week, I became very conscious of my age. It might not be important, but after the shoot-out last week I became conscious of [his] age,' he says . 'I became very aware of [her] age. I became aware of
 Ron and Clarence would be lucky to outlive me, all they had were FX05s. Ron would have been lucky to survive me. Clarence and Ron would never outlive themselves. All they had are FX05's. Clarence would never be able to .
 We couldn't recover all of the weapons this time, you'd be surprised what those canister rounds do to a weapon . The weapons were damaged by a canister round round .
 The attackers had been organized to a degree, the attackers had to be organized . The guys in front mostly had AKs or a variation of AKs, the men in front had guns .
 The AKM, SKS, AKS and the rifles built in China, the type 56, etc. Those variations included the AKM and SKS . The type 56 and AKS rifles were made in China .
 With a little help from Damon and Aaron, we managed to collect ~40 rifles . of them were Ml As, I was in heaven. of them being Ml. As . of course .
 I could clean a G36 but the HKs and FN FALs required a new learning tree, despite being a modified G3 . I could . clean a . G36, but I was able to clean a HK and FAL but the G36 required a . new learning
 At least these guy had a fair number of magazines, finding a rifle with only a couple of magazines was frustrating, to say the least . At least at least these guys had a few magazines .
 On the list of the top 10 military firearms of all times the Ml 4 came in 10th . The Mattel toy gun came in second and the AK first .
 The Ml 4 rifle would have been near the top if it had a longer service life . I didn't care what the Military Channel thought; the rifle would've been near top of the list . It would have had a long service life if it were more effective .
 Adopted in 1959 and mostly replaced by the toy gun by 1970 . TFIE WEAPON OF CHOICE for many operators . Still popular with operators .
 Damon tried to grab as many of the LAW rockets as he could, but we had those and I was more interested in the rifles . Damon was more than happy with the rifles, he says . Damon tried .
 He collected 60 of the LAWs and another 24 of the Ml 36 AT-4s . Still, he didn't do too badly .
 The thing I like about the LAW rocket is that it gives you a miniature, highly portable cannon . I like to see the rocket as a 'miniature, portable cannon'
 The new M72 family of weapons is designed primarily to defeat light armor . These weapons retain a moderate capability against main battle tanks when engaged from top, side and rear angles of attack .
 They are also effective against concrete and brick walls, as well as concrete or brick walls . They are effective against both hasty and prepared field fortifications .
 The next generation M72LAWs are affordable, highly proliferable weapon systems . They are compatible with the needs of most modern armed forces .
 The new M72LAWs offer greater lethality, increased range, better accuracy, and more versions of the M72 . The new LAWs are available for sale in the U.S.
 These improved capabilities are provided without significantly increasing system size, weight, complexity, or cost . The improved capabilities have been provided by the new system .
 During Operation Iraqi Freedom, the military ordered more of the LAWs rockets . The rockets were ordered by the U.S. military during the war in Iraq .
 They were a slightly improved version with slightly improved range and more accurate fire . They were slightly improved versions of the original version of the gun range .
 "The main thing was you could carry from one to three of them on the wheelchair. Regardless, the main thing is you could . carry from . one to . three of the wheelchair . Regardless of the size, the wheelchair was able to carry one or two of the children .
 HKs are tougher on the brass than the FNFAL so if you're a reloader, be warned . HKs tend to be tougher on brass so be prepared for reloading .
 The receiver did have to be stiffened to reduce the twisting on firing . The receiver was stiffened up to prevent the twisting .
 On the HK, handle is on the tube mounted above the barrel and requires an extension of the arm to cock it . The handle on the HK is mounted on a tube mounted on the barrel . The HK requires an extended arm extension to cock .
 HK used to make it for the FN-FAL, but I don't know if any were imported into this country . HK use to make the HK-FNFAL but not sure if any are imported into the country .
 It's easy to do simple armorer's work on the HK with a few punches . Well, it's easy for armorers to get it done .
 There are surplus parts kits, but these are from retired service rifles . There are also parts kits for retired service rifle rifles .
 The trigger group is not that hard to disassemble, but don't try it with a Set-Trigger of the MSG90 or PSG-1 . BTW, the trigger groups are not hard to assemble .
 You have to be a clockmaker to understand their set trigger and even my instructor had to pull a fresh one off the shelf to reassemble one . Even my instructor pulled a fresh new clock out of the shelf .
 FN-FAL requires about a dozen tools for a basic armorer's kit . Like the HK, it really isn't too hard to work on . FN- FAL is a small, easy-to-work on .
 There's a domestic source for new receivers here in this country . Another advantage is that there's a local source for the new receivers .
 It is unknown whether they obtained blue prints from FN or whether it is a product of reversed engineering . It's unknown whether the blueprints were obtained from FN .
 Blake Steven's $110 masterpiece is The FN-FAL Rifle . Manuals are out there and an excellent book is available for purchase .
 This is a version of the standard USMC Shoulder Mounted Assault Weapon but with a new warhead . The weapon is a new version of a USMC shoulder mounted assault weapon .
 It is a thermobaric mixture which ignites the air, producing a shockwave of unparalleled destructive power, especially against buildings . Described as NE ""Novel Explosive""
 The NE round is supposed to be capable of going through a brick wall . But in practice gunners had to fire through a window or make a hole with an anti-tank rocket .
 The SMAW-NE has only been procured by the USMC, though there are reports that some were 'borrowed' by other units . Reports that some of the equipment were used by the U.S. Navy .
 Thousands of obsolete M-72 LAWs could be retrofitted with thermobaric warheads, making then into effective urban combat tools . However, there are also proposals on the table that thousands of obsolete weapons could be upgraded .
 In an era of precision bombs, such massively brutal weapons have become highly controversial . Precision bombs are expected to be kept to a minimum, but they have become controversial .
 Every civilian casualty means a few more "hearts and minds" are lost . These days, every civilian casualty . means more hearts and minds . are lost. These days .
 The Soviet Union was heavily criticized for using thermobaric weapons in Afghanistan because they were held to constitute ""disproportionate force" and similar criticisms were made when thermobarics were used in the Chechen conflict .
 According to Human Rights Watch, thermobaric weapons ""kill and injure in a particularly brutal manner over a wide area" The weapon is used to kill and injure people in a "particularly brutal manner"
 The Marines have made so little noise about the use of the SMAW-NE in Fallujah . So it’s understandable that the U.S. has made so much noise about it .
 Keeping quiet about controversial weapons is a lousy strategy, no matter how effective those arms are . But keeping quiet is not a bad strategy, even if the weapons are effective .
 "We didn't find any of the SMAWs, but we didn't really know what we were looking for," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 FAE occurs when a shell or projectile containing a fuel in the form of gas, liquid or dust explodes . The fuel or dust like material is introduced into the air to form a cloud . FAE is a form of explosion that forms a cloud when a projectile explodes .
 This cloud is then detonated to create a shock wave of extended duration that produces overpressure and expands in all directions . This cloud then detonates to create an extended shock wave that is then extended for extended duration .
 In a thermobaric weapon, the fuel consists of a monopropellant and energetic particles . The weapon is made of particles that are energetic particles and a monopropant .
 The monopropellant detonates in a manner similar to TNT . The particles burn rapidly in the surrounding air later in time, resulting an intense fireball and high blast overpressure .
 The term ""thermobaric"" is derived from the effects of temperature and pressure on the target . The Greek word ""baros"" means ""pressure" and means "pressure" in the target's name .
 Performance enhancement is primarily achieved by addition of excess metals to the explosive composition . Performance enhancement can be achieved by adding excess metals into the explosive .
 Composite Explosives detonation can be viewed as three discrete events merged together . The detonation of composite Explosives can be seen as three separate events .
 The initial anaerobic detonation reaction, microseconds in duration, is primarily a redox reaction of molecular species . The reaction is microseconds long enough for microseconds to detonate .
 The post detonation anaerobic combustion reaction is hundreds of microseconds in duration . The reaction is primarily a combustion of fuel particles too large for combustion in the initial detonation wave .
 The post detonation aerobic combustion reaction, milliseconds in duration, is the combustion of fuel rich species as the shock wave mixes with surrounding air . The reaction is the reaction of a shock wave that mixes with the surrounding air.
 Aerobic combustion requires mixing with sufficient air to combust excess fuels . Aerobic combustions require mixing of sufficient air with excess fuel . Combination of air and air is essential to combustion of excess fuel, but excess fuel is not combustible .
 Some low pressure shock wave enhancement can also be expected for personnel defeat . The defeat is expected to be a major loss for the World Cup .
 Boron, Aluminum, Silicon, Titanium, Magnesium, Zirconium, or Carbon, or Hydrocarbons . Titanium is the most common form of substance .
 Thermobaric materials can provide significantly higher total energy output than conventional high explosives . Thermo-based materials can be used to create energy from thermobaric material . Thermobasic materials provide significantly more energy output .
 The majority of the additional energy is available as low pressure impulse and heat . Most of the energy is generated by low pressure impulses and heat.
 One of the new munitions for the M25 was also thermobaric . You may recall that one of the . new . munitions for . the . M25 .
 Derek couldn't understand why we needed thermobaric grenades or rockets . Derek was too scared to understand why they were needed . Derek said: "I'm not sure why I'm going to be able to survive"
 In MOUT operations, they'd be the perfect weapon for clearing a house or whatever . They'd be perfect weapon of clearing houses, clearing houses or whatever.
 Damon and I took the guns and ammo to Ron's trailer along with the 60 LAWs and 24 Ml 36s . Damon and Ron were able to get the weapons and ammo from Ron .
 He helped me get an empty Mauser rifle rack from the shelter and we proceeded to clean the weapons . We set up an armory in a spare bedroom .
 I don't like politicians, lawyers and reporters, in no particular order . I like reporters, politicians and lawyers, but I'm not a reporter .
 FEMA had been delayed getting to New Orleans back in 2005 because the Governor wouldn't let the President federalize the Louisiana National Guard . The Governor refused to allow FEMA access to the state's National Guard in 2005 .
 "I collected any weapons worth having, cleaned them and stored them in your spare bedroom partner" Anyway, I collected any . weapons worth . having, cleaning them and storing them in a spare bedroom . partner .
 There are also some of the newer version of the LAW rocket and a few AT-4s . There is also a few newer versions of the rocket .
 The day may dawn when fair play, love for one's fellow men, respect for justice and freedom, will enable tormented generations to march forth triumphant from the hideous epoch in which we have to dwell. Fair play and respect for the one, the most important thing is love .
 We have 'hundreds of square miles of desert that we know and they don't,' says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "We have hundreds of square mile of desert we know that we don't," he says .
 If they use an aircraft to take recon photos, there is nothing visible from the air to give them a clue as to our military power . If they are using an aircraft, there are no visible signs of military power from the sky, he says .
 If the U.S. ever has another internal war, it will no doubt be a 4th generation war . The Civil War or the War of Northern Aggression will be a fourth generation war, like the Civil War . If the United States ever has an internal war it will be
 Given the absolute power of our modern military, it would be nearly impossible to go head-to-head with them, he says . Given the power of the military, "it would be almost impossible"
 It is nearly inconceivable that any President could manage to get the American military to wage war on the American people .
 There is nothing to preclude a President from calling on the UN to help restore law and order . However, there is nothing that prevents a President calling for help from the UN .
 Until George Bush became President, I couldn't conceive of any President turning on the American people . Until then, I would not have thought any President would turn on the Americans .
 That's not to condemn Bush, but to identify when the concept became plausible . The concept became possible when it became plausible, but not when it was possible .
 In this final work, I have examined a series of disasters that could happen . In the final work of my book, I examine what could happen in the future .
 Not one of them is impossible although having them occur in such a short sequence is highly unlikely . Not one is impossible but having them all occur in one sequence is very unlikely .
 The answer, my friend, is blowin' in the wind, the author says . The answer is blowing in the air, he says .
 There are still plenty of us left who were born in the '40s and '50s who remember when this was mostly a free county . The county was mostly free in the 1940s and 1950s .
 Heirloom seeds to outlast the Blight and could, with care, continue to produce food . He knew we had enough heirloom seed to survive the blight, and could continue to .
 The problem with people who have low self-esteem is they don't handle criticism well, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: People with low self esteem don't deal with criticism .
 My mama always said, "If you can't say something nice, don't say anything at all," she said . "My mama said, If you can’t say something good, don”t say anything," she added .
 We never saw a contrail, but that didn't mean much, some planes don't generate one . Some planes never generate one, but some planes do generate one.
 Maybe the government still had a satellite they could use or some of those Predators . Besides, maybe some of the Predators still had some of them .
 Derek had to pull double duty; he knew about the Blight and was our military commander . Derek had been tasked with pulling double duty as a military commander. Derek had pulled double duty .
 I unloaded all of my magazines to let the springs rest and later reloaded them to capacity . I reloaded all of the magazines to allow the springs to rest .
 "I loaded them into surplus gas mask bags because they had a shoulder strap," she says . She loaded them up with surplus gas masks because of the shoulder strap .
 There were advantages to winning the Lottery, if you felt like having 20 of those 5-round magazines for your Tac-50 . The fact that they listed for $330 each didn't bother you .
 Raufoss rounds cost an inordinate amount of money for a few rounds . Neither did paying some Sergeant First Class a lot of money .
 Surefire makes Surefire suppressors . Surefire is a class III type of suppressor . The suppressors can be easily loaded up .
 They cost about 3 times as much as the average suppressor but last about 5 times as long . They are 3 times more expensive but last longer than average suppressors .
 I have a car load of Thunder Lizards but not a single Chicago Typewriter . "I have a lot of Thunder Lizard Lizards," says author. "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to write again."
 An original Model of 1928 in working condition can easily fetch $20,000 or more . An original model of 1928 can fetch more than $20k or more.
 The M1A1, formally adopted as the United States Submachine Gun, Caliber .45, Ml A1, could be produced in half the time of the Ml 928A1 and at a much lower cost .
 By Spring of 1942, cost reduction design changes had brought this down to US$70 . By Spring 1942, the cost of the ship had been reduced from US$60,000 .
 In February 1944, the Ml A1 reached a low price of $45 each, including accessories and spare parts . In February of 1944, it reached a $45 price, including spare parts and accessories .
 The Tommy Gun wasn't worth a crap in dense jungle because of its low muzzle velocity . It was a low-velocity weapon that was used in dense jungles .
 "A frequent topic of conversation was the government and when they'd come after us," says the mother-of-one . "We were always concerned about the government," she says .
 If they got a Predator drone up with FUR and DLIR they'd almost know our exact population . "If they got . FUR, DLIR and FUR," they would almost know their exact population. If they . got . a Predator Drone up with . Fur and
 After a while, the nose of the plane gets in the way, making it impossible for the pilot to keep an eye on the target . The nose of a plane gets so close to the target that it's impossible to keep a clear eye on a target .
 Auto Ordnance Corporation of West Hurley, NY has expanded its product line to include Submachine guns, Tommy gun patterned semi-auto rifles, Ml 911A1 pistols, and a host of spare parts and accessories .
 For domestic sales, they have three versions of a Tommy Gun styled semi-auto rifle . The 1927A-1, 1927A1C, and Ml Semi-Automatic Semi-automobile .
 Owners of Thompson submachine guns, new or old, can find a wide assortment of parts and accessories in the Auto Ordnance catalog . Owners of a Thompson sub machine gun can buy a Thompson from the catalog . The catalog includes parts, accessories for new and old .
 Wait, that's not true, he said, / could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you . Wait. Wait. Then he said: "Then I'd kill you"
 I think I read somewhere that there was about 4,600 tons of gold at Fort Knox . Fort Knox was built in 1877 and is now a national museum .
 Russians must be deep in snow and the Chinese are mostly crispy critters, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I think those Russians must have been in snow," he says .
 The Ml As should be our primary guns and the submachine guns the backups . Submachine guns should be the backup guns . The submachine gun should be a backup gun .
 Palmdale, California, had a huge wind turbine generating nearly 1 mw of power for the Water District . The city was lucky enough to have a large wind turbine that could generate enough power for water districts .
 Palmdale had water while many cities lacked the power to pump their water . Palmdales had water, while many other cities had no such power . Many cities were without water, and many had no water .
 Without electricity, water couldn't be pumped over the Tehachapi Mountains . The Aqueduct came through the area, but without the electricity, the water was not pumped over .
 Tehachapi, Texas, reallocated wind turbines from Techachapi . Techapi wind turbines were moved to Techapapapa, Texas .
 Derek didn't say that anyone was there that objected to his group taking them . Derek said that anyone who objected to him taking them was not there .
 Obama had probably outlawed guns by now by now, either by persuading Congress or by Executive Order . Obama had to persuade Congress or Executive Order to do so .
 I didn't feel a bit bad having Tommy guns, hell a BB gun was probably illegal . "A BB gun probably illegal. Hell, it was probably probably illegal," he says of his childhood .
 We'd been attacked by a hungry family, Latino troops and a big group of bad guys, managing each time to successfully resist their overtures . "We'd been . attacked by hungry family and Latino troops," the author says .
 "We hadn't had to go up against a modern, mechanized military, possibly one with aircraft," he says . "I hadn't been faced with a modern ... military," he adds . "It's a good thing that we're not going to have to face a modern military
 A jet flew so fast you couldn't line up a gun on them; you either used a missile or got bombed . You either had to use missile or get bombed. You either used missile or you got bombed. A jet flies so fast that you could not line up your gun on
 There might be a lucky shot, it happened a few times in 'Nam, where a person brought down a jet with a rifle . A lucky shot might have happened in the U.S. in Vietnam .
 Things like tires, batteries, belts and hoses for vehicles are getting hard to come by . Things such as tires and batteries are getting harder to get by .
 Regardless of your feelings on salvaging supplies, eventually the cupboards were bare . The cupboards eventually became bare .
 It was one of the reasons we standardized most of our firearms to certain calibers, it lessened the type of supplies . It was also one reason for standardizing most of the firearms, it said .
 Even reloading ammo had a limit, eventually the brass would be beyond use, provided we still had powder, primer and bullets . The brass would eventually be used only for reloading .
 Per Derek's instructions all the grass crops were gathered up, taken a few miles out and buried . The grass crops had been gathered up and buried in a nearby lake .
 The winter was very hard considering we were in southern Arizona, it would have seemed like nothing to the Iowa folks . The winter would have been very hard if we had been in Iowa .
 It got down to 0°F for several nights running, hopefully low enough to destroy any leftover seeds .
 Can't tell you how nice it was to have Ron and Clarence back, even if it meant I got called 'asshole' a dozen times a day .
 I put Damon on finding them a means of transportation, thinking he'd come up with a couple of wheelchairs, he said . "I put Damon working on finding a way of transportation," he says .
 When he found them, he didn't say anything, opting to have one of Mary's relations work 'em over' just a bit .
 Using my 9 rifle rack on my wheelchair as a pattern, he welded together a 6 rifle rack for each of the ATVs . He welded the rack together with a pattern to create a larger rack .
 He mounted one of those window rifle racks on the backside of each one to hold 3 LAWS rockets . Then, he mounted a window rifle rack to hold one of the other .
 When they had the project done, Damon came with a hat containing 3 slips of paper and said the 3 of us should each draw a slip . Damon came up with the idea of drawing a slip on a piece of paper .
 "They'd done something to the exhaust system to make them reasonably quiet, we could get within walking distance of any bad guys," says police officer .
 Noise disciple was something they talked about on the military channel; you could hear us coming at least V* mile away. Noise disciple. You could hear it coming from a mile away . Noise disciple .
 "It was mostly a mix of name calling, curse words and suggesting what we'd try to do if the bad guys showed up," the author says .
 Maybe the nicest suggestion was to cut his heart out and feed it to Max, sounds like animal cruelty to me . Maybe the niceest suggestion is to cut the heart out of the heart and feed Max .
 Every road into the area was heavily barricaded and each barricade manned . It wasn't as if we were in any real danger, Derek and Bill had patrols out 24/7 .
 Most of the people in Whetstone and Benson were concentrating on trying to grow enough food this year to get through the coming year and maybe resupply their dwindling pantries .
 Give us 10 and then escort their OIC, his driver and their NCOIC down to the ranch . Give them 10 of the 10 then escort them down to a ranch . The ranch is a ranch in Texas .
 The fellow on his left is Ron Brown and the fellow on my right is Clarence Floyd, my advisors. Ron Brown was Ron Brown . Clarence Floyd was Clarence Floyd's advisor .
 We're here to collect the available food so it can be redistributed . Be that as it may, we're not here to redistribute food .
 It also provides that no property shall be seized without due process of law . The law provides no property seized without the right to be seized .
 "You go, Captain, and tell those in charge that we don't have any food or weapons to spare," says the captain . "We're going to have no food, weapons or spare," he says .
 Tell them that we will resist any attempts by you, or anyone, to take what we have . Tell us that we'll resist any attempt by you or anyone to take our resources .
 Caesar also said, veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I conquered. You tell them that Caesar . I came and conquered, he said, and I conquered .
 Tell them that George Santayana said, Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it . Tell them, tell them that those who can't recall the past will repeat it.
 If we get some of that material that they make Space Blankets from we can suspend it over the buildings and reflect any infrared signature they might have . We can also use it to reflect infrared signatures on buildings .
 "We have plenty of camouflage netting and can suspend that above the blanket," says the team . "We're going to use it for the first time in a week"
 Those silver oak leafs looked pretty good on Derek's lapel, he might as well keep wearing them . For all practical purposes, they didn't mean any more than the butter bar .
 I got on the ham set that evening and spread the word about Obama and what he was doing. "I was on the set that night," he said .
 "Strangely, I got quite a few acknowledgements and an indication we weren't alone in the fight," says author . "I got a lot of acknowledgements," she says of the book .
 One fella said that the only thing worse than them damned Yankees was them damned furiners . The Yankees' furiners were 'damnier furiners,' he said .
 In the US, space blankets are made by vacuum depositing a very precise amount of pure aluminum vapor onto a very thin, durable film substrate .
 Space blankets are included in many emergency, first aid, and survival kits . They are usually waterproof and windproof . Space blankets can be used in many first aid and survival packs .
 "We explained to Derek what we had to do to protect the buildings on the acreage," he said .
 If the UN thought it was up against a brigade sized force, their first step would probably be a recon . The UN says it would probably need to recon the situation .
 "If they sent in spies, through the desert, they were as likely as not to start at our place," he said . "They would be as likely to start with our place. If they were sent in ... they would be more likely to find it in the desert."
 We'd screwed the pooch not putting up the netting and space blankets earlier, they already had pictures of the entire area . The netting was put up earlier this week, and the space blankets were put in place .
 "I didn't think of it at the time, I was too concerned with getting a Tommy gun," he says . "I was too worried about getting Tommy gun"
 The 3 of us weren't in charge of security and just ran the fence line to free up a couple of the troops . The 3 were able to help free up some of the soldiers .
 "What I know about fighting a battle could be written in large letters on a sheet of paper that would get lost in the eye of a gnat," he says . What I know could be lost in a battle, he says. "I know nothing more than what I need to
 "It never occurred to anyone that they might wait until later in the year to attack," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The gardens were growing very well and the grass crops looked like they might be ok . The grass crops were looking good and the gardens were looking well .
 In times past, disasters were speculative, one could expect them, but they might never happen . In times of the past, disaster was speculative, but never expected to happen . Now, disasters are speculative .
 This was different; they knew where we were and had as much as said, well be back . This was the first time they had been back in the UK, and it was a surprise .
 If you could get your dragster to accelerate that fast, you'd always win the drags . The dragster is capable of accelerating at a high speed .
 "They were close, before I could bring my rifle to bear, Ron cut them down," he said . "Ron cut down. They were close to ... but before he could bring his rifle down, he cut down"
 This is the first time in a week that Max was with us; remind me to give him a steak . This was the first . time I've given him a . steak .
 The truck came to pick up the survivor and the body and returned to the house . The survivor and her body were picked up by the truck .
 Sharon and the girls were in charge of the house and garden . Derek and Damon were also responsible for security and recovery . Damon and Sharon took charge of recovery and security . Sharon was in charge .
 1-10 wasn't nearly as busy as 1-40 in northern Arizona and he'd gone almost to the state line in both directions . Next to me, Damon had the fewest duties, there wasn't much left to salvage .
 Most of his efforts were now centered on Tucson; there was always something there to find . Most of the efforts now centered around Tucson, Arizona .
 The 3 of us patrolled the fence line on the even hours, then sat and smoked and drank coffee the remainder of the time . I took my lack of duties seriously, and I took it seriously .
 'Max seemed almost disappointed. From the time of the shooting, we didn't have any more trouble,' he said . 'Max seems almost disappointed,' he added .
 "The wounded guy got an infection and what antibiotics we had failed to save him," says the hospital . The wounded man was taken to the hospital with a gunshot wound, but died of a self-inflicted infection .
 Near as well as we could tell, he didn't speak English and we'd have never understood him . Near as we couldn't tell, we would have never been able to understand him .
 It was a good thing we got a corn crop, we needed alcohol to make biodiesel and E-85 . It was good thing that the corn crop was good enough to make ethanol and biodiesel . "We needed alcohol," she said .
 "What little corn we did get went into livestock feed, I had to let loose of some of those one ounce gold pieces to get corn for alcohol," he says .
 The planes that dared to fly over soon learned we had Stinger missiles, lots of Stinger missile missiles . The planes who dared to . fly over learned they had . Stinger . missiles, many of them .
 In case you're wondering, the boys came up with a TRUCKLOAD of the things . The boys were able to find the items online .
 They wouldn't say where they found them, but they did say there were no Marines at Yuma or Barstow . No Marines were found in Yuma, but no Marines were reported missing .
 More importantly, they found a few stragglers, of military origin our military, our military. More importantly they found them, of course, our own military .
 The 2nd Amendment, America's Original Homeland Security we mused about the coming battle . America's original Homeland Security, the Second Amendment, was created .
 They had to spread the tens of billions of dollars in development costs over fewer planes . The planes cost more than $1 billion each .
 "They were only building something like 20 a year once they got rolling. They're complicated to build; I think they were only . They were only built about 20 a . year . Once they were rolling, they would only be building about 20 per year .
 It's not the size of the dog in the fight, it's the size the fight in the dog . Which brings to mind the old saw, the old say, the size . of the fight .
 "The few additional men they added gave us maybe 3 Companies of soldiers," says the soldier . The few additional soldiers they added were maybe 3 companies of soldiers .
 "With 6 artillery pieces and now 4 tanks, we couldn't last very long against a sizeable, organized force," he says . "We couldn't survive very long," he adds .
 The main difference was we were fighting for our homes and they were half a world away from theirs. We were not fighting for their homes, but for their lives, they were fighting in the war .
 If these guys attacking us had watched the History Channel, they'd have known how to get past our little Siegfried Line . "If these guys attacked us had . watched us, they would have known . how to attack us," he said . "We're not going to let them
 With our registered arty and a pair of tanks at each barricade, they weren't getting anywhere . We're not going to get anywhere, but we're going to try to get them to the ground .
 The sneaky SOBs had a third force to the south, some on 80 and the larger force on 90 . Some of the larger forces were on 90, some 80 and some on 90.
 While we watched the action, we were busy topping off mags and loading the extras .
 We had dragged all of our guns up to the fighting positions and had 5 LAW rockets apiece . We had five LAW rockets each . We were able to get into the fighting position in the first place .
 They were driving commandeered vehicles which didn't give them much protection . "Commandeered" vehicles "didn't give much protection," says CNN.com .
 "I tried to block the road by blowing up the engine in the front vehicle," says the driver of the vehicle . He says he tried to blow up the vehicle's engine by blowing it up .
 "That worked, for all of 10 seconds, then they tried to go around and I murdered a second vehicle," he says . "They tried to try and go around," he adds . "I murdered a car. That worked," he said .
 Ron and Clarence were shooting at the guys bailing out of the vehicles . Clarence and Ron were shooting . Clarence shot at the people bailing from the vehicles. Meanwhile Ron was shooting at them .
 All of our soldier's, you see, were sent to the barricades except for those using the arty and the Stingers . All of the soldier's were sent . except for the . arty . and Stingers.
 "It looked like a Platoon sized group and there were only about 10 of us on the embankment," she says . "There were about 10 people in the group," she adds .
 I was being careful not to damage their guns; I could easy get $4-$500 apiece for them . "I could easily get $400 each for them," he says. "I'm not sure if I'm going to buy them."
 Ping, a round hit right in front of my foxhole, spraying sand and dirt everywhere . Ping, an amateur golfer, hit a hole in the foxhole . Ping's round was the first to hit the hole in a foxhole.
 I thought I spied that SOB who shot at me and introduced him to Mr McMillan; it cut him near in half. I thought he spied the SOB, but he didn't, he said. "It cut him nearly in half," he said .
 "No old guy like me should be able to shoot that good. That rifle must have been 1 in 1,000," he says .
 I swear these guys had the range; they were chewing up the ground around all of our fighting positions . "These guys had a lot of range," he says. "They were chewing it up around all the fighting positions"
 I was slammed to the back of the foxhole, that Dragon Skin had just earned its pay . 'Dragon Skin' is a brand that has a reputation for its reputation for being unflinching .
 "Knocked the wind out of me, I struggled to get my breath and stand back up. Knocked me out of my breath," she said . "I struggled to breathe and get back up," she added .
 I could hear Ron and Clarence shooting theirs, so I racked back the action and opened up . "Ron and Clarence shot theirs," says Clarence . "I'm not going to shoot my friends, but I'm going to do it," he says .
 Even with a moderate rate of fire, these things give a new meaning to the term spray and pray . Even with their moderate rate, these . rate of . fire .
 Udell, Jr. had his Ml 6 set on full auto and was spraying, if not praying . Udell Jr. was praying, if he was not praying, as he sprayed .
 "I reloaded every magazine I had before I noticed it was very quiet. I must have been pumped," he says . "I must have reloaded all the magazines I had"
 I stood and looked around; everyone was out of his/her fighting position, just standing around visiting . I stood . Everyone was standing around, just visiting visiting. I looked around .
 There was a row of slugs across the front of Ron's Dragon Skin, but he didn't seem to seem to be hurt . There was no damage to the Dragon Skin .
 Clarence must have avoided getting shot; he had a big grin on his face . Clarence had to avoid getting shot . Clarence was smiling as he walked away from the scene of the shooting . Clarence and Clarence were laughing hysterically .
 Derek and Bill have their people out collecting weapons, ammo and supplies . Derek, Bill and Bill are on the road collecting weapons .
 Clinton directed the acting chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Jeremiah, to stop all actions by United States forces against Aidid except those re302 quired in self-defense . In a national security policy review session held in the White House on October 6, 1993 .
 All U.S. forces would withdraw from Somalia no later than March 31, 1994 . Ambassador Robert B Oakley was appointed as special envoy to Somalia in an attempt to broker peace .
 On December 15, 1993, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin stepped down, taking much of the blame for what was deemed a failed policy . Aspin's resignation was announced in December 1993 .
 A few hundred Marines remained offshore to assist with any noncombatant evacuation mission . 1,000-plus U.S. civilians and military advisers remain as part of the United States liaison mission .
 They'd paid dearly for the attack, but only they could decide if it was worth the cost to get what little food we were growing . Only they had to decide if the cost of the attack was worth it .
 Stingers were consumables and we didn't have another source of supply . Stingers are consumables, and they were consumable and we had to rely on suppliers .
 "When they were gone there wouldn't be much we could do to stop their planes and choppers," says President Obama . "They would be gone, and there would be little to stop them," says Obama .
 Sometimes military commanders react to a force getting wiped out by re-attacking the same place to put down the resistance . Sometimes military leaders react to the situation by attacking the same area .
 If you kick they're butts; they'll be back, just like Arnold . Still, the rule of thumb is that if you kick them's butts, they will be back . If you want to kick them, kick them butts .
 Derek continued to send out patrols; it appeared that we were generally hemmed in, by three Regiments . It appeared that the three regiments appeared to be hemming in .
 This, in turn, ended Damon's salvage operation, if we didn't have it now, we couldn't get it, unless we could grow it or manufacture it out of available materials . This, of course, was the end of the salvage operation .
 The only problem with the Hind is that the engine exhaust is directed right under the rotor shaft . The Hind is not the first time a car has been driven by a car with an engine .
 Those heat seekers tend to home in on the jet engine exhaust and blow off the rotor . The rotor can also be blown off by the heat of the engine rotor .
 The SINCGARS radio is used to send out a net call on 33,000, the single channel plain text frequency for real world emergencies . The SincGARS frequency is a plain text radio frequency .
 "If they didn't know that I was only a pretend colonel, then I was happy to pretend. If they didn’t know that . I was just a fake colonel," he says .
 Right about then a drink would have gone down smooth, it was just a shame I couldn't stop at one . It was a shame that a drink was not enough to go down smooth .
 "How they were going to get an armored cav squadron past the UN was way above my pay grade," says the author . "I'm not sure how they're going to do it, but I'm sure it's a good idea."
 The choppers could probably sneak in during the dark, I wondered if they were Huey's or Blackhawk's . The chopper could probably hide in the dark during the night .
 According to the information I copied to my computer from global security they use Blackhawk's for medevac . The information was obtained from the global security on the U.S. government .
 "If one of them went down with a full load of people, that meant a whole lot of dead people," he says . "It's not just one person's death," he adds .
 I knew you could shoot one down with an RPG-7; 2 in fact, they did that in Mogadishu . 2 of these RPGs were shot down with a grenade launcher . 2 in Somalia were also shot down by a mortar gunner .
 I had felt like telling him to speak English before I realized he was using the phonetic alphabet . "I'm not sure what I really want to say, but I'm glad to hear him speak English," he said .
 Alfa Bravo Coca Delta Echo Foxtrot Golf Hotel India Juliett Kilo Lima Metro Nectar . Oscar Papa Quebec Romeo Sierra Tango Union Victor Whisky Extra Yankee Zulu .
 "About the time I get this one memorized, they'll probably change it again," he says . About the time he's memorizing the name, "they'll probably be changing it again. They'll probably get it memorized again."
 In my opinion, Kenwood gives you the most bang for the buck . Loom and Yaesu are both very good radios . Kenwood and loom loom are the best radios .
 If you add a CB SSB base station and some business radios, you've got everything covered except frequency hopping military radios . If you want to use military radio frequency hopping, you're covered by a base station .
 You'll probably have to steal one of those to get one . Then you need the code disc to program it to the current operating frequencies . You'll also have to get a code disc and then you need a program .
 SINCGARS are 28 volt radios except for the man-pack which operates on 12 volts . SincGARS operate on 28 volt instead of 12 volt radios .
 You don't really need an 11 meter antenna, you can retune your other antenna . If you have an antenna capable of 10 and 12 meters, you don't need to retune it .
 I think it's better to have a separate 11 meter antenna plus a Comet tri-bander that will cover the higher frequencies . The antenna will also be used to cover the lower frequencies of the radio .
 The X part of the TS-2000 is a plug in card you can always add later . It covers 1.2ghz. The X is the part of a plug-in card that can be added to later .
 More watts of output power are nice, but you really should spend the extra bucks on the antenna . More watts are nice but you need to spend extra money on an antenna .
 When my brain still worked a little, I could think well enough to try and avoid giving bad advice . When I was younger, I was able to give advice to others, I would try to avoid giving advice .
 Derek assigned Aaron as his driver, not because he couldn't drive, but because his brain slowed to the point that he would be like an epileptic and might go a mile or more and not know I did it . Aaron was assigned as driver not because of his inability to drive,
 There isn't much practical difference between being epileptic and hypoglycemic, you're totally out of control . You're not just epileptic, you are totally out-of-control .
 The statement from the Bible is, physician heal thyself and it was more like no way, Jose. Jose. The Bible says, 'Physician heal yourself and it's more like 'no way' Jose.
 I'm assuming Derek will tell you more about the guys when they show up . Derek says he's not sure how many of the guys will show up at this time .
 "It sounded like we'd more than double our force and pick up all kinds of things we didn't have. It sounded like ... it sounded like it would be more than doubling our force," she said .
 Dustoff showed up first, with six nice, new Blackhawk helicopters . Dustoff also brought in six new helicopters .
 The 498th Air Ambulance Company was a medevac unit in the U.S. Army . Their nickname was the common call sign for Army medevach units .
 I assume that they got in partly because they were all marked plainly with nice, big red crosses on the sides of the sides . I assume they got into partly because of the fact that they were marked clearly with nice red crosses .
 Even medevac choppers carry miniguns now, thanks to some of the insurgent activities the Army has faced over the last several decades .
 Geneva Conventions banned attacks on it because of the rescue missions being flown . Your average official soldier from another country saw the red cross and knew that the Geneva Convention banned attacks .
 Your average insurgent, on the other hand, saw the red cross and thought the Americans were very stupid to put a crosshair on the side of their aircraft . The average insurgent thought the U.S. was very stupid . The American military said it was very lucky to have a cross
 Even medevac choppers could put an amazing amount of firepower on target to secure the landing zone . So long as the fire remained defensive Geneva couldn't say anything .
 The 498th was made famous for its daring rescue missions flown during Vietnam . The other reason they got in was that this was the unit made famous in Vietnam .
 Nap of the Earth flying, an ugly method requiring the pilot to dodge the ground at high speed, was practically invented by the 498th and units like them . Nap of Earth flying is a form of flying known as "Nap of the earth"
 "I felt better knowing that we had the best chopper pilots in the world at our disposal," says the pilot pilot .
 St. Battalion, 168th Armor Regiment was a bunch of Minnesota National Guards that belonged to the same brigade as I did back when I was in the Iowa Guard . Bataan showed up next .
 Normally, their complement was 58 tanks, 8 120mm mortar carriers, and various support vehicles . Normally, they would have 58 tanks and 8 mortar carriers .
 They did not have mechanized infantry, normally, unless they had exchanged a company of tanks for a company from another command . They exchanged tanks for Bradleys’ from other commandeers .
 These guys were every bit as antisocial as any cavalry scout, though, and decided that they didn’t want to act in support of UN invasions . These guys decided to be antisocial and decided not to support the UN .
 They headed south at a medium pace, picking up as many stray soldiers and equipment along the way as they could . Thus, they headed south . They picked up as much stray soldiers, equipment along with them .
 I'm sure that all those tankers were slightly insulted by my comment to that fact. I’m sure that . I'm not sure how much tankers are actually tankers .
 Armor units know that the Cav sux, just like Cav units know the reverse . Armor units . know that Cav units. know that they are in the same shape as the Cav .
 One other nice little fact was that their Bradley's were Infantry models . One of them was an Infantry model .
 I joked with the Bataan commander about retasking his unit as cav; one look from that grizzled old light colonel said more than enough . One look from the commander from his unit was enough, he said .
 This was a unit whose proud history included surviving the Bataan Death March . This was one of the unit's proud history . It was the first time the unit had survived the death march in a war .
 This unit held the distinction of being the original Battling Bastards of Bataan, a fact that they were extremely proud of . This unit was extremely proud to be part of the original "Bataan"
 The unit call sign Bataan and their unofficial nickname, the Bastards . The Bastards are a unit called the Bataan by the unit's nickname .
 This unit had no history, calling themselves the 1st provisional volunteer infantry . This unit was called the "The Provisional Provisional Volunteer Infantry"
 Their CO was a retired sergeant major from the 101st who bled red, white and blue . The men were mostly former soldiers who had the same sort of bloodstream .
 Sergeant-Major had whipped them into shape, forging perhaps the finest militia unit in history . That crusty old Sergeant-major had whipped the militia into shape .
 The Ugly Stepchildren could march 36 miles in a day, every day, for weeks on end . They could march for weeks every day for weeks .
 Their composition told me that we weren’t the only ones out there who would stand up for our beautiful, sacred land . What’s more than that, they told me, it was a good sign that others would stand for us. What's more, their composition told
 These days, it was What's mine is mine and what's yours, is mine, if I can get it . "What's yours is mine" is mine if you can get. These days it's What's Mine is mine. What's I'm Mine is Mine. What
 "There wasn't any reason for Ron, Clarence and Clarence to patrol the fence, so we did it anyway," says Bob Greene . "There was no reason for the fence to be guarded," says Greene .
 "I went to bed early that night and never heard the Thump, Thump of the Blackhawk's when they arrived," says Navy pilot . "I'm glad to have had a good night of sleep," he says .
 The day after the armor unit showed up, they had tanks, Bradley's and even mortars . "They had tanks and mortars," says the soldier .
 Derek explained that 6 Paladins made an artillery unit called a battery . Derek explained how the artillery unit was made into a battery. Derek said that the unit was a battery, a battery of artillery . Derek also explained that the battery is a unit of artillery.
 "We had people from Minnesota, the southeast and the rest from here and there. We had people ... from all over the world," she says . "We're going to have a great turnout," she adds .
 Sabot ammo is made in Iowa at the Iowa Army ammunition plant in Middletown, Iowa .
 Derek claimed if we could get new rounds from Middleton they could swap out the warheads . Derek claimed we could swap the warheads with new rounds of ammunition . Derek said if we got new rounds, we would swap out warheads .
 We could use up most of the old ammo, depending on the condition of the disintegrating cartridge . Meanwhile, we could use some of the new ammo, if the condition is too bad .
 "With them having 2 Regiments and our having a short Brigade, we were outnumbered maybe 4-6 to 1. With them having two Regiments, our . had to be outnumbered maybe . 4- 6 to 1," he said. "We were outnumbered [6] to 1
 If we were to get beyond them, it would take a concentrated attack against only one of their Regiments, says the British Army . "It would take us to be beyond them. It would take them to be able to get past them. They would be very difficult to do so
 The answer was if we didn't break out, they'd eventually come for us and take everything we had . "The answer was to break out. They'd eventually ... take everything they had. The answer is if we break out," she says .
 Derek said if we could punch a hole in their lines, he could get to Iowa and locate more tank ammo, or the components . Derek said he could go to Iowa to find more tank ammunition or components .
 "I sometimes wondered if we wouldn't have been better off if we had been in Tucson, shopping, when the war occurred. I sometimes wondered ... if we weren't better off . We were shopping in Tucson .
 It must have been the depression that sometimes crept in despite the Zoloft . It must also have been depression that crept in .
 "I'm not sure why we had a stalemate, maybe they actually believed they had a full Brigade with more coming all of the time. Maybe they thought we had more coming coming all the time," he said. "I don't know why we're in the middle of a
 "They had to see the evidence, you can't move that large of an armor force without leaving signs," the officer says . "You can't leave signs without leaving them," he says of the evidence .
 Apaches equipped with Hellfire missiles, Hydra rockets and 30mm cannons . That would have been nice, a detachment of Apaches . Apaches could have been armed with Hellfires and Hydra rockets .
 Like all of our equipment they are vulnerable to machinegun and rocket fire . Like all the equipment they were vulnerable to Machinegun and Rocket fire, they are still vulnerable .
 After several days of scouting, a patrol found a gap in the encirclement . The gap was discovered after several days .
 After checking all the tanks rounds, they found enough swelled they didn't have much choice . It was still a long way to Middleton but after checking all of the tank rounds they found too much .
 Bill and Derek decided to make the mission with 10 vehicles, 4 10-ton trucks, 1 fuel hauler and 5 HMMWVs . The mission was a success for Derek and Bill and Bill .
 If they found more ammo than that, they'd appropriate a civilian tractor trailer . If more ammo was found, they would have to use a military vehicle .
 Derek would lead the mission and with good travel times said they could be back in 5 days . Derek would be Derek's first person to go on the mission .
 At oh dark thirty, one cold and blustery morning, they launched the mission, sending scouts and infantry ahead to clear the way . The mission was launched by the U.S. Air Force in the dark .
 My contribution was to supply a dozen suppressors that they promised to return, he says . "They promised to give them back," he says of the suppressors .
 I wasn't really contributing much these days, my banker duties had been taken over when I made a math error . I was taken over by my bank manager, who had made an error in a math calculation .
 Every morning The Three Amigos bundled up to keep warm and patrolled the acreage, a make work project . Every morning the trio of amigos patrolled an acreage .
 The nearest troops were probably 15km out just maintaining the encirclement . It is thought to be 15km from the base of the base .
 One scouting party reported that not all of the troops assigned to the 2 Regiments were concentrated on keeping us in . One scout party reported not all the troops .
 Arizona authorities confiscate food and guns from southern Arizona . They range much of southern Arizona, confiscating guns and food . They also confiscate guns and ammunition .
 Police found some food, but no firearms, an unlikely scenario in Arizona . They were finding some food and no firearms . Police say they were looking for food and water .
 There were camouflaged containers everywhere and we had more ordnance than we could shoot up in years . We had a lot of ordnance that could be used to shoot up years, he says . He adds: "There were camouflaging containers everywhere"
 "Everyone has a goal, everyone has to have goals, was to shoot down a Hind with my Tac-50," he says . "I'm going to shoot it down, but I'm not going to do it," he adds .
 I was counseled that only a hit to an engine would do and I'd have to find one hovering fairly close to pull it off . I was told that only an engine hit would do, so I would have to hit it to pull off .
 The crew compartment of all series of Hinds was well armored; I couldn't simply shoot the pilot . "The crew compartment on the Hinds were well armored," he says . "All series Hinds are well armored"
 After I got up, showered, dressed and had breakfast, I found them in my den drinking coffee . "I found them drinking coffee," she says of her husband and his wife .
 Give us a squadron of fighter bombers and it would be over in nothing flat . Give us an air force of fighters and bombers, we would say. Give us some of the best fighter bombers .
 Last I knew a Squadron had 24 planes and a Wing, 72. "Back in the '90s, they kept changing the Squadron sizes," he says .
 Congress diverted large sums of money to both the F-22 and F-35 programs after Iraqi Freedom ended . What I didn't know was that Congress diverted funds from Iraq War funds .
 The government clamped a lid on the news and the American public was unaware that the Air Force was, for the first time since 'Nam, almost over strength, was almost over .
 Ordnance for the aircraft was widely distributed, with a vast quantity stored at Ft. Ft. Hill .
 The apparent explanation was that the money had already been allocated to the war and homeland security sucks. It's not clear why the money was already allocated to homeland security .
 "Once they allocate money, they're loath to not spend it. You know how the government is," he says . "You know how . Once they allocated money, once they allocate it, they are loath not to spend it," he adds .
 The buildup ended when the war came but the F-15s and F-16s hadn't yet been retired, the phase out was gradual . The phase out of the program was gradual, with the planes phased out gradually .
 Idaho city has the 391st Fighter Squadron and their 24 F-15E Eagle fighters . The squadron is based in Boise, Idaho .
 Disgusted by UN tactics and the unjust mission, pilots and ground crews had decided to look for something else to do . Disgusting by the UN tactics, they decided to turn their guns on .
 The 162nd Fighter Wing was a unit that I was sure had been wiped out with Tucson . Best of all, it was the 162nd fighter wing, a unit I thought would be wiped out .
 162nd boasted 3 full squadrons of F-16E/F fighters before the additional squadrons were attached . The 162nd was the first to have a full squadron of F/16 fighters .
 In total, we had 24 F-15E Strike Eagles, 72 F-16E Block 60 fighters from the 162nd, and 24 A-1 OC Thunderbolt II ground attack fighters . The U.S. military says it has a total of 1,800 American troops in the
 Officers fed up with Commander-in-Chief to cover their tracks . Now they would fly missions in support of us instead of the UN, with a little help .
 Obama would crap his drawers if he knew we were commandeering his expensive hardware and highly-trained pilots, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 With a bit of luck, we might get even more units sent our way in support of contingency operations that would remember their allegiance was to the Constitution, not the President .
 "Ron never said anything, but he was concerned about our having automatic weapons and suppressors," she says . "I believe that he was ... concerned that he would be concerned about us having automatic weapon and suppression," she said .
 They were strictly controlled by the NFA of 1934, another example of the government meddling in our lives . The NFA was strictly controlled .
 A suppressor doesn't silence a firearm; it reduces the sound to a bearable level . It reduces the noise of a firearm to a manageable level . suppressors don't silence firearms, they reduce the noise .
 You could have one, provided you were willing to cough up $200 for the tax stamp and pass a background check . The background check is required for a tax stamp, and the background check required .
 $200 was nearly a fortune when many were working for $1 a day in 1934 . Think about that in the terms of the economy in 1934... $200 is almost a fortune . Many people in the 1930s were living on $1 per day .
 Next, there was the question of where the gangster came from in the first place . The gangster legend is known for his gangster origins .
 Prohibition gave them a new source of money and they had millions of more than willing customers . Yes, Virginia, we've always had criminals, but Prohibition was a new money source .
 The government created the situation in the first place, rather than legalize liquor, they outlawed certain firearms and accessories . The bad guys took advantage of the latest weapons for their rivalries for their rivals .
 Many states outlawed all of the NFA weapons and even if the feds approved the purchase, you still couldn't legally own one whatsoever .
 Ronald had lived in Kalifornia since he was 2 weeks old . He was taught from day one that NFA firearms were bad things that only criminals had . Ronald had been taught that they are bad things only criminals have .
 "He was very uneasy with the selection of weapons we had. Thus for whatever rea316 son, he was uneasy," he said .
 Government overstepped its authority in banning machine guns, short barrerere rifles, suppressors, destructive devices, and that special class, any other weapon, says the author . "I was the opposite and always felt the government had overstepping its authority"
 Hillary's husband got through an Assault Weapons Ban when he was Prez, but it had a sunset clause, thank God . Hillary got through the ban, but the sunset clause is a good thing .
 "When the fat was in the fire, none of this kept good ol' Ronald from using the weapons, although I still could tell, it bothered him," he said . When the fat is in the . fire, "Ronald" used the weapons .
 Had it been up to me, I'd have mounted Mk19s on our front and back decks, but we didn't have enough to allow that . We didn't even have enough of a Mk19S to mount them on our decks, says the pilot .
 Given a choice between spraying and praying vs. one well-placed shot, the latter always prevailed . Given the choice, it was always the best shot to get in the game .
 I keep the 10 round magazine that came with the rifle loaded with Black Hills 165gr BTSP point ammo, 'cause you never knew when an edible critter might get into your sight picture . The 10 round . magazine came with a 10-round . magazine .
 "Like I'd ever see an edible critter now that we spent most of our days in my den," she says . "I don't think we'll ever see any edible critters," she adds .
 Damon had moved from the shelter to the den. At best, the 3 of us were consigned to monitoring the radios Damon had had moved to the shelter . Damon's wife and two other men were also forced to monitor the radio .
 I kept the volume up on the SINCGARS so we'd know immediately if the UN were attacking. I kept it up so we could see if we were attacked by the UN .
 By stationing a Regiment on each side of us they hoped to keep us contained until they were ready to do whatever evil deed Obama assigned them to them . The U.S. military is using this tactic to keep them contained until Obama is ready to attack them .
 They controlled most of southern Arizona, except Davis-Monthan and Ft. Ft. Mesa . Meanwhile, they control most of Arizona's southern Arizona .
 They weren't about to go up against 5 Squadrons of Air Force or the remaining force at the Fort . The Fort is located in Fort Rock, Arkansas .
 It was rumored that Obama was at Cheyenne Mountain and SecDef Clinton was at Holloman . Obama was rumored to be in the middle of the action .
 Although most former members of the U.S. already know these things, many civilians don't . Many civilians don’t. know these facts .
 Every service member, from the rank-and-file enlisted to the highest officers, swears an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States and obey the orders of the President . The oath of allegiance to the U.S. is an oath of support for the Constitution
 National Guard members add the Constitution of their respective state and their Governor to this oath, following the same patterns . The oath of allegiance to the U.S. is the same pattern .
 If the oath was to the Government, the service member would be pledging themselves to serve the people elected to represent the nation and the people who elected them instead of the nation itself . The oath of allegiance to the nation would be a pledge of allegiance .
 The services would become the property of those elected officials and the people that elected them . Thus, the services would be the . property of elected officials .
 President declared martial law, nationalization of critical resources, invitation of foreign troops onto U.S. soil to maintain public order . Now, the elected President had decided that the mounting crisis within the borders of the United States .
 President Obama subordinated the authority of the Constitution to that of the United Nations . In doing this he subordinated himself to the U.N. Constitution, he said .
 The Constitution is the supreme law of the United States, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he wants to keep the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on immigration reform .
 When these acts happened, the members themselves each faced a personal crisis . The members of the group faced a crisis when they committed the acts .
 The answer is that we continue to serve the office until such time as we can act to restore the Constitution . The answer to the question is that the Constitution must be restored .
 Dad didn't know that we were using what connections we still had to contact the Armed Forces of the United States as often as we were able to remind them of their oath to the Constitution . Dad didn’t know that .
 "I was afraid that if I told him that I was doing this he would feel that I had subordinated the wellbeing of our family and friends in our small community to that of the same corrupt government that took away his rights before the crisis . I was afraid to tell him that if
 "I feared the kind of roaring argument that would follow might threaten his health. Nothing could be farther from the truth, but he was getting old enough that I feared the argument might threaten my health," he said .
 The truth is that the folks like Dad, Sharon, Ron, Clarence, and the other older people that remembered the freedom we youngsters could only dream about were depressed because they could remember that freedom and mourned its loss . The truth .
 Those of us born after the slow decline of freedom that the older folks mourned mourned now fought to restore a level of freedom . We had never really had. We were born in the '60s and '70s, '80s. Those of those born during that period
 One speech was usually enough to spark the interest of other freedom-minded individuals our own age . One speech usually sparked interest of others in the freedom of speech .
 Service members are often reminded of their true allegiance . That fact makes service members easier to remind them of that fact .
 The word was out through the rumor mills and scuttlebutt that there was a bunch of service members standing up to the occupying army of the President down around the Four Corners .
 Every once in a while a few service members would disappear because of this rumor . The rumor was a rumor that some service members had disappeared because of it .
 Most reappeared in a few days to a few weeks closer to the Four Corners area . Most of them reappeared later in the days to the weeks .
 As we made our way across the country we ran into patrols, checkpoints, and units deployed to police up firearms, food, and medical supplies . We ran into checkpoints, checkpoints and units that were deployed to pick up firearms and supplies .
 The UN troops got a line of bull about how we were transferring the vehicles to another garrison that was always just a few more miles up the road . It worked, too, thanks to acting classes I took in college and in part I think to Divine Providence .
 I was legally a Lieutenant Colonel because of a very old tradition known as Full Faith and Credit . The legally constituted government of the state I served kept their own promotion lists . The tradition is an old tradition .
 The Arizona National Guard's rank was determined by the elected government in Arizona . So long as I was in the National Guard, my rank was decided by the government .
 "All of the American units I ran into were sympathetic when I explained to them. All of the U.S. units I encountered were sympathetic," he said .
 "We were all sick and tired of the way the government was running things. Service members are a pretty loyal bunch when it comes to America," the president said . "Service members are pretty loyal to the U.S. and we were sick of the government," he said .
 None would volunteer any information about us and our whereabouts to UN officers they reported to by Executive Order . None of the UN officers who reported us to them would volunteer information .
 "This time, the enemy was inside the gates before we knew what was happening," says President Obama . "This is the first time the enemy has entered the gates," says Obama .
 "The civilians that saw us proudly flying the Stars and Stripes from our radio antennas definitely loved us," says the pilot . "We were proud to fly the stars and stripes from our antennas," he says .
 "We had hot meals all the way there and back, even when the families providing them looked like they needed them more than we did," she says .
 To repay them for their hospitality we gave away the food we didn't eat thanks to them . We arranged with our network of “bat tie buddies” to misroute some of the food seized by Obama’s troops .
 We were at each of the two depots less than two hours and got a full load between them of everything we needed, from bullets to grenades to rockets . The depots are filled with ammunition, grenades and rockets .
 Someone even conjured up some fake orders for us, labeling this shipment as necessary ordnance for the contingency operations in Arizona . Someone even made it up to be a fake order .
 Huachuca would now be getting occasional resupply from the ordnance depots and Obama would never be the wiser . Obama would have never been the wiser.
 The resupply convoys would be headed for the UN forces stationed there .
 Unofficially, each convoy would have whatever we asked for to be delivered to Ft. Ft. E.C. "Unofficially," the convoy would receive whatever they asked for, delivered to them .
 The additional items would never be on the books so there would be no paper trail, either . There would also not be a paper trail for the additional items, either.
 They were elsewhere during the strikes and had survived mostly intact . Thankfully, they were elsewhere in the country and survived the strikes .
 "We now have all the ordnance we could ever use set up to be delivered to Ft. Ft. E. Crippen, Virginia . We now have a lot of ordnance set up, delivered to the Fort Hill, Virginia, base .
 Americans will drive the UN out of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah . They are part of a new off-the-books taskforce of Americans who will eventually drive it out .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff don’t know it yet, but they’re not in command of the Armed Forces . They’ve been in charge of the U.S. Armed Forces since 2001 .
 "There’s a civil war brewing right now, Dad, and our quiet little town is getting famous as one of the last bastions of freedom," he says . "There's a Civil War brewing, Dad says. There’�s been no war, Dad.
 Native tribes like the Navajo are making sure that the UN can’t enter reservation lands pretty effectively . Some guy up in Utah is doing something similar up there, and the native tribes are making it harder .
 Whetstone is one of the principle rallying points for the Four Corners, Dad . Whetstones is a principle rallying point for the group .
 There are folks all over that want to know why it is that we are left alone for the most part, including Obama . Obama. Obama.
 Most of the forces he wants to pacify the Four Corners are getting into trouble before they leave Texas and Oklahoma . Truth is that most of those he wants pacified are getting in trouble before leaving Texas .
 The locals all over the country have brought back some time-honored traditions like tarringand-feathering . The locals are celebrating the return of tarring and gathering .
 The UN has its hands full rounding up the leaders of such rebellious acts and hanging them publicly . The UN says it has no idea how many of the leaders will be hung publicly .
 It was just a shame you couldn't get into West Point when you graduated from High School. "It was just the shame you can't get West Point," he said. "I'm not going to be able to go to West Point."
 He surrendered at Skeleton Canyon, located 30 miles northeast of the town of Douglas, a ways southeast of here on 80 .
 It seemed more than fitting in a way; the 2nd Revolutionary War would be fought by Apaches . The Apaches were the first Apaches to die in the Revolutionary War .
 With what little information he gave me, I couldn't tell if we'd ended up with a Brigade, Regiment or Division . With little information, he told me, it was not clear if we had ended up in a Brigade or Regiment .
 A Bird Colonel could command a Regiment or Brigade and a Brigade could be as large as 2 Regiments . Bird Colonel is a Bird Colonel who commands a regiment or Brigade .
 The reference to gold is because the Spanish were rumored to have hidden 2 tons of gold in a cave in Skeleton Canyon . The reference is because of the Spanish believed to have buried 2 tons in the cave in the area .
 It's a long way from Phoenix, so I guess it's not the source of the Dutchman's gold . The Dutchman has been in charge of the U.S. since 1984 .
 I'll be darned if I can remember the name of the mine, but when I was there they had a mining demonstration and a store where I bought a book about the Lost Dutchman Mine . "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm glad to see the
 The four corners are the junction of Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado . We were a fair distance from the four corners, but we're not at the corners .
 "I wouldn't go there anyway, they charged admission, $3 a head before the war. I wouldn't have gone there anyway," he says . "They charged admission to the war."
 The PowerBOSS 7000 has 8 years since it was purchased . The PowerBoss 7000 was a PowerBoss 8 years ago . It was the first time we've seen a new PowerBoss in 8 years .
 "Those were simple times, I only fired my rifle on the range and we only used the generator once a month for 15 minutes to exercise it," he says . "We only used it once a . month for a 15 minute exercise it"
 We hadn't burned any more calories doing that than we did sitting in the Den. We had burned more calories than we had sat in that place .
 Once upon a time, there was a mountain that represented the heart and soul of the U.S. Department of Defense . The mountain is now home to the National Guard .
 "After all those years in uniform I was used to someone telling me what to do from time to time," says former soldier . "I'm used to being told what I need to do," he says .
 I was used to the relative bliss of having a small area of responsibility compared to what I had now . I was also used to being used to having a relatively small area, compared to the job I was given now .
 Not one soldier to ever put on the uniform got through so much as a week of serving without thinking that he knew better than his officers . "Not one soldier never thought that he could do so much for himself," said the author .
 The Four Horsemen were the commanders of the groups assigned to the various areas leading up to and around Cheyenne Mountain . They were the commander of the various groups .
 Whitehorse 6, a screwball infantryman with nearly a full division of irregulars behind him, all from former Confederate states . In the north, Whitehorse . 6, was Whitehorse. 6 .
 From the west would come Redhorse 6, two brigades worth of Midwestern farmboys in heavy combat vehicles led by an old friend of mine, Matt Bogardus . From the east, Redhorse would be led by a pair of old friends from the Midwest .
 I knew him back when he wore three up and two down; now he wore a single star . "Now he wears one star. Now he wears three up, two down," he says .
 They would cut off everything from the east and set up their headquarters in Security, Colorado, Colorado . They would set up a headquarters in security, Colorado.
 "From the south, my new boss would lead the rest of Blackhorse up through Four Corners and Pueblo," he says . From the north, he would lead from the south up through four Corners, four miles from the town of Black Horse .
 Between the three forces, the foreign invaders that Obama was using to protect himself would be pinned against the Rampart Range . Obama would be using the 3 forces to keep his enemies at bay .
 Someone in Kalifornia managed to gather up some of the best warplanes ever built . Somehow, somewhere, someone in California managed to collect them .
 I’m talking about F22s, F-35s, B-2s, and that wild weasel version of the F-16s . I'm talking about the wild, weasel-like versions of the aircraft . The F-22s and B-
 They were assembled into a huge mega-group nicknamed Taskforce Death by some melodramatic idiot . The group was assembled by some idiot who assembled them into a mega-force .
 Behind them would follow several massive cargo lifters loaded to the gills with paratroopers from every airborne unit still in service . Behind them were several massive cargo lifts loaded with paratrooper from every airborne unit still in service .
 All five patches were supposed to be represented in the second half of Palehorse, nicknamed Taskforce Hell . Palehorse was supposed to have been named after the first half .
 Paratroopers would drop in on NORAD and penetrate the mountain after we isolated it . "Brave paratroopers" would drop into NORAD's airspace .
 Overall command was in the hands of what was left of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Overall command of the military is now under the control of what is left of what remains .
 Their callsign was Pentagon 6, but we were beginning to call them the Pens-are-gone 3 . The Pentagon is now known as the Pentagon 6 .
 I sometimes wondered if they had caught on that we were in the middle of one of these wars . For that matter, I sometimes wonder if they'd caught on . The United States is in a war of its own .
 The Pens-are-gone 3 did give us some crypto gear so that we could encode our radio traffic and a mountain of operational orders and acetate map overlays .
 I loaded the cryptographic sets into my SINCGARS radio and used the rest to start fires in burn barrels so that the men could warm themselves . The men were warm themselves, but the men were cold .
 One piece of this overblown plan I liked, but only from a point of honor, was the plan to keep it from being overblown . Now, one piece of the plan is one of the overblown plans .
 They were organized on the 13th of August 1943, sent to Europe in January of 1945, and sent right back home in August of August 1945 .
 The Black Cat Division never saw much of anything except for a regiment transferred in from the 82nd that never respected the rest of the soldiers in this hard luck division . The division was never respected by the other soldiers .
 The All-Americans and the Screaming Eagles laughed at their less storied cousins in the 11 th, 17th, and especially the 13th .
 The 82nd, 17th and 82nd paratroopers of the 82nd and 17th would make the first drop . The air assault divisions would also make the drop, followed by the air assault division .
 The 13th was a bunch of civilian skydivers and parasailing adrenaline junkies . Never mind the fact that the 13th is not a skydiver .
 The 2d Cavalry Division was reactivated as a backup plan . The braniacs had reactivated the 2d cavalry division .
 The 2d Cavalry was cursed by the permanent tan many of the members wore . The tan was due to be caused by a permanent tan .
 Originally organized with the 9th, 10th, and 11th Cavalry Regiments assigned, it finally gathered together all the Buffalo Soldiers into one division . The division was formed from Buffalo Soldiers in 1918 .
 "I was surprised only that they weren't used in some farcical mission, like Operation Human Shield or Operation Cannon Fodder," says author . "I'm not surprised that they were used only for a few missions," he says .
 The natives of the Plains tribes respected the tenacity and fighting ability of these soldiers for decades before that war . Yet the unit was never trusted to face actual combat as a division .
 These fellow soldiers had a deep pride and a burning need to redress past wrongs . They had a burning desire to redress their wrongs, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The Pens-are-gone 3 didn't know it, but they couldn’t have assembled a more unlikely bunch . The Pens are now in the midst of a difficult season .
 "I lined up my guys abreast of each other and told them to hold formation no matter what happened," says coach Mike Downey . Downey says he lined up with his players in formation 'No Matter what happened'
 We were the eastern flank of Blackhorse, so we had the most level terrain . We were able to work with the best terrain in the world, says author .
 In front of us we could see the Great Plains meeting the foothills of the Rockies . The Great Plains and foothills were met by the foothill of the Rocky Mountains .
 It was our job to make sure that nothing got between us and the southern flank of Redhorse until we linked up with them . Now it's our job: Make sure that they don't get between them and their southern flank .
 I reminded them that no job was unimportant but they wanted to see some action . I reminded me that 'no job is unimportant' was not unimportant, but they said they wanted action .
 "He was telling me that he saw something, and I wanted to know exactly what it was," she said . He was telling her that he had seen something and she wanted to find out .
 Echelon right formation is simply a diagonal line with the trailing edge on the right side . The formation is used in the Echlon Right formation . The Echloon right formation has been used in more than 50 years .
 I wanted to set up my lines so that we would hit them in the flank all at once, says Stuart Lancaster . "We wanted to hit them all together," he says of his side .
 "I brought up my binoculars and took a look over towards the reported position of the enemy," says the pilot . "I looked at the reports and looked over to see the enemy's reported position," he says . "It's a good sign that we're not going to
 It doesn't seem like a long time, but when you are waiting to kill someone, 2 minutes is an eternity . It doesn’t seem as long as long, but it’s an eternity. When you’re waiting for someone to die, it's an
 "The fire started immediately and burned its way through my senses to my stomach. The fire started instantly and burned my stomach," said the author of the book .
 Bill put the crosshairs on a tank and pressed the button again . The tank's $100,000 flashed in green under the crosshair . Bill put it on the tank again, and it flashed green .
 Bill pulled the trigger on that big gun, causing the breech to rock back about a foot and drop the brass from our first round . The first round dropped brass from the first round, and the second dropped the brass .
 Through his hearing protection I could hear the thunder of dozens of similar explosions . Through my hearing protection, I was able to hear the thud of the explosions .
 I kept my eye in the sight and toggled over so that I could designate the next target for Bill while he watched the round in . I kept his eye in .
 The big gun swung over to line up on the second target I had picked out . The gun swung into the air and the gun fired .
 "We cycled through the firing process four more times before I couldn’t find a new target," says the author . "I found a target in the middle of the firing line four times," he says . "It's not the first time I've been able to find
 I popped my head up and looked through my binos, taking a quick scan of the horizon . I popped his head up to look at the horizon. I popped up to take a photo of the sunrise .
 A hundred columns of smoke remained to mark the burning hulks that once were combat vehicles . The U.S. military says it has lost more than 100,000 of its combat vehicles in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 I could also just pick out the dismounted infantry as they finished ducking into the brush . "I could also pick out [the] dismounted [soldiers] as well as just pick up the dismounts," she said .
 The framers of the Constitution saw the possibility that someday, someone would take it into their head that they were Above the Law . The Constitution was designed to protect the Constitution from tyranny of the people .
 If government gets too big for its britches, the people have a means to resist tyranny, that's really what the 2nd Amendment is all about . I could quote a hundred sources, but they all say the same basic thing .
 Somewhere along the way, the country got too civilized for its own good and lead us down a path to destruction . "We're not going to be able to be civilized for our own good," says President Obama .
 The eastern world, it is exploding, it's exploding, the eastern world is exploding . Even the Jordan River has bodies floatin' But you tell me Over and over and over again, my friend Ah, you don’t believe We’re on the eve of destruction
 "My blood’s so mad feels like coagulatinatin' I’m sitting here just contemplatin’ I can’t twist the truth, it knows no regulation. Yeah, my blood's so mad," he says .
 This whole crazy world is just too frustratinin’ And you tell me Over and over and over again, my friend Ah, you don’t believe We’re on the eve of destruction. And marches alone can”t bring integration When human respect is
 Think of all the hate there is in Red China Then take a look around to Selma, Alabama . You can bury your dead, but don’t leave a trace . Hate your next-door neighbor, but . don't forget to say grace .
 On the right, a group called The Spokesmen released an answer record entitled The Dawn of Correction . On the left, the group released a record entitled "Dawn of Correction"
 A few months later, Barry Sadler released the patriotic Ballad of the Green Berets . The patriotic ballad was released by Sadler in 1964 .
 The song was banned by some radio stations in the USA as well as by the BBC and Radio Scotland . It was also banned by Radio Scotland and the BBC .
 Of all the tragedies in this tale, two stand out, WW III and the government's usurpation of power . Two of the tragedies stand out: WW III . The government is usurping power .
 "I'd like to thank Derek for his collaboration, especially on the military stuff," he says . "I'm not going to be surprised at the amount of work I've done," he adds .
 We started our preps; I only hope we have time to finish them before the world situation gets totally out of hand . We only hope to finish preps before the situation gets too out-of-hand .
 If you live in the country, you probably have a farm tank, but try putting in one of those in the PRK if you live a city . The PRK is the largest water tank in the world, with one in the city .