 Khrushchev asked the Cuban president Fidel Castro if he could plant the missiles there in the May before . The Soviet leader had asked for the missiles to be planted in Cuba in May, 1962 .
 Cuba had medium, and long ranged missiles that could easily reach the U.S.A, after more analysis they estimated the missiles could travel over 2,200 miles . Two days later the photos are analyzed and showed that Cuba has medium and long-range missiles .
 Three days after, president Kennedy speaks out to the nation and is carried live on televisions across the U.S.A, to inform the Americans that there are missiles found armed in Cuba, pointed directly towards America . Three days later, the president Kennedy tells the nation that missiles are
 He also orders that he has ordered a Navy quarantine to surround Cuba and orders the Soviets to remove and disarm the Missiles .
 Soviet ships that are heading toward Cuba are halted . As the debacle continues, now October 23rd, the ships are halted from Cuba .
 Khrushchev orders that the Soviet ships going to Cuba halt in the Atlantic Ocean close to America . The Soviet Union ships were ordered to stay close to the U.S. and close to Cuba .
 This makes sure that they don’t meet with U.S. Navy ships that surround the Caribbean Sea . This is the first time they have met with the United States Navy ships .
 Khrushchev refuses to remove long-range missiles from Cuba, blaming Kennedy and accuses him of putting the world at a nuclear risk . Kennedy was assassinated by the Soviet Union in June 1968 . Kennedy's assassination is the subject of much of the nation's greatest unsolved mystery .
 President Kennedy making little to no progress with Khrushchev . Kennedy commands flights over Cuba to be double as often as often . Kennedy orders pilots to begin night shifts to monitor Soviet missiles .
 Ex-Comm begins to plan to invade Cuba and take control over and dismantle the Soviet missiles . The USSR might not dismantle the deadly close Missiles from Cuba .
 October 27th Kennedy decides to not invade the Cuban territory . Khrushchev speaks out to say that he will remove the deadly missiles from Cuban territory, if President Kennedy agrees to not invading .
 Thirteen days after October 15th Khrushchev agreed to remove every missile under Soviet name in Cuba . The agreement was made 13 days after the Soviet Union agreed to take down every missile .
 Khrushchev speaks out on a radio station that the Soviet missiles will be dismantled and removed from Cuba . Cuba will not be invaded, and the crisis will come to an end, he says . The crisis will end in Cuba .
 The world escaped nuclear war in October 1962 mostly because of the cautious nature of Kennedy and Khrushchev . The world was spared nuclear war by the two leaders .
 A year later a telephone hotline was set up to sign a nuclear test ban between the two leaders . A year after a phone-in-persona hotline was signed up, the leaders signed a ban on nuclear tests .
 The U.S. and Cuban relations where irreparably damaged. You might be wondering how this whole catastrophe affected the locals . Well after the crisis United States and Cuba relations where .
 Relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were on a shaky ground after Khrushchev’s removal of the missiles . As well, relations between the two countries were on shaky ground for some time .
 The affect it had on everyone was the two weeks of anxiety that a nuclear war could break out at any time . The affect of the nuclear war was to be seen as a two-week period of anxiety .
 If it wasn’t to President Kennedy’s calm and cautious behavior the war could have ended very differently . President Kennedy's calm demeanor helped end the war in Vietnam .