 Some 3,400 unique records relevant to the crisis, totalling approximately 17,500 pages, are reproduced in the microfiche . The micro-fiche contains about 17,000 pages of micro-printable records .
 Much of the documentation focuses on U.S. decisionmaking during what Robert Kennedy called the “Thirteen Days” of the missile crisisfrom McGeorge Bundy’s October 16, 1962 briefing of President Kennedy on discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration made critical decisions during the Kennedy-era crisis . The set includes intelligence reports, diplomatic cables, political analyses, military situation reports, and meeting minutes .
 First, a focus on the missile crisis itself was necessary in order to guarantee the intellectual coherence of the set . First, the focus was necessary to guarantee a co-ordination of the series .
 The volume of documentation available on the Bay of Pigs and Berlin made it difficult to identify a usable number of key documents that could be extracted for inclusion in this collection . Second, the volume of . documentation available made it hard to identify .
 The dispute did not immediately end with the Soviet decision on October 28 to remove the missiles from Cuba . Contrary to many published accounts of the Cuban missile crisis, the dispute didn't immediately end .
 For three more weeks, tensions between the United States, Cuba, and the Soviet Union ran high over several unresolved issues . U.S., Cuba, Soviet Union, and Soviet Union were at odds for three weeks .
 Documents trace negotiations held in November 1962 over verification of missile withdrawal, the U.S. non-invasion”guarantee,” and the question of Soviet IL-28 bombers and troops remaining on the island . Documents in the collection trace negotiations .
 Documents in the set also cover the effect of the crisis on overall U.S. policy toward Cuba during the remainder of the Kennedy administration . The collection also covers the effects of the Cuban crisis on the United States .
 You may use it as a guide or sample for writing your own paper, but remember to cite it correctly . Remember to cite the paper correctly .
 In case you can't find a relevant example, our professional writers are ready to help you write a unique paper . Hi, my name is Amy .
 Just talk to our smart assistant Amy and she'll connect you with the best match . Amy is a self-proclaimed matchmaker who can help find the perfect match .