 The advantages often relate to greater and Canadian politics . insight into the intelligence process itself .
 The cyclical model, the target-centric model, and the multi-layered model, are three prominent Introduction models on offer . Each model is based upon a slightly different understanding of the intelligence profession .
 The relationship between policymakers, analysts, and collectors can be difficult to articulate . For one, the exact nature of weaknesses as a result of the relationship is difficult to explain . For another, the nature of the weaknesses in this relationship can be hard to articulate.
 The remainder of this article aims to test the usefulness of the highly interactive order of decisions, actions, and events these three models can be easily captured in ‘linear’ descriptions .
 This crisis demonstrates many of the conceptual challenges time, decisions, actions, and events can take place simultaneconfronting intelligence practitioners and scholars, making it an ously, or in reverse logical order .
 In turn, the fourth section situates the three intelligence models within this history to critically evaluate their respective merits . The fourth section of this section discusses the three models of intelligence .
 In light of these challenges, a number of intelligence models section serves as a short conclusion, restating the article’s main have been created to help grasp this complexity . The final section of this article concludes .
 None of the modfindings, and returning to the overall complexity of the intelligence els claims to completely or faithfully represent the intelligence profession . None of these claims to be accurate or accurate .
 Requirements, at the centre of the intelligence process, push other needs considerations to the periphery . Requirements at centre of intelligence process pushing other considerations to periphery .
 Planning, The target-centric approach has more promise for direction than the traditional cycle view . Planning, Planning,
 Though depicted as a cycle, the traditional process is in practice linear and sequential, 5.5.5 . The traditional process in practice is in place of a linear, sequential process .
 Analysis, whereas the target-centric approach is collaborative production 3.3. Analysis, is . Analysis . Analysis is . . Analysis, rather than the . target-centered approach, is collaborative . Production 3.4. Analysis .
 Its nonlinear analytic process allows participation by all stakeholders, so real insights into a problem can come from any knowl4.4. Its non linear analytic process is nonlinear .
 Involving customers increases the likelihood that the resulting intelligence will be used . Involveing customers makes it more likely that the intelligence is used, says CNN.com .
 The Cyclical Model them to) the value of an analytical approach to complex problems . The model is based on an analysis of complex problems in the world .
 The intelligence profession is very complex, centric model, but they speak directly to the perceived faults of the model . These are only some of the purported strengths of the targetA s . Intelligence Models in Theory .
 Clark’s view is that the target-centric critical actors involved in the intelligence process create greater appreciation for intelligence process policymakers, analysts, and collectors . Ultimately, it is Clark's view that the targeting-centric model creates greater appreciation of intelligence process .
 The different roles as a whole, including the distinct contributions of policymakers, performed by these actors, reflect their different nameanalysts, and collectors . The different role of these actors reflects the different contributions to policymakers .
 In this respect, policymakers set the overall objectives appearance when compared to the traditional cyclical model of the intelligence process and guide its workflows .
 The intelligence ‘product’ centric model aims to address some of the perceived destined for consumption by policymakers . Like the targetinterpreted by analysts, analysts, this model is based on the intelligence 'product'
 It attempts to make provision for ers, analysts, and collectors . Instead of making provision for collectors, it makes provision for analysts, collectors, collectors .
 Admittedly, such a pattern is not greater discretion and contingency within the intelligence process, ideal, failing to properly account for the inherently unequal noting decisions, actions and events can move in almost any direcstatuses between these three types of actors .
 U.S. Processing and Requirements Collection Exploitation Analysis Analysis Dissemination Consumption Intelligence Community. Americans. Americans, but it drew little initial concern from the intelligence community.
 Central Intelligence Director John McCone interpreted the presence of SAMs as part of a defensive system for offensive nuclear weapons . One notable exception to this general truth was that he interpreted SAMs to be an offensive system .
 A Special National Processing and Intelligence Estimate was issued on Requirements Collection Exploitation Analysis Dissemination Consumption 19 September 1962 .
 The Multi-Layered Model was designed by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s .
 SAMs can be used in real-world intelligence situations, however, is SAMs . SAMs could be used to send weapons to Cuba, but this decision had no direct connection to the applicability of the SAMs.
 This history is based on the writings of Raymond L Garthoff, who worked in the U.S. Department of Defense . He worked under the assumption that such weapons had been delivered .
 Soviet state of State as a special assistant for Soviet bloc affairs during the policy of glasnost allowed for greater openness, including the Crisis . Moreover, they never became aware of the presence of tactical nuclear weapons until the late 1980s .
 The history draws upon the writings of several release of previously secret government records to provide greater perspective . The history also draws upon . other authors to provide . greater perspective.
 Human reports failed to properly describe the missiles, and range missiles (which would have been necessary to deliver the they were provided before the actual delivery of missiles to Cuba nuclear warheads) in Cuba from Cuban refugees . Significantly, the majorof human reports with respect to the presence of Soviet long
 The Americans received two accurate reports towards the end of September, and they decided to investigate the matter further through the use of U-2 reconnaissance aircraft . Having said this,
 A desire to avoid offending the Soviets and poor weather conditions combined to delay the flights for two weeks . Poor weather conditions also delayed the flights by two weeks.
 The U.S. confirmed the construction of longrange missile sites in Cuba through the use of aerial photographs . The Americans finally confirmed the sites in October 1962 .
 They kept this knowledge secret for one week before announcing it publically to the world, then catching the Soviets off guard . The Soviets were caught off guard by one week . The U.S. kept this secret for a week .
 Kennedy issued two public warnings aimed at the Soviets on 4 September 1962 and 13 September 1962 respectively . Kennedy also issued a warning to the Soviet Union in September 1962 .
 The Soviet leadership did not heed the warnings, and they continued with the transportation of offensive weapons to Cuba and the construction of . offensive weapons delivery systems in Cuba . Nonetheless, the Soviet leadership didn't heed warnings .
 Two subsequent Special National Intelligence Estimates were issued on 19 October 1962 and 20 October 1962, after the discovery of offensive weapons delivery systems .
 These estimates did not vary greatly in detail, considering possible Soviet intentions and potential American responses . These estimates were based on the Soviet intentions of the Soviet Union .
 The two estimates ascribed an offensive purpose behind the Soviet’s actions . This led to a more aggressive stance from the Americans, which led to an aggressive stance .
 The National Security Council was also created at this time; its Executive Committee was led by the president . The National security Council was created in 1953 .
 The NSC and ExComm were meant to pool resources across the U.S. intelligence community . It is generally regarded as having succeeded in this respect at first .
 The Soviets did not anticipate a naval blockade by the Americans . They assumed that the Americans would simply accept the missiles as part of the ‘game,’ and that the existing presence of the missiles would force the Americans to accept their continuing presence .
 First, was aggressive in tone, and demanded withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . It demanded the withdrawal of The Soviet leadership, in particular, Premier Nikita Khrushchev, American missiles .
 The Americans were surprised by the sudden change of tone, such a response, and decided to ignore the second letter . In preparing their reply to the first considered 'running' the blockade, but ultimately decided against letter .
 The origin of the letters is often attributed to an unauthorized two main sides opened lines backchannel communication between Soviet embassy counselor of communication between each other, but the Americans also opened lines of communication .
 The Soviets were was instructed to make contact with the Americans by satelAmbassador Anatoly Dobrynin, who was not lite imaginary . The Cubans became aware informed of the Soviet plan to place missiles of the American’s contingency plans through in Cuba until after it became
 The positive response expressed Soviets and the Cubans took the American National Intelligence by Scali is read by many to have pushed the contingency plans to represent their actual Estimates . Soviets and Cubans were issued with further concessions .
 Khrushchev’s part to negotiate a settlement 20 October 1962, after the meaning the Soviets were already prepared on 28 October 1962 . Fomin's encounter led, in part, to the sudden willingness on on 19 October 1962 and Moscow in . time for the first letter, Kh
 Although this general discovery of offensive offensive to offer serious concessions, it is not the only one to offer more concessions .
 In response account of the conclusion to the Crisis is to the second letter, Scali met once again accurate, it glosses over several important weapons delivery systems with Fomin . Scali's response account is to a second letter .
 He was instructed events that took place between 22 October and 22 October in Cuba to offer a firmer message for the Soviets . This time, he was instructed to offer events that occurred in Cuba .
 Many now believe the message downplays some of the lingering issues that the Soviets and the Cubans to believe the were not resolved until much later . Likewise, it is this message that many now believe led downplays the issues .
 Two letters sent by Khrushchev aircraft around the same time only added to the sense of alarm on 26 October 1962 and 27 October 1962 . The fact that Soviet SAMs shot down a U-2 reconnaissance was also a cause of alarm .
 The idea of trading missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba, actually originated through parallel backchannel communiations . Khrushchev's first letter was conciliatory in tone, and it laid out many of the concessions that would form the final settlement .
 Reports reiterated the expectation of an immediate attack on Cuba . This may have led to greater confidence in the Soviet-Cuban camp . But subsequent reports reiterated the expectations of an attack .
 Such a sudden change in intelligence could have pushed the Soviets closer towards settlement . Even if the Cubans read it as cause for a pre-emptive attack, it could have been cause for an attack .
 As partial payment for their co-operation, the Cubans demanded that a small show of Soviet force remain in Cuba .
 The Soviet freighter Anosov leaving Cuba, 6 November 1962, was meant to act as a ‘tripwire’ in the event of any future American attack, and it went directly against the agreed upon settlement . This force of force left Cuba in 1962 .
 In fact, a small Soviet combat brigade of 2500 men remained in Cuba until their discovery in the summer of 1979, which caused a mini-crisis . The discovery of the Soviet-held Soviet weapons in Cuba caused a crisis in 1979 .
 The Soviets tried to exploit the difference between ‘offensive’ and ‘defensive’ weapons, but the Americans were generally effective in denying this difference . The Americans were able to deny this difference in their weapons .
 Other members of ExComm, apart from actions or actions, were not aware of these talks . ExComm did not discuss secret backchannel communications from the President .
 Any exchange of missiles was generally understood to be part of into their workflows . For this reason, between Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin, any exchange of missile exchange was understood to have been part of their work .
 Khrushchev may have misunderstood this cerns the generally-stated relationship between policymakers, point point, point, but the other major players were aware of it .
 Analysts may communicate with ligence actors at the beginning of the crisis, towards the end of that period to get a better sense of their needs . For example, collectors may communicate between the beginning and end of crisis .
 President Kennedy assumed sole ownership of the issue . Policymakers such as President Kennedy and Attorney General directly related to the American surveillance of Soviet missile sites .
 The cyclical model succeeds in recognizing hierarchy within actors . Collectors were actively phototothey began to actively perform the roles of analysts and collecgraphing the pace of construction .
 In this sense, the true nature of hierarchical power is not the intelligence process, but it arranges policymakers, analysts, properly captured by any of the models . "In this sense of power, it is not intelligence process but it is the power of policymakers and analysts," he says .
 Their general focus and collectors in a way that overstates their independence is overstated, they say . Their focus and collectivity are overstated in the way that they overstate their independence .
 As upon interactions between policymakers, analysts, and . analysts, policymakers enjoy the unique capacity to bypass tors . The degree to analysts and collectors, or to unilaterally . this relationship is truly interactive depends upon policymakers .
 Cyclical model fails to incorporate outside events or autonomy over the other the cyclical model, the target-centric model actions . This is problematic for the reasons already and it overstates the reciprocal nature of intelligence process .
 The same model also suggests the intelligence process, albeit in greater an overly linear process in that instructions excess excess .
 A cursory glance at the model would proceed unidirectionally from policymaksuggests a nearly equal, symbiotic relation to analysts and collectors .
 Such a depiction ignores the reality ship between policymakers, analysts, and collectors, but actual of interaction between these three actor types . The reality ship is between policymakers and analysts, analysts and collectors .
 To impose clear meanings upon highly fluid and oftentimes centric model presupposes that a clear intelligence target already ambiguous workflows . Second, the targetto impose clear . meanings upon . highly fluid . often . often fluid and often centric . model . presupposes . that the intelligence target
 This was not the case with respect to the Cuban Missile of presenting a linear account of the intelligence process and of Crisis. This was . This is not the . case of presenting an . linear account . of the . intelligence process . and of crisis.
 The American government scrambled to build such a target-centric model after it became known that the Soviets were building long-range targets in Cuba . The U.S. government is guilty of both these faults, in addition missile sites in Cuba.
 The multi-layered model is guilty of being overly complex . The importance of long-term, forward to overemphasizing the availability of advanced knowledge should be emphasized . The target-centric model may . reflect an expectation that is set too high .
 Given the overall complexity of the intelligence other hand, the target-centric model allows for greater interaction profession, this ‘fault’ of the multi-layered model is actually among policymakers, analysts, and collectors than the cyclical model .
 Multi-layered model represents a highly complex account of the titioners and scholars intelligence process . Although it is far from an ideal heuristic, it appears to be the best heuristic .
 While this might seem like a fault, it actually serves to positively distinguish the model . The car is a $1,800 model with a price tag of $2,800 .
 The multi-layered model, for instance, allows for interaction between policymakers, analysts, and collectors in myriad ways . It injects a critical sense of discretion and contingency into the intelligence process .
 Taken together, the the the secrets of the world would still be secrets to me, I say . Taken together the secrets would still remain secrets to the world, he says .
 Lowenthal, 69, says intelligence process demonstrates 7.5% of intelligence . Lowenthal: Intelligence process is based on fact that intelligence process itself demonstrates 7% of the world's intelligence .
 An analyst can perform the role of a collector and vice versa, but the target-centric model, and the multi-layered model, is more important than a collector .
 In pursuneither can't perform the role of a policymaker without first being given the authority of the policymaker . In this case, he said: "In pursunehere can perform the . role of . a policymaking without first having the authority to do so."
 This point relates to the leading position of the U.S. in the world of intelligence . The Cuban government has been criticized for its policies in the past .
 To some extent, all the models encountered expanded discussion on the true relationship between these three actor types in difficulty incorporating outside events or actions into the intelligence profession .