 October Fury contains startling revelations . The most spectacular display of brinkmanship in the Cold War era . Tom Clancy's film October Fury will be released in October 2015 .
 In October 1962, President Kennedy risked inciting a nuclear war to prevent the Soviet Union from establishing missile bases in Cuba . The Cuban missile bases were a key part of the Cuban plan .
 October Fury uncovers startling new information about the Cuban missile crisis . The risk, however, was far greater than Kennedy realized . October Fury: The risk of a confrontation between U.S. Navy destroyers and Soviet submarines in the Atlantic was greater .
 A single shot fired by any U.S. warship could have led to an immediate nuclear response from Soviet submarines . Peter Huchthausen, who served as a junior ensign aboard one of the destroyers, reveals that a single shot by any . U.K.
 If I take the wings of the morning And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, Even there your hand will lead me . Read an Excerpt Prologue of the novel .
 Khrushchev was caught in the act of secretly deploying nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles to Fidel Castro's Cuba . The confrontation came after Soviet premier Nikita S Khrushche was caught secretly deploying the missiles .
 The showdown with the Soviet Union nearly led to an exchange of tactical nuclear weapons at sea between ships and submarines of the opposing navies . What is not widely known is that the showdown led to a nuclear weapons exchange .
 This account is based on the recollections of men who had their fingers on the triggers . It's based on recollections from men who were on the trigger at the time .
 Items from the files have been selectively released by the government of the Russian Federation . Items from these files were selectively released .
 Only in the event of a landing of the opponent's forces on the island of Cuba and if there is a concentration of enemy ships with landing forces near the coast of Cuba, in its territorial waters . You are personally allowed as an exception to take the decision to apply the tactical LUNA
 General Anatoly Gribkov, who was chief of operational planning on the Soviet General Staff in 1962, stated during a Cuban crisis reunion hosted by Fidel Castro in 1992 that Luna missiles with nuclear warheads had already been provided .
 Four submarines sent as the advance brigade to make its home port in Cuba were equipped with tactical nuclear-tipped torpedoes . They were given the same authority to use them if an attack by U.S. ships appeared imminent .
 The Cuban missile crisis and its outcome provide a classic study of the successful use of diplomacy backed by superior sea power . It provides a classic case of the success of diplomacy and the use of sea power backed by diplomacy .
 The Soviet Navy was operating in unfamiliar waters with inferior naval forces and without air support . It was operating with inferior forces and with no air support.
 Khrushchev faced a choice between hostilities and certain defeat, or withdrawal and a major diplomatic setback . The advantageous naval position enabled the U.S. to take advantage of the situation .
 The major reversal for the Soviet leader eventually resulted in his political defeat and forced retirement . The Soviet leader was forced to retire after a major reversal .
 The confrontation was a pivotal moment for the Soviet fleet, leading to resumption of an aggressive naval construction program, which continued until the implosion of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 By that time the USSR had achieved status as the world's largest and second most powerful navy . The USSR had become the most powerful and largest navy in the world .
 Historians and command and control experts have pondered the Cuban missile crisis in great depth . Historians have also offered new analysis .
 In 1992, surviving senior decision makers from the three sides met in Havana and Moscow for reunions and roundtable critiques . During the thirty-year anniversary observations of the Cuban episode in 1992, a number of surviving senior officials met in Cuba and Moscow .
 The situation came even closer to a nuclear exchange than the U.S. or the Soviet Union realized . New information revealed at those gatherings confirmed that the situation came closer than the United States or Soviet Union thought .
 Escalation to a nuclear exchange might have resulted in grave injury to the U.S., but it certainly would have led to disastrous Soviet defeat . Escalating to a nuke exchange would have been disastrous for the United States, author says .
 The results of the crisis had a profound impact on subsequent overall Soviet military policy as well as the naval construction program . The results were a profound influence on subsequent military policy .
 The Soviet Navy before the Cuban confrontation consisted of twenty-five conventional cruisers, fewer than one hundred destroyers, and large numbers of small combatants . The Cuban confrontation took place in the 1960s .
 It also included more than three hundred diesel-powered submarines . More than half of the submarines were long-range attack boats .
 Until 1962, Soviet naval forces were seldom deployed far from home waters . The Soviet naval force was rarely deployed beyond the borders of Russia .
 The Cuban confrontation served as a dramatic arena where the United States Navy, for the first time since World War II, looked seriously into the eyes of a genuine naval opponent . The U.S. Navy, however, was capable of inflicting serious damage .
 Until this point the Soviet Navy had confined its operations to supporting the massive Soviet ground army in Europe and Asia . The Soviet Navy was largely focused on supporting the Soviet ground forces in Asia and Europe .
 For many years the Soviets had dreamed of becoming a naval power . However, for many years, they had hoped to become a major naval power.
 Gorshkov was father of the modern Soviet Navy . He was twice Hero of the Soviet Union and Admiral of the Fleet . Gorskkov was the son of Peter the Great .
 Gorshkov, who joined the navy at age seventeen, became an admiral at age thirty-one . He served for twenty-seven years as its commander in chief, presiding longer and through more significant changes than any other Soviet naval leader . Gorshov joined the Soviet navy at
 He emerged from the war as one of the few senior Soviet naval heroes, mostly due to his actions during the campaign in Odessa on the Black Sea and as commander of the Danube River Flotilla .
 The Russian navy emerged from the war as a nearly intact but small force commanded by the popular Admiral Nikolai G Kuznetsov . The war ended in a victory for the Russian navy .
 In the aftermath of the sinking, Khrushchev summarily removed and demoted Kuznetsov, elevated war hero Gorshkov to commander in chief . The investigation into the causes for the sinking remains a major controversy in Russia .
 Khrushchev directed the disposal of many large surface warships and a halt to their further construction . The decision was made to halt the construction of many more large surface ships .
 Navy surface ships are good only for carrying heads of state on official visits . They have outlived their time. They have been used to carry heads of states .
 This year we have destined practically all cruisers to the scrap heap . This year's cruisers are destined to be the most of the world's most expensive .
 Khrushchev stopped the aggressive heavy cruiser construction projects in midcourse . The heavy cruiser was the first heavy cruiser to be built in the Soviet Union .
 He redirected naval thinking to a defensive strategy anchored on a strong submarine force . A surface fleet was restricted to coastal defense on the flanks of a massive ground army . The U.S. naval strategy was designed to counter the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev sought to cut costs of new military construction while still retaining a gigantic land force . The Soviet Union sought to reduce costs of construction while retaining a huge land force.
 The navy cuts had been accompanied by a debate on the value of a conventional surface navy dominated by cruisers . The cuts had led to a controversial debate on value of the navy .
 The large diesel attack submarine construction program also was reduced and deferred in favor of building nuclear and missile submarines with more sophisticated capabilities . Large diesel attack submarines were also reduced to a more sophisticated submarine .
 Gorshkov led the transformation of the Soviet fleet into a powerful navy of the nuclear era . He presided over the creation of the new navy chief, Gorshov, in the 1950s and 1960s . He was one of Russia's most powerful naval chiefs .
 He proceeded with the disposal of obsolete battleships and older cruisers following Khrushchev's dictum, and stopped the new all-gun cruiser building plans .
 The pattern of the enormous loss of life aboard Novorossysk would haunt the Soviet Navy as they launched unprecedented numbers of submarines and modern, lighter, and missile-equipped surface ships in the race to become the world's largest navy .
 The stampede into the nuclear power arena resulted in scores of serious accidents aboard their prototype classes of submarines . The first nuclear submarine submarine was built in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev reproached Admiral Gorshkov during the height of the Cuban crisis in 1962 . The Russian navy searched frantically for appropriate escorts for their merchant ships being challenged en route to Cuba .
 Khrushchev denied not only that he had given the order to destroy all surface combatants but that he ever knew about the sinking of battleship Novorossysk or that he knew of the sacking of Admiral Kuznetsov .
 Operation Anadyr took place in 1962 when the Soviet Union launched its secret operation . This was the first time it had taken place in a Soviet state of secrecy . The Soviet Union was behind a series of secret operations against the West .
 Carrier Randolph Finds Savitsky's B-59 . Atlantic Datum.Atlantic Datum . Atlantic .
 In the fall of 1962, Huchthausen was a junior navy officer on the USS Blandy, a Forrest Sherman class destroyer . He and his fellow crew members were center stage during the Cuban missile crisis .
 The submarines were equipped with nuclear-tipped torpedoes . They had been given secret orders to use those new and virtually untested weapons if American forces attacked .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union came close to an exchange of tactical nuclear weapons . That set of circumstances came very close to leading to a nuclear war .
 Huchthausen details the story of what happened in those waters in this riveting account . Based on his own experience and extensive interviews he conducted with former Soviet submariners and former shipmates .
 Capt. Edward G Kelley, the Blandy's quixotic but experienced commanding officer, was killed by a fireman . Capt. Kelley was the first Blandy to die in the Navy . The Blandy was a World War II submarine .
 Rear Adm. Nikolai Shumkov, who courageously and conscientiously commanded one of the four Soviet subs in Cuban waters, was killed in Cuba in the Soviet Union's invasion of Cuba in 1961 . Rear Adam. Shumk, who commanded the sub, was
 Leonid F Rybalko, another veteran naval officer, countermanded dangerous orders from his superiors . He paved the way for a peaceful denouement of the tense confrontation .
 Nicely balanced between operational and analytical material, this account should satisfy action-seeking lay readers and buffs, says author .
 John F Kennedy: The Great Crises, recount the harrowing diplomatic parrying betwetn President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev to avoid nuclear war .
 Huchthausen tells the lesser-known but no less frightening story of the Soviet and U.S. sailors sent to Cuba to be the nuclear tripwire . He tells the tale of the Cuban sailors who were sent to be nuclear tripwitches .
 The author was a young ensign aboard the USS Blandy, assigned to stop Soviet ships from delivering weapons to Cuba . He was assigned to make sure that the missiles were ultimately removed .
 Much of the book is about Operation Anadyr, the Soviet deployment of missiles and troops to Cuba . The book is based on the Soviet invasion of Cuba in 1959 .
 Riveting details include hazards of Soviet submarine travel-which entailed dangerous storms, lack of food and fresh water, loss of oxygen, and inescapable diesel fumes . Nuclear war was narrowly avoided by the quick thinking of United States and Soviet captains .
 Unlike the Americans, the Soviet officers had prior authorization to launch nuclear-tipped missiles from their submarines . Unlike the U.S. officers, they had prior approval to launch missiles from submarines .
 The book is tinged with humorous anecdotes, and Huchthausen succeeds admirably in portraying sympathetically the sailors who would have been the first to die if war had been declared . The book, published in Germany, is published in the UK and Australia .
 This book will appeal to history buffs and to fans of espionage fiction . This book is highly recommended for public libraries .