 The Cuban missile crisis has assumed significance . David Welch: The crisis has assume significance . He says the crisis has taken on significance .
 Dean Rusk called it ""the the the the world has ever seen,"" the only ti superpowers came ""eyeball to eyeball" called it the ""Gettysburg of the Cold Winger, Jr., it was ""the finest hour"" of the a moment of maximum
 Many people believe that the mi 1962 represents the closest point that t nuclear war may have been reached .
 Since the Cuban missile crisis remains the only nuclear crisis we have experienced, it remains the great laboratory in which to study the art of crisis management . It remains a great place to study crisis management, writes David Frum .
 This disagreement was brought into sharp focus at a recent meeting of scholars and former members of the Executive Committee of the Na tional Security Council . The group convened by President Kennedy to advise him on the matter of the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Blight and Welch are currently working on a book on the Cuban missile crisis .
 The authors wish to express their thanks to the Carnegie Corporation and the Alfred P Sloan Foundation . They wish to thank them for their work .
 But we should also be wary of drawing generalizations that ignore important ways in which the world has changed, that cannot be supported by evidence from a single crisis .
 The German leadership in 1914 had expected a repeat of Russia's backdown in the Bosnian crisis of 1909 . The German leaders in 1914 were expected to expect a repeat .
 They found themselves broiled in the costliest war mankind had yet seen . Instead, they found themselves em broiling in the most expensive war ever seen .
 Retain civilian control and beware of the limited outlook of the military, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 This list reflects a large measure of the common wisdom of classical diplomacy . The successful resolution of the crisis is prima facie evidence of its validity . The list reflects the wisdom of Classical diplomacy .
 More forceful action would have led to at least as desirable an outcome, hawks say . But the history of the missile crisis has not given the hawks a chance to vindicate their view .
 Perhaps the United States did hold all the cards and could have acted more forcefully, even with impunity . Perhaps the U.S. did hold a lot of the cards .
 The nuclear balance, rather than the quarantine or world opinion, had been primarily responsible for the resolution of the crisis . The latter sort of list might have had some validity .
 No one can resolve the controversy over the importance of the nuclear balance in 1962 . The U.S. nuclear balance was the focus of the debate in 1962.
 History is an imperfect laboratory, and there were too many causes of the outcome of the missile crisis for any single factor to be definitive . History is imperfect laboratory and history is not definitive .
 In the dispute between hawks and doves lies a series of important lessons for future policymakers and future crisis managers . But in the . explana tion of the dispute . of the . dispute lies in the lessons of future . policymakers and crisis managers.
 Several key factors which heavily influenced the outcome of the event heavily influenced its conduct and outcome . The hawks and doves have held such different views of the world's most recent events .
 At the ti crisis, ExComm members assigned different weigh risk and tended to favor a particular course of actioni ingly . At the time of the crisis,
 ExComm members of the ExComm fell into three main catego hawkish options in the missile crisis . The options included an air strike on the missile bases or a of the island or both air strikes .
 Dovish views implied wishing any use of military force, even a naval quaranti willingness to . resolve the crisis by ""trading" Americ missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 In shorthand, hawks were traders, doves were traders; "owls" were persuaders . In shorthand they were hawks and doves . hawks are traders; owls are persuaders; doves are traders .
 The fact that Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles were ""soft"" and required con siderable time to prepare for launch made them extremely vulnerable to an American first strike, and seemed to shorten the Soviet fuse . The fact . that Soviet intercontinental missile was "soft"
 Crisis stability and the importance of assuring command and control were sources of concern to the owlish group . Crisis stability was a source of concern for the group, according to the group .
 I was so sure we had 'em over a barrel, I never worried much about the final outcome, but what things might happen in between . I was never worried about the outcome of the game, but about what might happen next .
 Some of the civilians do recall worries about the time of that second Saturday . "Worries that really run to two or three steps up the ladder of escalation"
 "It's the nature of some people if they can't have a legitimate worry, they create them," he says . It's not just a worry, he says. It's a problem for some people, he adds .
 "If he was irrational, I still expected his colleagues to look after him," she said . "I still expected him to be looked after by his colleagues," she added .
 Taylor's analysis is remarkable about how wedded it is to the classical ""rational actor"" model of decision-making . What is remarkable is that Taylor is wedded to the 'rational actor' model .
 If all partic ipants could be counted on to act rationally and there were no accidents or mistakes, Taylor would probably have been correct about the low level of risk .
 Several members of the ExComm lieved from the start of the crisis that military action against the Soviet bases in Cuba carried little risk of retaliation . Several members, including Taylor, Dean Acheson, Douglas Dillon, John McCone and Paul Nitze, were lieved that action against
 The United States held all the cards, the only question was how great was the fall that the Soviets were bound to take . The U.S. held all of the cards; the question was "How great is the fall"
 With a tougher response Kennedy could have removed Castro as well as the missiles . Some still hold this view, and they have been joined by like-minded scholars and publicists .
 Many in this hawkish group believe at the same time that the crisis holds no significant lessons for today . But many in this group believe that today's crisis has no lessons to be learned .
 In their view, the reason why the Soviets capitulated, agreeing to withdraw the missiles from Cuba, was the overwhelming American superiority at the strategic nuclear level, they say .
 The missile crisis is thought to be no more relevant to present concerns than, say, the Peloponnesian Wars . Strategic superiority is believed to have been funda mental to the outcome of the crisis .
 All were concerned to avoid setting a precedent whereby the Soviets believed they might deceive the U.S. and then escape unpunished when caught in the lie .
 Soviet SS-4s and SS-5s were in stalled in Cuba . Others were concerned more with what they regarded as the real and substantial military significance .
 The correct interpretation of the significance of the missiles, according to the hawks, was that the Soviets in a preemptive strike could destroy only a tiny fraction of the U.S. strategic forces . They could destroy perhaps as much as 40 percent of the Strategic Air Command bomber force,
 The hawks were very concerned about the risks involved in what they regarded as the foot-dragging aspects of a quar antine . Finally, the hawks also expressed concern about the risk of a quarry antine being dug up .
 The missiles were discovered before they became op erational and ought to be destroyed before they were made ready to fire . The missiles should not have been made ready for fire .
 The hawks favored an immediate air strike aimed at taking out the Soviet missile sites in Cuba . They believed U.S. conventional and stra tegic superiority would nullify any Soviet response .
 President Kennedy and most of his inner circle seem to have had a more expansive view of the risks involved . President Kennedy's administration seems to have been more cautious about the risks .
 Taylor and the other hawks seem to have felt a fear of inadvertent nuclear war that was not shared by Taylor . But more than that, they seemed to have feared accidental nuclear war . The U.S. has never seen a nuclear war since the first Gulf War .
 It would have been perfectly natural for the hawks not to feel this apprehension if they did not take the risks of inad vertence seriously . The hawks are not the only hawks to be nervous, they are also the ones to be anxious .
 Those who felt the fear of inadvertent nuclear war most keenly approached the crisis not merely as advisers offering their opinions, but as people who felt that they shared the president's responsibility to get missiles out of Cuba without catastrophe .
 This sense of responsibility, the resulting heightened sensitivity to the risks of inadvertence, and the associated fear seem to have reinforced each other and to have had a powerful cautionary effect on the ExComm's choices of action throughout the crisis .
 Together, these consid erations go a long way toward explaining the way in which the crisis was eventually resolved . Together, the crisis in Iraq was resolved .
 With pressure mounting, the president sent his brother Robert to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The Soviets seem to have interpreted the offer as the final American offer to resolve the crisis peacefully . The U.S. president sent Robert's brother to the ambassador .
 General Taylor arrived with news that an American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba . General Taylor arrives with news of the shooting down of the U.2 .
 Meeting with the president, in cluding Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, Rusk, McNamara, Bundy, Bundy and Llewellyn Thompson . Meeting with president .
 Robert Kennedy: "At first, there was almost unanimous agree ment that we had to attack early the next morning with bombers and fighters and destroy the SAM sites" According to Robert Kennedy, "At first there were almost unanimous agreed that we . had to . attack early . morning with
 Robert Kennedy told Dobrynin that the U.S. would pledge publicly not to invade Cuba if the Soviets agreed to begin withdrawing the missiles immediately . Kennedy: "The United States would pledge to withdraw the missiles if they were withdrawn immediately"
 He also said privately that U.S. mis siles were going to come out of Turkey, any event .
 He took to the airwaves to accept the offer immediately after receiving the offer .
 There remains a great deal of disagreement among the former members of the ExComm on whether Robert Kennedy ""traded"" the missiles in Turkey, on whether he had given the Soviets an ultimatum .
 McNamara resists the idea that Robert Ken nedy actually threatened the Soviets with an air strike and an invasion . Dillon, Nitze and Taylor have all expressed confi dence in interviews that President Kennedy would have or dered the air strike .
 Dean Rusk provided new information to the Hawk's Cay conference indicating that the president had not yet abandoned the option of a public trade of American missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . Rusk said the president did not yet abandon the option .
 Mr Cordier was to put that statement in the hands of U Thant only after a further signal from us. Mr Cordiers said he would only put it in the . hands of the U.S. government only after further signal was given .
 Mr Cordier's statement has never seen the light of day. That step was never taken and the statement I furnished to him has never been seen by the public, he says .
 President Kennedy, Andrew Cordier and I were the only ones who knew of this particular step . "So far as I know, President Kennedy ... and I was the only one who knew about it," she says .
 As McGeorge Bundy pointed out to the meeting at Hawk's Cay, this step does not necessarily mean that a policy of trading missiles would have resulted . Bundy pointed to the fact that this step would not have resulted.
 We will never know what President Kennedy would have done had Khrushchev not responded favorably to his last proposal . President Kennedy may have vetoed the proposal, but it is not known what he would have chosen .
 He laid the groundwork for a public trade indicates he was concerned about the possible unintended consequences of extending the crisis, or of an imminent air strike .
 Each group's exposure to the other's views led to polarization and discord, rather than convergence and consensus . It is striking how little the hawks were concerned with these risks, says Julian Zelizer .
 As the owlish option of the quarantine began to look like a failure, the hawkish and dovish options looked like the only viable alternatives . The debate in the ExComm became bitter, tempers flared and positions hard eneded .
 The risks of the hawkish and dovish options were successfully avoided . But the owls were vindicated, and the risks were ultimately vindicated . The risk of a hawk and a dove was avoided .
 The trade was made, though privately, and the invasion, though threatened, never occurred . The invasion never occurred, though .
 When we suggest that the trade was made ""privately,"" we recognize that this is a figure of speech describing an action which was of no use to Soviet public diplomacy . It is important to recognize that the strategy adopted by the 9 was not intended to be used in public .
 The Administration's intention was to help Khrushchev justify the settlement to his opposition in the Politburo and the military . But in conveying to the Soviets the information that the Jupiters in Turkey were scheduled for removal, the Administration seems to have been to help justify the
 The prevailing opinion in the ExComm was that there were dangerous risks in relative inaction and also in direct and decisive military action . The prevailing view is that there are dangerous risks of relative inaction .
 The dovish position, exemplified first by Adlai Steven son, held that military action was just too risky because of the danger of provoking a superpower war, perhaps even a nuclear holocaust . The military action is too risky to provoke superpower war .
 Hawks saw dangers, political and military, only in the continued presence of the missiles in Cuba . Hawks, as we have illustrated, saw dangers only in continuing presence of missiles . Hawks saw the dangers of the missile presence in Cuba only in its continued presence .
 The naval quarantine represented an owlish attempt to reconcile the partial truths contained in the options favored by hawks and doves . The quarantine was an attempt to reconcil the options of hawks, doves and hawks .
 If one assumes that there were indeed risks in both action and inaction, the resolution of the crisis must be seen as a masterpiece of owlish diplomacy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If forced, the president would have chosen to run the political risk of a trade rather than the risk of an inadvertent nuclear war, the authors say . This approach recognizes a wide variety of risks; because it provides a safety net right up until the end, they say .
 President Kennedy had decided he was not going to initiate war over the missiles in Cuba, but that he would do his utmost to get them removed with the least political cost . In short, we believe that President Kennedy .
 Before, during and at the conclusion of the missile crisis, American leadership was perplexed by the question of S.S. intentions . IV IV . IV .
 The professed confusion added measurably to fearfulness as the crisis wore on . It was the first time the government had been involved in the crisis .
 None in the president's inner circle had predicted the em ment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Of all the ExComm memb none predicted the launch of the Soviet missiles .
 Most of the members inner circle expected a dramatic Soviet countermane probably around Berlin . Once the quara line was in place on October 24, most of the . inner circle expect a dramatic . Soviet counter-mane .
 Some reacted to the first letter with fear that Khrushchev had ""lost his cool,"" and thus might begin to think irrationally and act impulsively in ways that would deepen the crisis . Some, like Dean Rusk, reacted with fear .
 Others feared Khrushchev might no longer be in charge and that the Soviet military or hardliners in the Politburo had assumed command . Others, like George Ball, recall reacting to the second letter with dismay . Ball: "It was a shock to see what had happened to the
 Few of those who knew of Robert Kennedy's message to Dobrynin expected that the Soviets would agree to the American offer . When the ExComm broke up on the evening of October 27, few of those on the night of the offer were expected .
 The Soviets agreed to the U.S. terms immediately, enthusiastically and without reservation . Yet not only did they agree to the American terms, they did so immediately . The Soviets did so without reservation.
 President Kennedy and his closest advisers found the Soviets almost entirely inscrutable . From the discovery of the missiles to the agreement securing their removal, President Kennedy's closest advisers had found them inscruble .
 Understanding one's adversary is crucial to managing a conflict, as every stage of the Cuban missile crisis illustrates . Understanding your adversary is key to managing your own country's interests, experts say . Understanding each other's adversaries is crucial in managing a war .
 President Kennedy's public warnings to the Soviets not to deploy offensive weapons in Cuba committed the two countries to a showdown once such missiles were discovered . The two countries faced a showdown in Cuba once such a missile was discovered .
 The line between offensive and defensive weapons was drawn in September, and it was not drawn in a way which was intended to leave the Soviets any ambiguity to play with .
 I say that believing very strongly that that would have been an act of prudence, not weakness, is a strong statement . I say I believe very strongly . That would be a very strong statement of support for the U.S. government, he says .
 The line was drawn at zero was because we simply thought the Soviets weren't going to deploy any there anyway . But I am suggesting that one reason the line was . was because of the Soviets . We simply thought . that we . simply thought they weren't . going to . deploy any
 Kennedy's warnings were too late; the Soviet decision to deploy had been made months before . The relevant machinery had been set in gear, and the relevant machinery was in place .
 It is striking that few outside the intelligence community and none in President Kennedy's inner circle seem to have given any serious thought as to why the Soviets might deploy until after the missiles were discovered .
 The most important dimension of knowing one's enemy is knowing his view of a crisis and what is at stake . This largely determines which strategies are appropriate and effective, and which are not .
 If the adversary sees it as a zero sum game for which he is willing to take great risks to avoid a loss, then the interaction needs to be handled differently than would be the case if he saw it as something stumbled into by mistake or through stupidity . Both sides must extricate
 In these two cases, the same strategies would elicit very different responses and would carry with them very different risks . In both cases, these strategies would be very different .
 The 'adversary' may be a contentious group whose internal balance shifts over the course of the crisis . To make matters even more prob lematic, the ""adversaries"" may be contentious group .
 The quarantine option, and the owlish approach to the Cuban missile crisis, was successful largely because it provided the flexibility that enabled the Administration to ""learn"" about its adversary as the crisis progressed .
 President Kennedy expressed increasing curiosity about Khrushchev's personality . Bundy recalls that as the missile crisis wore on, Kennedy expressed interest . Bundy: Kennedy expressed concern about the ways this man might interact with the Soviet system .
 Other experts consulted directly or indirectly included Foy Kohler, Ray Cline, Raymond Garthoff and Averell Harriman . The book was published in 1998 . It is published by The Century Century Foundation .
 Kennedy's administration learned so much about the Soviet Union and its leaders during the Cuban missile crisis . Perhaps in no other two-week period has any American administration learned more about Soviet Union than Kennedy's .
 It is difficult to discover exactly what Thompson did or said to warrant the verdict that his contribution was heroic . Thompson's contribution to the U.S. was heroic, but it's difficult to find out exactly what it was .
 Thompson was certainly not a member of the president's inner circle; he seems to have spoken relatively infrequently at ExComm meetings . Former ExComm members have few concrete recollections of anything in particular he said or did during the crisis .
 It seems clear that whatever Thompson's role may actually have been, the portrayal of him as an almost infallible index of the ""Russian soul" must be related to the feeling among most of the other ExComm members that, in this most tense and dangerous confrontation, they themselves knew next
 Thompson is credited with the success of his efforts to deal with the crisis in Iraq . The crisis has since been resolved and Thompson has been credited with his success .
 Presi dent Kennedy and his closest associates found themselves constantly mystified by the Soviets . In retrospect the single member of the group who claimed famil iarity with the Soviet Union is given credit for being the hero, the absolutely indispensible man .
 Some degree of mystery about the Soviet side is likely to be a feature of any superpower crisis, says CNN's John Defterios . Some of the mystery about Soviet side will likely be likely to remain a mystery, he says .
 Kennedy is reported to have believed at t of fighting between U.S. and Soviet for out of three and fifty-fifty . He believed the fighting would be out of 50-50 .
 The Soviets should have been able to do much more than they could have done, barring unforeseen complications . The Soviet Union should have done more than anything else, the author says .
 Some of the participants at Hawk's Cay that the chances of a war that could e exchange were more like one in fifty . The chances of war were more than one in 50, participants say .
 We find little reason to fault the cour President Kennedy and his advisers . Likewise, since the proof is prim we find little . reason for faulting Kennedy and advisers .
 The next crisis is not likely to be as easy as the Cuban missile crisis . Whatever one's view of the past, the next crisis will not be as "easy" as it was .
 At the nuclear level, we no longer have superiority (whatever difference that may have made) and there is little prospect that the Soviets will allow us to regain it . At the nuke level, the U.S. no longer has superiority, and there are little prospects that it will
 "Our international political standing and ur ability to win the backing of the United Nations, the Organization of the American States and NATO have diminished," says President Obama .
 After Vietnam and Watergate there seems slight prospect of preserving secrecy for a week of careful consideration of the options, as Kennedy was able to do . After Vietnam, Watergate, it seems that after that, there is slight prospect .
 The system of nuclear deterrence has become much more complex, the author says . Moreover, the system has become more complex .
 In some ways the weapons are better protected than they were in 1962, but the numbers have grown and so has the complexity of command and control systems . The weapons are now better protected in some ways, but they are also more complex .
 Finally, the Soviet Union is changing, but we will never be sure what that means in a crisis . The Soviet Union has changed, but it's not clear what it means in an emergency .
 Robert Kennedy's list of lessons looks even more perceptive than it appeared at the time . Given these considerations, Robert Kennedy was even more prescient than he appeared, he said .
 Perhaps the first lesson of an updated list would be the importance of avoiding superpower nuclear crises . The first lesson would be to avoid superpower nukes .
 Attempts to replay the Cuban missile crisis could lead to fatal mistakes, experts say . Attempt to repeat the Cuban crisis could be fatal mistake, they say .
 A corollary is the importance of developing measures and channels of com munication that help to avert crises . The importance is also to develop channels and channels that help avert crises, experts say .
 The most impor tant lesson of the missile crisis a quarter-century later may be to be wary of reading from it simple lessons on crisis management .
 The second lesson concerns the importance of the views of the top leaders who are elected and appointed . The lesson is that the world's top leaders should listen to their own views .
 Each member of the ExComm brought to the Cuban missile crisis a coherent world view which determined his perceptions of the risks and of Soviet intentions .
 The episode illustrates the importance and the dangers of rigidly preconceived world views and the effect they can have on the pro-cessing of new information .
 Deterrence is not a game played by two players seated at a chess or poker table . Deterrence isn't a game that can be played at chess, poker or poker tables . It can be a game of war, not two players sitting at a poker or chess table .
 It is played by small groups of people embedded in enormous complex orga nizations whose outlines they barely discern and whose detailed operations they scarcely control . It's played by groups of small groups embedded in . enormous complex . complex . operations they barely control .
 Robert McNamara was acutely aware of the need for civilian control and the need to manage the details so that the wrong signals were not communicated in the crisis . McNamara: "Robert McNamara knew that the crisis needed civilian control"
 He could not prevent a U-2 from overflying Soviet territory at the height of the crisis . He was not aware until 25 years later that his orders to alert our forces were transmitted in the clear (where the Soviets could easily read them) rather than in code, as per standard
 The law should be inscribed above all the doorways in the White House and the Pentagon, he says . It is the overwhelming lesson of the Cuban missile crisis, he writes .
 It is critical for high level officials to prepare themselves to deal with crises ahead of time, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It is critical to prepare yourself for crises."
 Our country places in high office lawyers, politicians, academics and businessmen who have no experience with nu clear systems . Yet they are expected to handle a nuclear crisis if one occurs, yet they are not .
 The briefings on nuclear operations that top officials receive from the professional military at the beginning of an administration's term have been described as analogous to being given a drink from a firehose . The briefings are described as akin to those of a president's first term .
 We need to find ways through briefings and simulations to ensure that top officials have a better grasp of the complexity of the nuclear systems they direct before a crisis occurs . The U.S. government needs to find a way to prevent a crisis from occurring .
 The Cuban missile crisis may hold some lessons on the limits of current debates about nuclear deterrence . The leaders of the two superpowers discussed the possibility of ridding the world of nuclear weapons .
 On the one hand, the Cuban missile crisis shows that a little nuclear deter rence went a long way . On the other hand, a little nukes went a little way . The Cuban Missile Crisis was a success story .
 At least for the group of American leaders at that time, superiority did not remove the prudence that was engendered by even a low probability of a few Soviet warheads exploding over our cities . At least .
 Khrushchev did not respond with a Berlin blockade or pressure on Turkey, as some of the participants expected . Perhaps Soviet leaders might have reacted differently had positions been reversed . But it seems clear that nuclear deter rence had a good deal to do with the fact that Khruschev did
 The specter of nuclear catastrophe lurking at the end of a chain of events had a powerful cautionary effect on both sides . "Nuclear catastrophe" was a powerful warning to both sides of the fence .
 It fostered a caution that, as George Ball noted, would not have been present to the same degree if only conventional forces had been involved .
 The horror of nuclear weapons will have the ironic effect of producing both fear and caution . As long as that political competition persists, the horror of nukes will produce caution . It will be ironic that the terror of nuke attacks is producing fear .
 The Cuban missile crisis would appear to have had the desirable effect of reinforcing these responses . The result has been, in the past 25 years, that we have weathered arms races, third-party wars at various global flash points, and a renewal of cold-war rhetoric .
 The next superpower crisis will almost certainly be accidental and unexected . But we cannot rely on fear and caution exclusively . We need to rely on caution and caution, but not fear .
 We will have to learn to manage the U.S.-Soviet com petition to reduce the risks we have thus far dodged .
 It will also involve learning to manage crises more effectively, while we strive to improve the relationship over the long run .
 In the meantime, we will be drawn back repeatedly to the Cuban missile crisis and the effort to understand the lessons it can teach us .
 Though the world of 1962 is becoming increasingly remote, some of its lessons seem timeless . Some of the lessons are timeless, including the lessons of 1962 .