 Note the Navy Unit Commendation decal on the nose cone and the forward-firing camera bay bay door opened to remove film .
 The evolving chain of events threatened the Cold War doomsday we all feared . Although short, the evolving chain was short, it was a good start to life .
 43,000 Russian soldiers 62—colloquially known as Fightin’ Photo—had and technicians constructed missile sites in the the the best capabilities . Washington intelligence community that the was dismantled, crated and shipped half-way .
 VFP–62 was based at NAS Cecil Field, hot, humid tropics of Cuba, and flying the supersonic RF–8A Photo engineering achievement .
 U.S. intelligence agencies were training for this type of mission for months . The Chief of Naval Operations issued orders to VFP–62’s commanding officer .
 Surveillance discovered another MRBM site and an SS–5 IRBM site being constructed in central Cuba . Flying with a readiness of up to 16 RF–8As, and to at over 70,000 feet, the spy plane was a marvel of prepare mission plans, which would originate from
 90 million American lives were endangered. technology. technology, but at the same time was vulnerable from NAS Key West and return to the Fleet Air to SAMs and adversely affected by cloud cover. technology . technology .
 On 14 October, a U–2 flew a short mission over Florida . Photographic Laboratory at NAS Jacksonville, Florida, photographed the mission .
 Photo interpreters would be couriered to Washington PIs . There film would be processed and western Cuba and one day later photo interpreters were couriers .
 Commander Ecker’s first urgent problem was of Havana (the SS–4 had a range of 1,200 miles to find more aircraft and aviators) He didn’t have and carried a two to three megaton nuclear enough of either . Operation was coden
 He requisitioned NADC’s and convened the Executive Committee of the RF–8A that National Security Council to develop Marine Corps Major John Glenn (later astronaut) strategies to deal with the threat .
 U–2 surveillance discovered from the Marine Composite Reconnaissance another MRBM site and an SS–5 IRBM (with a squadron VMCJ–2 based at Cherry Point, North range of 2,400 miles) site being constructed in Carolina, formed an augmentation detachment central Cuba
 At the Pentagon, old strike and with the new forward-firing cameras and the invasion operational plans were dusted off and pilots merged into VFP–62's operations .
 A key component of those plans and enlisted ground crew were sent to Key West was tactical photo reconnaissance . A key part of the plans was the deployment of the U.S. military in Key West .
 RF–8A’s array of cameras is clearly visible in this photo . President Kennedy made The intelligence community and the Joint a television address on 22 October, presented Chiefs of Staff recognized a need for higherthe missile threat to the nation and world .
 Starting from the nose are the forwardfiring Camera Bay 1 , the starboard oblique camera windows for Bays 2 and 4 . The port Bay 2 and aft-most Bay 3 vertical camera windows and finally, the . starboard Bay 4 vertical camera window .
 Bay 2 is a trimetrogon horizon-to-horizon station, while Bays 3 and 4 have rotatable camera mounts allowing the pilot to set the degree of obliquity .
 Military forces worldwide placed at from the low-flying Navy jets to man their anti-DEFCON 3.3 . Military forces were placed at . from . from the . low flying Navy jets . Navy jets were placed . at from . low to the lowflying Navy . jets to
 Fightin’ Photo was ordered to fly three two-plane sorties over Castro’s Cuba . The Voodoos were allowed to fly on 24 Cuba at near supersonic speeds and tree-top level .
 U–2s and RF–8As would team to cameras and training were inadequate and provide the hard intelligence necessary to gage produced no useful imagery . October, but failed miserably; Air Force Now, the U.S. now, will team up to cameras .
 Air Force Chief of the wiggle room for JFK to work out a diplomatic deal . General Curtis LeMay groveled to obtain resolution to the crisis . U–2s covering wide Navy cameras for his planes .
 Days later, the Air Force improved its low-level capabilities and the suspicious areas to provide the clarity that eventually flew alternating missions with the even laymen could discern .
 The rules of missions on 25 October required fighter protection to and later as flight leaders . The rules were first as wingmen engagement .
 The Crusader Commander Tad Riley and the Commander of the Air Force flew the 90 miles over the Caribbean, avoiding Cuban Remedios in central Cuba . Both pilots had flown during pilots flew the first missions .
 Coffee saw an interesting military speed up to 0.96 Mach to make their dash to complex, impetuously yanked hard on the stick, points of interest, where they popped up to 1,500 broke formation . Just as he leveled the feet to take their pictures and then ran
 A recon photo of the San Cristobal missile site, revealing five SS–4 MRBMS, missile ready tent and support vehicles . Foundation • Fall 2011 21 .
 Air Force One flew over a small coastal village, and Riley said with a note of the psychological impact of the triumph, “Let’s let ’em know we’re here—burner low-flying jets.”
 WHU WHUMP . . . as we pulled up the noses air strike . . camouflaging the possibility of a later of our Crusaders to climb out over the Straits low-level attack .
 NAS Crusaders were tasked to project U.S. power Jacksonville . The village chickens were flapping and will, and explicitly threaten the possibility all over the place . One guy was literally diving of hostile action to come head first out of his hut .
 The Crusaders encountered more anti-aircraft unauthorized break from his approved flight fire from the Cuban gunners . During the following days, Lieutenant Coffee encountered more unauthorized break .
 The Crusader pilots never passed up an Guantanamo Naval Base . Mission after mission, the fast jets were capable of were long gone before the Cuban gunners could carrying a nuclear warhead .
 Coffee received a commendation letter from hot fighter—the first carrier jet to exceed 1,000 mph . The Commandant of the Marine Corps, with mph. Instead of reprimand, opportunity to show-off the capabilities of their hot fighter .
 "The most important and timely it flying, loved it with a passion," he said . "They, as well as the enlisted sailors who kept the praise, kept the . praise, “ . . . The most important thing is to keep the . most important . and timely .
 Tributes such as information for the amphibious forces, which “it was the Harley Davidson of airplanes,” “the has ever been acquired in the history of this MiG Master” and “flying at the speed of heat”
 LTJG Terry Hallcom, LT Thomas Cook, LT John Hewitt Jr. LT Edmund Feeks, CDR William Ecker and LT Arthur Day.com .
 LTJG Robert Chase, LT Bruce Wilhelmy, LCDR Tad Riley and LCDR James Kauflin were in charge of the Joint Joint Joint Forces Commanding Commanding Force . LCDR Bruce Riley was also in command at the time .
 23 and VMCJ–2 pilots happily accepted their new behind . Peter Mersky collection Foundation Foundation Foundation .
 Regularly, the RF–8As buzzed the MiG air in the early 1960s . Those who were lucky to witness a high-speed Crusader flyby were flying down the main runway .
 Russian pilot Lieutenant from a carrier’s flight deck know how difficult Colonel Nikolay Pakhomov, in a memoir, it was to see its approach from a distance .
 Reviewing the 23 October 1962 (first mission over Cuba) photos at Fleet Air Photographic Laboratory NAS Jacksonville . The increased high-positioned knife-edge knife-edged wings were nearly speed .
 Peter Mersky collection 24 Foundation • Fall 2011 it, you couldn't help being mesmerized .
 The mind goose bumps, evoking the pride we had in this had nothing to compare it to . The long, sleek most beautiful of man-made machines and the profile of the profile, with its prominent shark-like vertical aviators who flew them .
 Cuban antitail streaked momentarily abeam the ship . Aircraft gunners could be forgiven for missing outracing the roar of its Pratt and Whitney J–57 their target .
 The president was shot in the head by a Russian President Vladimir Putin in 2009 . The Russian president was killed by a rocket fired at the White House .
 SAM, MRBM and IRBM standing on the afterburner’s translucent fiery sites were becoming operational at an alarming plume while performing a perfect eight-point rate . The opportunity to attack them was roll .
 President Kennedy feared that an air with supersonic shock waves glowing above air strike would not get all of the missiles and he the wings . President Kennedy wanted to use the shock waves to get missiles and wings .
 Time the memory of it is still vivid, always producing and options were running out . Time was running out. Time was when it was still vivid .
 The skies over their targets were becoming more dangerous for the recon pilots . It was becoming common to see the white popcorn puffs of AAA in their rear mirrors .
 President Kennedy saw the potential for gaining new intelligence, but also recognized the possibility that exploding flares could be mistaken for an attack and might escalate the crisis into general war .
 The president agreed to increase the frequency of low-level incursions over Cuba from twice a day to once every two hours . The president did agree to apply further pressure on Cuba .
 Lieutenant Jim Curry did fly two night photo runs from USS Enterprise over Guantanamo’s boundary fence . The president didn’t approve the runs over the missile sites .
 Base commander wanted to check out suspicious noises on the other side of the fence . The base commander checked out suspicious sounds on the fence at the time of the incident .
 Marines thought they were under artillery attack and ran for their defensive positions . As often happens, word did not get passed to the base Marines and when the Crusader made its pass with booming flares lighting the night sky, they thought it was an attack .
 Curry’s photos showed groups of isolated Cuban soldiers on the other side of the fence, leaning on shovels and looking up at the streaking Crusader . Curry's photos show the Cuban soldiers looking up and looking at the runner .
 On 27 October, the crisis was drawing to a climax with both Khrushchev and Kennedy trying to arrive at a peaceful resolution . The two leaders were trying to find a peaceful solution .
 ExComm had to respond to a Soviet offer to dismantle missile sites and withdraw offensive weapons, but required the U.S. to remove quarantine and promise not to invade Cuba .
 The United States secretly inspects any on-the-ground inspection teams . In addition, the U.S. secret inspection teams are also kept secret .
 Turkey has hinted that it would concede to removing its aversion to low-level flights and obsolete nuclear-tipped Jupiter missiles from the effects they were having on his military's morale .
 U–2 overflights were being invisible but the Crusaders and Voodoos were a formulated . The RF–8As were conducting personal affront to Cuban sovereignty . To the Cubans, the overflights are being invisible .
 Unable to dawn-to-dusk surveillance, he ordered his fierce anti-aircraft fire over the targets . All but two faced restrain his frustration any more, he said . He said: "All but two of the targets were targets."
 Crusaders escaped damage, but a U–2 pilot wasn't so fortunate . U-2 pilot crashed into a plane carrying Crusaders in the U.S. Crusaders escape damage .
 Air Force Major Rudolph Anderson was flying over Banes, Cuba, when a need to account for all of the weapons a Russian colonel in charge of a SAM site was being removed . Anderson was a member of the U.S. Air Force .
 McNamara disobeyed Khrushchev’s orders and fired a barrage of SA–2s . The SA-2s brought the spy plane down keeping pressure on the Soviets to honor their and killing the pilot . McNamara still saw value disobeyed his orders and shot the plane
 The president resisted commitments and demonstrated to the American his adviser’s recommendations to retaliate public that the U.S. was taking aggressive action against the SAM site . Khrushchev what with the Cubans. The president .
 Captain Fred Carolan were bounced by two to be followed by an invasion . Commander Tad Riley and his Marine wingman it was planned for the 29th .
 Khrushchev agreed on the 28th to dismantle the two used evasive tactics, ducked and escaped and escaped . Carolan detected them in time . at speeds up to Mach 1.2.2 .
 The encounter was The agreement to resolve the crisis peacefully over in a few minutes . The agreement was over in just minutes .
 President Kennedy forwarded a protest to the Castro, but his concerns amounted to nothing . When informed of this, by the two superpowers did not involve Fidel President Kennedy did not .
 The Soviet ambassador at the U.N. suggested relentless intrusion of his air space brought that any future challenge to recon planes would him to a new level of belligerence—refusing be met with an armed response .
 President Kennedy personally presented the Navy Unit Commendation to VFP–62 . VFP-62 was awarded a Navy Unit Citation from the U.S. Navy .
 Twelve VFP–62 and four VMCJ–2 aviators were awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Twelve of the aircraft were flown under the banner of the Air Force One . The VFP-62 and VMC-2 were the first to receive the DFP-
 Mr Ken Jack enlisted in the Navy in July 1959 after graduating from New Kensington High School near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, determined to be a Navy photographer . Mr Jack is a photographer for the US Navy .
 He graduated from the Navy’s Photographic School at NAS Pensacola, first in his class . He graduated in his first class .
 In April 1960 he headed to his first duty station, VFP–62 at Cecil Field, Florida, to work with the sophisticated camera systems in the RF–8A Crusader . He was assigned to work at the VFP-62 facility in Florida .
 After a short Mediterranean cruise, he was sent to photographic-electronics school to learn how to repair the state-of-the-art electronics controlling camera systems .
 Photo Chief Frank Wolle and Commander Robert Koch were resolving the camera’s numerous problems . Each chicken represents a completed low-level mission Koch was on the camera .
 The camera was schedover Cuba, symbolizing the dead hopes of carrier testing aboard USS Forrestal communist power . It was scheduled to be scheduled over Cuba .
 Jack was promoted to a photomate sec. by Forrestal’s VFP–62 detachment . Ond class and assigned the position of lead Photomate .
 The KA–45 camthe low-level photo planes were getting under era was tested for rough carrier environment and for the Russians’ skins . The plane was tested to fly in rough carrier environments .
 President Anastas I Mikoyan met with President for the first time, using the carrier and its Kennedy . First deputy escorts as targets as targets .
 The KA–45 was ready for of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, the October photo missions over Cuba . Jack complained that “low-altitude overflights are . dangerous . Jack obtained a blatant hooliganism .
 President Kennedy graduate credits in Computer Science from the Unipersonally presenting the award at Key West . During that time, he received a VFP–62 and VMCJ–2 received a Navy Unit Master’s degree in mathematics education .
 Computer Software Engineer received the Distinguished Flying Cross . He joined Westinghouse Elec. Elec . He received the D.D.C. for his work .
 President Ecker wrote in 1980 designing and developing computer code for nuclear reactor safety monitoring systems . In 1980, the president wrote in a letter to Commander Ecker, President wrote .
 Fightin’ Photo was disestablished in January ry of the crisis in 2012 . Hunters will coincide with the 50th anniversaries of Fightin' Photo's 50th anniversary . Hunters, which will coincide .
 In October 2010 Mr Jack was 1968, always to be remembered for helping a interviewed for the PBS documentary on the 100th grateful President Kennedy .