 Econ. of Parecon Quiet Rev in Welfare Econ . Econ Interviews All Interviews with Chomsky . Chomsky .
 Chomsky, Albert, Klein… Anti-Semitism . Albert, Herman…vs. Pomo Science Wars .
 Hahnel vs. Monbiot on the Green New Deal: Global Warming . Pollin and Fitz on the Greens: "Green New Deal is a mess of nonsense"
 Satellite photos had revealed Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy had ordered a naval blockade to stop any Soviet ships on their way to the island .
 "Our daughters and our unborn son and the other children of the world were threatened with annihilation," says mother-of-two . "We were threatened by annihilation," she says .
 People lived through the Missile Crisis, which became an enduring part of our personal histories . For six days, until negotiations between Washington and Moscow defused the crisis, people lived through that crisis .
 Operation Mongoose, Washington’s new secret plan to overthrow the Cuban government – the plan that provoked the Missile Crisis . Not until years later did we learn about the plan, which led to the Cuban crisis .
 Cuban intelligence agents found out about it soon enough and tried to stop it, but it was too late . Cuban officials say they will never be able to do so again .
 Some declassified documents about Operation Mongoose were made public in 1989 . Few people in the United States have even heard of it, much less understood its profound significance .
 Operation Mongoose began on November 30, 1961, a mere seven months after Cuba defeated the invasion at the Bay of Pigs . The covert activities of the CIA's covert operations began in 1961 .
 This leads to the creation of a new control group, the Special Group, to oversee Mongoose . The Special Group will oversee the Mongoose organization .
 Kennedy appointed Air Force General Edward Lansdale to coordinate Operation Mongoose . Lansdale had engineered the presidency of Ramón Magsaysay in the Philippines and then set up the Vietnamese puppet regime in Saigon .
 General Lansdale presented his plans in frequent reports about his new job . Lansdale's plans were going to try to overthrow a sovereign government, he said .
 As Lansdale stated in 1975, he tried to remove Fidel Castro by any means, including assassination . Lansdale said in 1975 that he wanted to remove the Castro regime . He tried to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Operation Mongoose had managed to put only four small teams onto the island, many fewer than planned . By May 1962, the operation had managed only four teams of small teams on the island . The mission was supposed to be a success for the first time .
 In July of 1962, Raúl Castro visited the Soviet Union, which did pay attention . Deployment of nuclear missiles began that month . In this context, in July 1962, the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba were no closer to the United States than U.S. missiles in Turkey were to the Soviet Union . After all, Soviet missiles were no longer within the U.K. than in Turkey .
 Washington's plan for regime change in October led to Cuba’s getting nuclear missiles for defense against that invasion, which led to the Missile Crisis .
 On October 27, President Kennedy sent a letter to Premier Nikita Khrushchev with a proposal that the Soviet Union immediately withdraw its missiles from Cuba . The United States would end the naval blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F Dobrynin . U.S. would withdraw its Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 On October 28, after six days at the nuclear brink, the worst of the Missile Crisis ended . Premier Khrushchev's letter to President Kennedy accepted the October 27 proposal .
 On October 30, the Special Group ordered a halt to all the sabotage activities of Operation Mongoose . The Special Group has been ordered to halt all the sabotaging activities of the operation .
 The CIA’s Task Force W, created as part of Operation Mongoose, was not terminated . However, the CIA's Task Force was created as a part of the operation .
 For example, on November 8 one of the CIA teams blew up its industrial target . The CIA team blew up an industrial target in New York City .
 President Kennedy lifted the naval blockade of Cuba on November 20, 1962 . The Soviet Union and Cuba agreed to remove Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The blockade was lifted after the Soviet-Cuba agreement .
 Desmond Fitzgerald proposed various plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . Fitzgerald replaced William Harvey as head of Task Force W in January 1963 . Fitzgerald proposed plots to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 In that month alone three children were killed in two attacks on the island . Three children have been killed in that month .
 People in the U.S. continue to know little about the State of Siege that is United States policy toward Cuba . People here in the United States .
 The full trade embargo that took effect February 7, 1962, was part of Operation Mongoose . Ironically, the full embargo took effect in 1962, part of the operation Mongoose. The full embargo was imposed in 1962 .
 Operation Mongoose ended, but the policies that created it continue to exist . The policies that led to the end of the operation are still in effect . The government ended the operation in 2011 .
 Regime change by any available means has continued to be Washington’s goal . Washington has been trying to change the world by any means possible .
 The participants in the Special Group included the top formulators of U.S. foreign policy . The participants included National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, Deputy Under Secretary of State Alexis Johnson, Under . Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, CIA Director John McCone .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara sometimes attended SGA meetings . Defense Secretary McNamara also attended meetings .