 The doctrine covers a broad range of measures for military deception, from camouflage to denial and deception . The doctrine is designed to cover a range of deception measures .
 Deceptive measures include concealment, imitation with decoys and dummies, manoeuvres intended to deceive, deny, and disinformation . Deception is a form of deception that can be used in deception, deception and deception .
 The Russian doctrine of military deception has evolved with time, and it encompasses a number of meanings . The doctrine of deception was developed in Russia in the 1980s .
 An early military meaning was camouflage, soon extended to battlefield masking using smoke and other methods of screening . The meaning of camouflage was camouflage in the early military .
 From there it came to have the broader meaning of military deception, widening to include denial and deception . The meaning of deception has been expanded to include denying and deception, the author says .
 In 1380, Dmitry Donskoy's Muscovite army defeated a much larger Mongol army using surprise . In the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380 in Russia, Dmitry's troops defeated a large Mongol army .
 Prince Dmitry Donskoy defeated the armies of the Mongol Golden Horde in 1380 using a surprise attack from a regiment hidden in forest .
 Before World War II The Russian Army had a deception school, active in 1904, disbanded in 1929 .
 Military deception was developed as a military doctrine in the 1920s . Meanwhile, military deception was first developed in the 1930s .
 The 1929 Field Regulations of the Red Army stated that ""surprise has a stunning effect on the enemy" The 1929 field regulations stated that surprise has a 'stunning effect' on enemy .
 Concealment was to be attained by confusing the enemy with movements, camouflage and use of terrain, speed, use of night and fog, and secrecy . The aim of concealment is to confuse the enemy .
 The 1935 Instructions on Deep Battle and then the 1936 Field Regulations place increasing stress on battlefield deception . The 1935 instructions on deep battle and the 1936 field regulations place increasing pressure on deception .
 Instructions define the methods of achieving surprise as air superiority; making forces mobile and manoeuvrable; concealing concentration of forces; keeping fire preparations secret; misleading the enemy . Screening with smoke and technical deception and using the cover of darkness .
 The 1978 Soviet Military Encyclopedia defines strategic levels, placing additional stress on strategic levels . It explicitly includes political, economic and diplomatic measures besides the military ones . 1978 concept is similar to that of the 1978 Soviet military Encyclopedia .
 It largely repeats the 1944 Encyclopedia's concept, but adds that .mw-parser-output .templatequote {overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px;margin-top:0}
 As war is but an extension of politics, it includes political, economic and diplomatic measures as well as military . In these spheres, as war is political, diplomatic and military, it also includes political and economic measures .
 Michael Handel reminds readers of Sun Tzu's claim in The Art of War that all warfare is based on deception . Handel suggests that deception is a normal and indeed necessary part of warfare .
 The goal of military deception is however surprise, vnezapnost, so the two are naturally studied together . Military analyst William Connor cautioned that in the Soviet sense, the doctrine covered much more than camouflage .
 By the time of Operation Bagration in 1944, Connor argues, the Russian doctrine of military deception already included all these aspects . Connor argues that the doctrine of deception in Russia was already part of the doctrine .
 This differs from Western doctrines on deception, and from information doctrines, by its emphasis on pragmatic aspects . The meaning in Soviet practice and doctrine is to include strategic, political, and diplomatic objectives .
 In 2015, Julian Lindley-French described strategic maskirovka as ""a new level of ambition"" established by Moscow to unbalance the West both politically and militarily .
 Russian doctrine roughly corresponds to Western notions of denial and deception . In military intelligence, the Russian doctrine corresponds to the Western notion of denial . Soviet military deception at different operational levels of war .
 The International Dictionary of Intelligence from 1990 defined it as the Russian military intelligence term for deception . Robert Pringle's 2006 Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Intelligence defines it as strategic .
 Scott Gerwehr's The Art of Darkness summarized it as deception and operational security . Scott Gerwhr's art of Darkness: Deception and security is deception and security .
 Glantz summarized the Russian doctrine as involving both active and passive deception and surprise . In his comprehensive study, Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War, Glantz wrote .
 American defence researcher Charles Smith identified different dimensions of Russian military deception . Deception could and should be used and constantly considered in politics before a war began, he says .
 He divided it into multiple types – optical, thermal, radar, radio, sound/silence; multiple environments – aquatic, space, atmosphere – each involving active or passive measures . And organizational aspects – mobility, level, and organization – also considered .
 The levels are the conventional military ones, strategic, operational, and tactical, while organization refers to the military branch concerned . The levels range from strategic to operational .
 Measures employed in Russian military deception measure Russian name Western equivalent . Techniques include camouflage, camouflage, deception and deception measures .
 In practice Georgy Zhukov was a leading proponent of Soviet military deception . Dummy artillery battery complete with noise and smoke . False letters; untrue information to journalists; inaccurate maps; false orders; false dates .
 The deceptions included apparent requests for material for bunkers and broadcasting of the noise of pile-drivers .
 In his memoirs Zhukov described them as such, noting that they were worked out at army group or ""operational-tactical"" level . In memoirs he described it as such .
 The first offensive to have its own deception operation was in Zhukov's part of the attack on the Rzhev-Vyazma salient to the west of Moscow in July and August 1942 .
 The offensive was conducted by Ivan Konev's Kalinin Front on the north, and Zhukov's Western Front with 31st Army and 20th Army on the south .
 The real tanks and other vehicles made tracks like those of troop columns . The radios communicated false traffic between the simulated armies and Front headquarters .
 When the Luftwaffe attacked, the deception units returned fire and lit bottles of fuel to simulate fires . The deception units responded with fire and returned fire .
 The deception had the immediate effect of increasing Luftwaffe air strikes against the railhead and false concentration area . The two railheads actually in use were not attacked, and the Wehrmacht moved three Panzer divisions .
 Zhukov's attack began on 4 August, and the 20th and 31st Armies advanced 40 kilometres in two days . Meanwhile, the real troop concentration to the north was conducted at night .
 The Russians claimed that surprise had been achieved; this is confirmed by the fact that German intelligence failed to notice Zhukov's concentration of 20th and 31st Armies .
 Other small offensives on the same front had poorly planned and executed deception measures, but these were largely unsuccessful . Other small operations were poorly planned .
 The successful deception for the attack on Rzhev showed that military deception could be effective, but that only certain Red Army commanders applied it correctly . The success of the successful deception showed that deception can be effective .
 Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus led the encircled German 6th Army to surrender in the Battle of Stalingrad .
 Military deception based on secrecy was critical in hiding Soviet preparations for the decisive Operation Uranus encirclement in the Battle of Stalingrad . The deception was critical to hide Soviet preparations to defeat the Soviet Union in the battle .
 November 1942 counter-attack at Stalingrad was the first instance of Stavka's newly discovered confidence in large-scale deception . The historian Paul Adair's view is that the successful counter-attempt was first instance . Adair: 'Stavka discovered new confidence in
 Hitler's own self-deception played into this, as he was unwilling to believe that the Red Army had sufficient reserves of armour and men . This was two months before the German 6th Army capitulated .
 Many ineffective Red Army attacks to the north of Stalingrad had unintentionally given the impression that the Red Army was unable to launch any substantial attack, let alone a rapid army-scale pincer movement . Further, the many ineffective . Army attacks had unintentionally . given the . impression that
 Careful attention was paid to security, with greatly reduced radio traffic . Security was greatly reduced during the operation .
 Troop movements were successfully concealed by moving armies up only at night, and camouflaging them by day on the open, treeless steppes . The deception included increasing military activity .
 At the sites of the planned attack, elaborate disinformation was fed to the enemy . At least one of the sites were sites of a planned attack on the West .
 Civilians within 25 kilometres of the front were evacuated, and trenches were dug around the villages for Luftwaffe reconnaissance to see .
 The Voronezh Front was prepared to suggest an offensive on the uninvolved side of the border . Conversely, bridging equipment and boats were prepared for an offensive there .
 The five real bridges that were built for the attack were masked by the construction of seventeen false bridges over the River Don . Five real bridges were built to mask the attack .
 The German intelligence view on 18 November 1942, showing 6 to 8 Soviet armies near Stalingrad, Russia .
 The actual Soviet dispositions on 18 November 1942 showed 10 Soviet armies . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1942 .
 Stavka succeeded in moving a million men, 1000 tanks, 14,000 guns and 1400 aircraft into position without alerting their enemy . Despite the correct appreciation by German air reconnaissance, Friedrich Paulus took no action .
 He was caught completely by surprise, failing either to prepare his armour as a mobile reserve with fuel and ammunition, or to move it on the day of the attack . He was not prepared to move his armour, or not to prepare it for the attack on the first day .
 This was a deception for a defensive battle, as Hitler was planning to attack the Kursk salient in a pincer movement . Hitler planned to attack Kursks salient in an attempt to counter-attack . Hitler's deception was a ploy to fool the Soviets into attacking the K
 Soviet defences were quickly built up using deception techniques to conceal the flow of men and equipment . This was accompanied by a whole suite of deception measures .
 In mid-June 1943 German army high command had estimated 1500 Soviet tanks in the Kursk salient, against the true figure of over 5100, and underestimated Soviet troop strength by a million . The German high command estimated that Soviet tanks were in the Soviet salient .
 The result was that the Germans attacked Russian forces far stronger than those they were expecting . The result of the attack on the Belgorod front in August 1943 was that it was far more successful than expected .
 The commander of the Soviet 1st Tank Army, Mikhail Katukov, remarked that the enemy ""did not suspect that our well-camouflaged tanks were waiting for him"
 Katukov's tanks were concealed in defensive emplacements prepared before the battle . Only their turrets were above ground level, with only their turrets above ground .
 The first tank was blown up by a mine or the first Russian anti-tank guns opened fire . We did not .. detect even one minefield or anti-vehicle area until ... the first tank tank blew up by mine, he said .
 Operation Bagration spanned about 1000 kilometres from Estonia in the north to Romania in the south . The operation spanned 1000 kilometres between Estonia and Romania in 1944 . Operation Bagration spanned about 1000 kilometres .
 The encirclements of three components of the German Army Group Centre at Minsk, Vitebsk and near Bobruisk are shown by dashed red lines in the middle of the area .
 Operation Bagration in Belarus applied the strategic aims and objectives on a grand scale, to deceive the Germans about the scale and objectives of the offensive . The 1944 operation in Belarus was the largest in the history of the Soviet Union .
 The Stavka needed to be certain that the Germans believed the main Soviet attack would be in the south . In particular, the Stavko needed to know that the main battle would be on the south of the country .
 The Soviet plan kept the German reserves doing nothing south of the Pripyat marshes until the battle to the north in Belorussia had already been decided . The plan was successfully kept the Germans out of the battle until it was decided .
 Stavka succeeded in concealing the size and position of very large movements of supplies, as well as of forces including seven armies, eleven aviation corps and over 200,000 troop replacements . The Red Army of the Red Army was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 As for the strategic offensive itself, its location, strength and timing were effectively concealed .
 The German high command and Adolf Hitler grossly underestimated the threat to Army Group Centre . Hitler and Hitler confidently redeployed a third of its artillery, half its tank destroyers and 88% of its tanks to the Southern front where OKH expected the Soviet attack . OKH also redeploy
 OKH had to rely mainly on radio intercept, aerial photography and agents left behind in the territory they had once held . The Soviets succeeded in distorting OKH's intelligence picture, given that German intelligence relied mainly on intercept and photography .
 Stavka systematically denied the Germans real intelligence on Red Army forces as they concentrated for the attack, and revealed other real and simulated forces in other places . OKH deceived OKH by playing to their three sources of information .
 Hitler's own reckless optimism and determination to hold on to captured territory at all costs encouraged him to believe the picture suggested by the Russians . Hitler believed the picture was true and believed it to be the result of the Russian invasion .
 His advisors believed the Soviet Union was running out of men and materiel, with much less industrial production than it actually had . Meanwhile, his advisors believed that the Soviets were running out men, materiel and men .
 They underestimated the forces ranged against them, a belief encouraged by continued deception operations . Thus they underestimated their forces, the U.S. said .
 Pirnie points out that it did not have to succeed in every aspect to be successful . Pirnie: "It didn't have to try to succeed every aspect in order to do it"
 Army Group Centre and OKH failed to appreciate how strong the attacks would be, or the intention to encircle the Army Group . In Belarus, the German armies had a good idea of the locations and approximate timing of Operation Bagration .
 The soldiers involved in Anadyr were provided with winter clothing and informed they would be going to the east of the Soviet Union . The soldiers were given winter clothes and told they were going east .
 On board ship, intelligence officers allowed the 40,000 soldiers involved on deck only during the hours of darkness .
 The force, including missiles, reached Cuba before U.S. intelligence became aware of it . Anadyr was planned from the start with elaborate denial and deception, including ski boots .
 Hansen's analysis ends with a recognition of the Soviet advantage in deception in 1962 . Hansen: "The Soviet advantage was evident in 1962," Hansen says . Hansen concludes that the Soviets were successful in deception .
 Hansen says the Killian Report did not mention adversarial denial and deception was an indication that U.S. intelligence had not begun to study foreign D&D . It did not do so for another 20 years, he says .
 Maj. Hansen considered it likely that with a . properly-prepared ""deception-aware analytic corps"", America could have seen through Khrushchev's plan long before . Hansen considered that with . a properly .prepared analyze correspondence and a .
 The Soviet Union made substantial use of deception while preparing for their military intervention of Czechoslovakia in 1968 . The Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechsoslovakia was the first of its kind in the world .
 Kremlin failed to reverse Czechoslovak leader Alexander Dubček's liberal reforms with threats, it decided to use force, masked by deception . When the Kremlin had failed to . reverse the . reforms with . threats, they decided to . use force .
 The measures taken included transferring fuel and ammunition out of Czechoslovakia on a supposed logistics exercise . Most of their soldiers were confined to barracks across the northern Warsaw Pact area .
 Men cleared customs and travelled to the Soviet Embassy in the centre of Prague . The men cleared customs before travelling to the embassy .
 There they picked up weapons and returned to the airport, taking over the main buildings . They then took over the airport's main buildings, taking control of the airport .
 Spetsnaz and airborne troops took over key buildings across Prague before dawn . They at once allowed further aircraft to land uniformed soldiers .
 The 2014 annexation of Crimea was described in the West as maskirovka . The annexation was described by the West in the 2014 annexation as 'maskirovko'
 The area was swiftly occupied by so-called little green men, armed men in military trucks . They came at night, with no insignia, so that even pro-Russian activists did not understand what was happening . So-called 'little green men' are armed men who came at
 Time magazine reported in April 2014 that the troops in eastern Ukraine described themselves as Cossacks . Analysts in Ukraine and the West considered at least some of them to be Russian special forces .
 The subsequent war in the Donbass region of Ukraine has also been described as a Russian maskirovka campaign . The subsequent conflict in the region has been described by some as a 'maskirova'
 As with Crimea, the conflict began when armed 'rebel' forces without military insignia began seizing government infrastructure . The conflict began in Crimea in March, 2014 .
 Unlike the action in Crimea, there were no Russian military bases to deploy soldiers from . Unlike Crimea, no Russian bases were set up to deploy troops .
 Support for Russia amongst the local population was not as high, and Donbass was larger and less isolated than the peninsula . Support for the Russian government in Donbass is not as strong as peninsula .
 Russia sent ""humanitarian"" convoys to Donbass; the first, of military trucks painted white, attracted much media attention . U.S. Air Force General described the convoy as a wonderful example of maskirovka .
 Regular Russian troops were captured by Ukraine numerous times, making denial of involvement increasingly implausible . Regular Russian forces have been captured numerous times by Ukraine .
 Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Information Warfare and Security and Security . The conference will take place at the end of the year .
 Moro M90 Six-Color Desert Pattern United States ""M81"" Woodland Australian Disruptive Pattern TAZ 83 M84 wz. Moro m90 Six Color Desert Pattern .
 Puma camouflage Daguet Desert Night Camouflage . Europe Centrale Soldier 2000 wz. Puma camouflage . Puma . camouflage pattern .