 Officials denied there was any such arrangement 25 years ago . It has long been known that such a secret deal was struck as part of the solution to the crisis .
 The four hours of conversations at key White House meetings on Oct. 27, 1962, released yesterday by the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library . Kennedy Library: Four hours of the conversations were held at the White House in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy said he faced a situation where “because we wouldn't take the missiles out of Turkey, then maybe we’ll have to invade or make a massive strike on Cuba, which may lose Berlin, he said . Kennedy: "Because we wouldn’t take the
 Kennedy structured the proposal to remove missiles from Turkey after the Soviets took theirs out of Cuba, but agreed not to link the two actions publicly . Kennedy, at Secretary of State Dean Rusk's suggestion, structured the secret proposal .
 The released transcript also shows how Kennedy's advisers had to talk the president out of responding positively to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's first public proposal to remove Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba only if Washington did the same with its equivalent arms in Turkey . The president's advisers also had to
 Khrushchev proposal called for removal of Soviet weapons in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy was told to only discuss an earlier proposal that called for removing the Soviet weapons .
 McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser, agreed with Nitze that the president could deal with the purely Cuban solution . Khrushchev note had been the subject of a Khrushche note the night before . Bundy agreed with the president that the Cuban solution would be a purely Cuban
 Kennedy kept returning to the subject of the Jupiter missiles that day . Kennedy's aides pushed for a delay before agreeing to discuss the missiles with the Soviets .
 McCone: "I’d trade these Turkish things [the United States missiles] out right now.” McCone also said part of the message should be that “I'd trade these [the Turkish things] out [right now].”
 Adlai E Stevenson, then U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, was identified in a controversial magazine article based on interviews with senior Kennedy administration officials as a “superdove” Stevenson wanted to trade removal of United States missiles in Turkey for removal of Soviet missiles
 Rusk, who drafted the exchange proposal that was carried out, was the man who at the time described the Soviets as blinking in what he termed an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation .
 Rusk revealed earlier this year that Kennedy had secretly ordered him to propose through an intermediary to U Thant, then set' retary-general of the United Nations, that if Thant publicly proTub Washington Post posed a removal of missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba, the
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw his missiles from Cuba in return for a secret U.S. assurance to dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . But that plan was not implemented because Khrushvic agreed to pull his missiles in Cuba .
 The transcript also shows that the participants talked of employing only conventional forces . Never discussed in these sessions the use of nuclear weapons by either the Soviet Union or the United States .
 A new book on the crisis by Raymond L Gartoff, a State Department official at the time and now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, will report . New information indicates that the Soviet ship carrying warheads was headed toward Cuba but never even approached the United States naval blockade .
 The transcript also shows that the participants did not have completely accurate information on the military situation . Despite the presence of McNamara and Gen. Gen. McNamara, the participants didn't have the correct information .
 The secret tape recorder was turned on and off by someone at the meetings, an official says . Some conversations were not recorded, the official who has reviewed the tape says .