 Richard Nixon was a Naval Officer, author, Congressman, Senator Richard M Nixon . He was married to Jacqueline Bouvier and had three children . Richard Nixon served as a Navy Officer .
 TV audiences thought Kennedy won while radio audiences thought Nixon had won . TV audiences think Kennedy won . Radio audiences think Nixon won .
 The Media had arrived. Inauguration: In your hands, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure of our course .
 Catholic Bishops tried to get Congress to include parochial schools, Kennedy refused, killed the bill . Medical aid for the elderly died because the AMA lobbied against it . Kennedy refused to allow medical aid to the elderly .
 Kennedy felt Eisenhower relied too heavily on nuclear weapons . Kennedy felt that Eisenhower had relied on too much nuclear weapons. Kennedy felt it was too much .
 During Eisenhower\u2019s presidency, the CIA had secretly trained and armed Cuban exiles known as La Brigada . During Eisenhower’s presidency,. the CIA secretly trained, armed and armed exiles . The CIA had been involved in the Cuban exile movement known as 'La Brig
 On April 17, 1961, 1,400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba . Disaster struck as Kennedy cancelled air support for the exiles in order to keep U.S. involvement a secret .
 Most of the La Brigada were either killed or captured by Castro’s army . Kennedy and Khrushchev meet and the USSR demands that the U.S. back out of Berlin .
 The Soviet leader retaliated by constructing a wall through Berlin, stopping movement between the Soviet sector and the rest of the city . After the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs invasion, President Kennedy needed a victory in Cuba .
 Kennedy had given the CIA directions to get rid of Castro in Cuba because as long as Fidel Castro was in Cuba, so was communism . The Soviet Union had begun to send short range nuclear missiles to Cuba for their . purposes .
 The photographs show these to be nuclear missile sites . These were very similar to United States . missiles that Eisenhower had sent to Turkey during the 1950s .
 The Russians are now close enough to hit almost all of the U.S. with nuclear weapons . Russia is now close to hitting almost all the United States with nukes .
 Kennedy is fearful that Cuba will be used as a bargaining chip for Berlin . Options discussed include a land invasion, invasion and a blockade .
 Military tells Kennedy a full scale attack of Cuba could be launched by October 25th . Kennedy has ordered the missiles in Turkey to be removed six months earlier . Could not remove them now under threat because he would look weak .
 Kennedy tells his advisors to come up with a consensus that will solve the problem . The consensus is a naval blockade of Cuba .
 Thirteen Days in October 1962 . Gives Khrushchev the option of negotiation . Kennedy addresses the nation .
 U.S. States that an attack on the United States from Cuba will be regarded as an attack from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union replies that the blockade is an act of war and promise to run through it .
 Khrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy that the missiles will stay in Cuba . Kennedy: "I don't want to go to Cuba. It's not a bad thing for the country"
 October 25th, 1962, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson shows the world the proof of the missiles . United States defense goes to DEFCON 2.
 "Do not gain much sympathy from the European nations due to the fact that they live under this every day," says French President Francois Hollande .
 Another American U2 plane is discovered flying over Soviet airspace . Khrushchev orders that it is not to be shot down, but escorted away from the Soviet Union . Robert Kennedy comes up with the idea of ignoring the second letter that included the missiles in Turkey .
 Robert Kennedy meets in secret with Dobrynin and states that the missiles in Turkey can be negotiated at a later time, but not during this crisis . Kennedy: "The missile crisis is not over, but it is over and over" Robert Kennedy: The missiles can't be negotiated during
 In a radio broad cast from Moscow, Nikita Khrushchev announces that the missiles will be removed from Cuba because the United States has promised never to invade . John Kennedy prepares to order the invasion of Cuba the following day .
 There are no mention of the missiles in Turkey, that are to be removed later . There is no mention .
 Fidel Castro finds out about this from the television and is very upset . Fidel Castro becomes very upset when he finds out he is in the news .
 The missile crisis led to Nikita Khrushchev’s fall from power, and the new Soviet leadership was less interested in reaching agreements with the West .
 Lyndon Johnson took office during what seemed like a prosperous time for the U.S. The result was a huge Soviet arms buildup .
 In reality, however, away from the nation\u2019s affluent suburbs were some 50 million poor . Away from the country's affluent suburbs, there were 50 million people who were poor .
 Kennedy and Johnson made the elimination of poverty a major policy goal . Johnson differed from Kennedy’s elegant society image .
 Johnson declared that his administration was waging an unconditional war on poverty in America . His ability to build coalitions made him one of the most effective and powerful leaders in Senate history .
 Congress created the Office of Economic Opportunity in the summer of 1964 . The office focused on creating jobs and fighting poverty . It was created by Congress in 1964 .
 The election of 1964 had Johnson running against Republican candidate Barry Goldwater . Americans were not ready for Goldwater's aggressive message, and Johnson won in a landslide .
 Between 1965 and 1968, over 60 programs were passed, including Medicare and Medicaid . Over 60 programs, including Medicaid and Medicare, were passed during that period . Medicare, Medicaid and Medicaid were passed .
 Medicare was a health insurance program for the elderly funded through Social Security . Medicare was for those on welfare or living below the poverty line . Medicaid financed health care for those who were on welfare .
 Johnson's interest in education led to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act and to the preschool program Project Head Start, which was administered to disadvantaged children . Johnson was a pioneer in education .
 Johnson urged Congress to act on legislation dealing with deterioration of inner cities . VISTA put young people to work in poor school districts .
 Congress responded with the creation of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1965 . The department was created by Congress in 1965 after the war of housing reform .
 The Immigration Reform Act of 1965 played a key role in changing the composition of the American population . It kept a strict limit on the number of immigrants admitted to the U.S. each year .
 It also eliminated the national origins system, which gave preference to northern European immigrants . The system also eliminated a national origin system, giving preference to northerners .
 The impact of the Great Society was felt by all aspects of American life and improved many lives . Immigrants arrived in the U.S. from all parts of Europe and Asia and Africa .
 Some Americans opposed the massive growth of federal funds and criticized the Great Society for intruding too much in their lives .
 "The New Frontier and the Great Society" "The 1960 Election" was the result of many Americans asking questions, questions Americans still ask today .
 Obama: Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do to your country . And so, fellow Americans, ask not what the government has done for you, but what it can do .
 During Eisenhower’s presidency, the CIA had secretly trained and armed Cuban exiles known as La Brigada . During the Eisenhower administration, the exiles were armed by the CIA . The CIA had been training and armed exiles in Cuba .
 In reality, however, away from the nation’s affluent suburbs were some 50 million poor . Away from the affluent suburbs, there are 50 million people in the U.S.
 Fidel Castro Communist leader in Cuba that America attempted to overthrow during the Bay of Pigs Invasion . America tried to overthrow Fidel Castro during the invasion of Cuba in the 1960s . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban government .
 Getting to California is the ability to bring people to agreement (or a coalition) Getting to  California    means   getting to California  the ability to make people to agree (or agree)
 The Kennedy Years Election of 1960 was first televised debates . First televised debates saw a slim victory for Kennedy Candidate .
 JFK’s Foreign Policy Presidential Candidates John F Kennedy –Wealthy –Powerful family –East Coast –Movie-star good looks – Movie-star looks –Ease & authority in presence in presence . JFK's Foreign Policy presidential candidate is wealthy and powerful .