 Kennedy's ace speechwriter Ted Sorensen worked on it day and night to meet the president's schedule . The speech was carefully crafted, copies were shown to only a few trusted advisors for comment .
 JFK's Quest for Peace" is JFK's most important speech . Jeffrey Sachs considers it the most important piece of JFK's life .
 The piece contains one of the most memorable paragraphs that I have seen in any presidential speech . It contains a quote from President Obama's speech .
 Kennedy appealed to our basic connection on this planet as the most powerful argument for worldwide peace: "So let us not be blind to our differences, but let us also direct attention to our common interests," Kennedy said .
 For instance, Vasili Arkhipov refused to launch his submarine's nuclear torpedo even as American planes were dropping dummy depth charges around the submarine .
 JFK advised not to tighten the ""knot of war"" which would eventually have to be catastrophically severed . His Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev understood this too, cautioning JFK to not tighten the 'knot' of war .
 Kennedy's pessimistic prediction that in 1975 ten or twenty countries would have nuclear weapons has not come true . Kennedy predicted in 1975 that 10 or 20 countries would be armed with nuclear weapons in 1975 .
 In fact the PTBT was followed in 1968 by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty was a deterrent to the formation of new nuclear states .
 There are troubling signs that Kennedy's dream is still very much much a dream . South Africa, Sweden, Libya, Brazil and the former Soviet Republics have all given up nuclear weapons .
 Countries like Israel and India which did not sign the NPT have acquired nuclear arsenals . Countries like India and Israel have acquired a nuclear arsenal . Israel signed NPT but signed a treaty banning nuclear weapons .
 North Korea is baring its nuclear teeth and Iran seems to be meandering even if not resolutely marching toward acquiring a bomb . North Korea and Iran seem to be on the verge of acquiring nuclear weapons .
 There are also little signs that the U.S. is going to unilaterally disassemble its nuclear arsenal . Non-state actors and unstable regimes like Pakistan pose an ever-present challenge that threatens to spiral out of control .
 The United States did unilaterally disarm its biological weapons arsenal in the 70s . Nuclear weapons still seem to inspire myths and illusions that cannot be easily dispelled . The U.S. unilaterally disarmed in the 1970s .
 Thousands of weapons are still deployment-ready, years after the Cold War has ended . Thousands are still deployed-ready in the U.S.
 It goes without saying that this kind of spending is unconscionable, especially when it takes valuable resources away from pressing problems like healthcare and education . It's not just a waste of money, but it's a waste to waste resources like healthcare .
 Eisenhower warned us about the military-industrial complex in his own ""Chance for Peace" speech in 1953: "Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies a theft from those who hunger and are not fed"
 It is two electric power plants, each serving a town of 60,000 population . The power plants are each serving the town of around 50,000 people .
 Sachs says Eisenhower and Kennedy pointed out problems in the 50s and 60s looming over our future . Sachs: In a greater sense too Kennedy's vision is facing serious challenges .
 Sachs believes that sustainable development has replaced nuclear weapons as the cardinal problem facing us today . Until now, the signs for sustainable development have not been very promising . Sachs: "Sustainable development is replacing nuclear weapons"
 The usual policy toward such countries is akin to the policy of a doctor who waits until a disease turns into a full-blown infection, and then delivers medication that almost kills the patient without getting rid of the cause .
 Drone drones are a much bigger priority than dams . Sadly for both parties in this country, drone drones are much more important than dams.
 We are still struggling with the goal laid out by John Kennedy in his Peace Speech . Kennedy also realistically realized that reaching the goal would be a gradual and piecemeal process . This has to change. We need to change .
 There is no single, simple key to this peace, Obama said in his inaugural speech . "There is no grand or magic formula to be adopted by one or two powers"
 President Obama's administration will not be finished in the first 1,000 days, nor in the life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet . Nor will it be finished by the end of the first year of the Obama administration .
 The views expressed are those of the author and not necessarily those of Scientific American .
 Ashutosh Jogalekar is a chemist interested in the history of the history, philosophy and sociology of science . He is the author of the book, "Sociology of Science"
 He is fascinated by the logic of scientific discovery and by the interaction of science with public sentiments and policy . The author is fascinated with the interaction between science and public sentiments .
 He blogs at The Curious Wavefunction and can be reached at curiouswavefunction@gmail.com .
 Rechargeable Molten Salt Battery Freezes Energy in Place for Long-Term Storage . May 2022 .
 Chemistry and diversity are at odds with each other .
 Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers .
 Sign in for a free account or use this article to help with research . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .