 His work has been published by the Washington Post, Toronto Star, Christian Science Monitor, The Nation, The Progressive, National Catholic Reporter, In These Times and Covert Action Quarterly .
 He was Washington bureau chief of the Guardian newsweekly from 1985 to 1992 . He was editor of the paper's Washington-based newsweekly .
 Nikita Khrushchev received fragmentary intelligence reports on Operation Mongoose . The U.S. sent missiles to Cuba in the 1950s and '60s .
 The KGB was also picking up intelligence about large-scale U.S. military exercises rehearsing an invasion of Cuba . The KGB also picked up intelligence on large scale United States military exercises .
 In Washington, the Navy Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic, Atlantic issued planning directives for U.S. operational plans for an invasion of Cuba in a February 14, 1962 telegram . The telegram was issued by the Commander in-Chief of the Navy in Washington .
 The Pentagon estimated that it would take ten days of heavy combat and 18,500 U.S. casualties to drive the Cuban revolution from power with an occupation of the island to follow .
 In spring 1962, the U.S. conducted military exercises to test the readiness of its Cuba OPLANs . The exercises were conducted in the Atlantic Ocean from North Carolina to the Caribbean Sea .
 Chairman Nikita Khrushchev was in Bulgaria on a state visit in April 1962 . Chairman Khrushchev was in the country during the visit .
 He worried that the U.S. was preparing to invade Cuba, and was preoccupied with defending the Cuban revolution, he says .
 Khrushchev came up with the idea as he strolled along the Black Sea in Varna, Bulgaria, with defense minister Rodion Malinovsky . The idea of deploying Soviet missiles to Cuba was discussed in a trip to Bulgaria with the defense minister .
 Malinovsky pointed to Turkey across the Black Sea, noting the U.S. Jupiter missile base there . The United States also has a missile base in Turkey .
 Intermediate-range Jupiter missiles could reach targets in the Ukraine and southern Russia within a matter of minutes . The missiles could be used within minutes of hitting targets in Ukraine and Russia .
 Khrushchev asked why the Soviet Union did not have the right to deploy missiles to Cuba as the U.S. did in Turkey . The United States did not deploy missiles in Turkey as it did in Cuba . The Soviet Union had no right to use missiles in Cuba, Khrush
 He was convinced that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba would deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown by the United States .
 The installation of missiles in Cuba would also augment the Soviet Union’s strategic nuclear force, he said . He pointed out that the installation of missile bases would augment the country's strategic nuclear forces . The Soviet Union is believed to be planning to install missiles in the Cuban territory .
 According to our intelligence we are lagging almost fifteen years behind the Americans in warheads, he said . He said the U.S. is lagging 15 years behind its rivals in warheads .
 The Kremlin was acutely aware of the margin of United States superiority over the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear weapons . U.S. was aware of margin of superiority over Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev discussed his plan to deploy Soviet missiles to Cuba with only a handful of Soviet leaders . The plan was discussed by only a few Soviet leaders, according to the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev consulted Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko about his missile deployment plan . The plan was discussed by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union . The missile plan was ultimately rejected by the Soviets .
 The Armenian leader sought the counsel of Anastas Mikoyan, a veteran member of the Presidium and his closest associate . Instead of seeking advice, he sought advice from a veteran Presidium member, he chose to consult with Mikoyans .
 This risk lay in the fact that in wanting to save Cuba, we could be drawn into a very terrible and unprecedented nuclear missile war . This risk was the risk of a nuclear war, writes Andrew Hammond .
 On May 24, 1962, the Presidium met to consider Khrushchev’s missile deployment idea . The Presidium considered the idea of a missile deployment in the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 KGB officer Alexandr Alexiev was summoned back to Moscow from his post in Cuba . Alexiev is a former KGB officer who worked for the KGB in Havana, Cuba . He was sent back to Russia after being sent to Cuba .
 Khrushchev informed Alexiev that he would return to Cuba as the new Soviet ambassador . Alexiev was puzzled, because he was not a diplomat, because of his lack of diplomatic experience . Alexev was puzzled when he was told he would become ambassador to Cuba .
 Alexiev said he thought Castro would reject the missiles because they would compromise the independence of the Cuban revolution . Alexiev: Castro's rejection of the missiles would compromise his revolution's independence .
 The success of Khrushchev’s exercise in Soviet missile power was predicated on presenting President Kennedy with a fait accompli . President Kennedy was presented with the Soviet Union's missile program .
 The Soviet "hedgehogs" would be installed in Cuba while Washington was preoccupied with the November 1962 congressional elections . The Soviet “hedgehog’s” would be deployed in Cuba during November 1962 .
 Khrushchev would tell Kennedy about the Soviet missile deployment after the elections, when the missiles would be fully operational . Kennedy would be able to see the missiles after the election, when they would be operational .
 Khrushchev said Kennedy would not launch U.S. military strikes against missile sites . Kennedy said he could not be sure of taking out all of the missiles . Kennedy: "I could not take out all the missiles"
 President Kennedy reasoned that Kennedy would grudgingly accept the missiles in Cuba as an alternative to nuclear war with the Soviet Union . He reasoned that JFK would grudgely accept that it was an alternative .
 In June, Alexiev returned to Cuba with a delegation from the Soviet Union . Alexiev's delegation included Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, head of the Strategic Rocket Forces, and politician Sharaf Rashidov .
 When the delegation met with Fidel Castro, the Soviets discussed the international situation and the possibility of a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 Marshal Biryuzov asked Castro what he thought would deter U.S. military intervention . Castro said it would deter the United States military intervention.
 The Soviet delegation insisted that only Soviet missile power could prevent U.S. intervention . The Soviets insisted only Soviet missiles could prevent United States intervention .
 The Soviets said the missiles would also enhance the power of the USSR and the Socialist bloc of nations . The missiles were developed in the USSR in the 1960s .
 He said he wanted to consult with his closest colleagues before making a decision about the missiles . But he said he was not ready to make a decision until after consulting with his colleagues .
 The next day Alexiev met again with Castro, who was joined by Che Guevara, President Osvaldo Dorticos, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, and Blas Roca . Alexiev's visit was the first time he had met with Castro since the war .
 The idea that Soviet missiles in Cuba would make the Socialist bloc stronger appealed to the Cuban revolutionaries . The Cuban revolutionaries believed that the Soviet missiles would make it stronger .
 It also tempered their concern that the missiles would compromise the independence of the revolution .