 This blog will show several of these incidents through the eyes of John F Kennedy . This blog is a look at the events surrounding Kennedy's assassination .
 It is insane that two men, sitting on opposite sides of the world, should be able to decide to bring an end to civilization . Thirteen Days In October 5 notes April 8, 2014 .
 Some interpreted Khrushchev’s challenge as a prelude to a planned Soviet takeover of West Berlin . Some including President Kennedy interpreted it as a planned takeover .
 An ExComm memo noted that the presence of these missiles on Cuba did not significantly upset the pre-existing balance of power . At the same time, an ExComm memorandum noted that such a move would not have upset the balance .
 Robert McNamara stated that U.S. demands that the missiles be removed were politically, not militarily, motivated . In an interview conducted 25 years later, McNamara said that the United States demanded that missiles removed were political, not military .
 Diplomatic crisis and diplomatic stalemate continued over the following weeks .
 President Kennedy writes a letter to the widow of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr., offering condolences, and informing her that he is awarding him the Distinguished Service Medal, posthumously .
 Kennedy insists removal of American missiles in Turkey will have to be part of an overall negotiated settlement . Kennedy says removal of the American missiles will be a part of a negotiated settlement with Turkey .
 The Committee ultimately decides to ignore the Saturday letter from Moscow and respond favorably to the Friday message .
 Air Force troop carrier squadrons are ordered to active duty in case an invasion is required . Robert Kennedy meets secretly with Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 In an additional secret understanding, the United States agrees to eventually remove the Jupiter missiles .
 The Daily Mail is published on 3 September 1962 . Click here to read the full article .
 The Daily Mail is published in the Guardian on 22 October 1962 . Click here to read the full article .
 The rebels were easily put down by a well-armed Cuban army that had strong links with the Soviet Union . Knowing that the Soviets were eager to prop up fellow communist regimes, the United States remained watchful .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message that Soviet missiles would be taken back . Days later, the world held its breath as the Soviet ships edged closer to their destination only to receive instructions from Moscow to turn back .