 The views expressed are entirely the author’s own and not that of the S Rajaratnam School of International Studies . The views of the author's own do not represent the school of international studies .
 RSIS’ mission is to be a leading research and graduate teaching institution in strategic and international affairs in the Asia Pacific . RSIS was earlier known as the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies .
 RSIS offers a challenging graduate education in international affairs . The program is taught by an international faculty of leading thinkers and practitioners .
 The Master of Science degree programmes in Strategic Studies, International Relations and International Political Economy are distinguished by their focus on the Asia Pacific . They focus on professional practice of international affairs .
 Students from more than 50 countries have successfully completed one of these programmes . Thus far, students have completed the programmes in 50 countries .
 A small but select Ph.D. programme caters to advanced students . Students supervised by faculty members with matching interests .
 The focus of research is on issues relating to the security and stability of the Asia Pacific region and their implications for Singapore and other countries in the region .
 The school has four professorships that bring distinguished scholars and practitioners to teach and conduct research at the school . The school also has four other professorships .
 They are the S Rajaratnam Professorship in Strategic Studies, the Ngee Ann Kongsi Professorial in International Relations, the NTUC Professory in International Economic Relations and the Bakrie Professivity in Southeast Asia Policy .
 RSIS aims to form a global network of excellence . Collaboration with other professional schools of international affairs is a priority . RSIS: Collaboration is a top priority .
 The paper argues that in an increasingly complex and interdependent world strategic intelligence may not be able to provide policy makers with the foresight of crisis and its possible outcomes .
 Strategic intelligence can perhaps help policy makers make sense of an increasingly chaotic, uncertain and unpredictable situation . Policy makers must grasp the complexity of a spectrum of possible outcomes, says Julian Zelizer .
 He joined the School after serving at its forerunner, the old Department of Strategic Studies at SAFTI Military Institute .
 He was seconded for several years to the Oral History Department and concurrently, the old National Museum, which he led through a major reorganization .
 He has published on subjects from the archaeology of 14th century Singapore to policy analysis for regional security crisis management . “There cannot be a crisis next week. There cannot be next week,” he says .
 The Cuban missile crisis has, and continues to be the locus case of successful crisis management, says Kissinger . Henry Kissinger . Kissinger: U.S. intelligence in shaping the crisis shaped the crisis .
 The evaluations of U.S. intelligence performance in the Cuban crisis have usually focused on the failure to estimate the Soviet intent to deploy strategic missiles on Cuba .
 Declassified records now enable us to assess the support U.S. intelligence provided to their policy makers during the crisis by monitoring the levels of Soviet buildup on Cuba and globally .
 Declassified records also enable us to follow U.S. intelligence monitoring of the Soviet removal of their missiles from Cuba . The Soviet missile removal from Cuba is a key part of the story .
 The opening up of the Soviet archives shows that Soviet intelligence was cut out of the decision making leading to the deployment of missiles on Cuba . In contrast, Soviet intelligence had no information on U.S. options and response to this deployment .
 The Cuban missile crisis confirms our conventional thinking of an international crisis as an unexpected and surprising turn of events that threatens the survival of the nation-state . The crisis confirms conventional thinking that international crisis is a surprise and unexpected event .
 Editor M Leventhal invited a number of leading historians to either write an aphorism about history or to select a quote about history . He asked them to provide a commentary on their choice of quotations .
 Longman/Addison-Wesley, 1999, 2nd edn. (Rational Actor Model) remains the benchmark study . This second edition reiterates the Rational Actor Model of decision making .
 Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 indicates that the CIA did consider this prospect, but ruled it out . The CIA has not ruled out the possibility of a terrorist attack .
 Strategic intelligence is, in our current understanding of international crises, expected to provide the information which anticipates what the adversary is planning and so enable the policy maker to take appropriate pre-emptive action to avoid war .
 Crisis management is about maintaining control over events to avoid war, 6 and intelligence is expected to provide policy makers the foreknowledge of events taking an unexpected turn leading to a crisis . Crisis management will focus on maintaining control of events and preventing war .
 U-2 aerial photographs confirmed the construction of missiles sites on Cuba . The images undermined the Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 . The crisis arose on 14 October .
 Crisis management is about maintaining control over events to avoid war . 2 to be Soviet national interests and clear U.S. warnings of its interests. 3 to be clear United States .
 Khrushchev feared the U.S. would discover the deployment of Soviet missiles before they had completed it and so present the US with a fait accompli . The outbreak of a crisis was over whether the United States .
 Khrushchev thought Kennedy would do nothing because the U.S. was already vulnerable to Soviet intercontinental missiles . He said Kennedy would not act because it was not a new or escalating threat to the United States . Kennedy would never act again because of the threat, he said .
 Khrushchev may have assessed that the Soviet Union could withstand any diplomatic pressure from the young U.S. President . Further, he may have thought that the Soviets would be able to withstand diplomatic pressure .
 The first step of political crisis management is understanding what sense the adversaries are making of their rapidly changing environment . We then decide upon our response to the evolving crisis we then decide on how to respond .
 Understanding the resolve of the other side in holding on to their intention is a key to our formulation of a negotiation strategy for the settlement of the crisis . This understanding is key to the formulation of the negotiation strategy, says Dr. David Cameron .
 The crux of successful crisis management is to be aware that the degree of coercion we are prepared to exert on the adversary feeds back into the crisis . Our response then becomes the basis of the next phase of the crisis when the adversary has to decide what to do next .
 U.S. policy-makers saw al-Qaeda’s actions as an evil against which the United States must engage in a Manichean struggle . But more important was how those visions fed into United States visions of their place and role in the world, he says .
 The limits of coercive diplomacy acknowledge that successful crisis management is about recognizing the limits and need to moderate coercive diplomacy . Successful crisis management can be about recognizing that there are limits .
 The traditional expectations of intelligence in the management of a political crisis are firstly to apprise the policy maker of the impending breakdown of normalcy and the possible outbreak of a crisis or worse, surprise attack .
 Intelligence is expected to provide the policy maker during the crisis with a constant flow of estimates and assessments of the other side’s intentions and response to the changing environment . Second, intelligence will provide policy makers with constant estimates, assessments of other sides' intentions .
 Estimates and assessments are expected to provide policy makers with an advantage in negotiating a settlement of the crisis or prosecution of a war . Third, these estimates and assessments will provide the policy maker with a . advantage .
 "The track record of intelligence in fulfilling these expectations in a crisis has been dismal," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to rely on the intelligence of intelligence," says Obama .
 All crises which escalated and erupted into war from before the Japanese invasion of Pearl Harbor that precipitate World War II in the Pacific, to the ongoing war in Iraq have been attributed to intelligence failures .
 Ex-CIA analyst Michael Scheuer writing anonymously in the first edition of his Imperial Hubris; Why the West is losing the war on terror makes the same critique of the US, that its imperial hubris will be its downfall in its war on al-Qaeda .
 A lack of awareness of more instances of successful de-escalation of a crisis12 to which strategic intelligence may have contributed, has focused attention on the catastrophes .
 The consequent post-mortems and studies have blamed intelligence for failure to provide their policy makers the foresight and understanding to avoid war in a crisis . Intelligence failed to provide policy makers with foresight, understanding, foresight .
 The first category of failures is the inability of intelligence to see through the fog of deception created by the adversary in the build-up to a crisis, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Central to penetrating the fog of deception is uncovering the adversary’s actions to cover and conceal his movements to launch a surprise attack . Central to uncovering an adversary's actions are uncovering his actions to hide his movements .
 The Soviets successfully covered and concealed much of their shipment of their missiles to Cuba from the CIA until 14 October, when they were about to complete it . The Soviet Union successfully concealed and concealed the shipment of its missiles .
 Barton Whaley13 pioneered the study of stratagems employed by adversaries in a crisis to deceive and surprise their adversary for a strategic advantage . Barton. Whaley.13 pioneered . study of . adversaries in . crisis .
 Whaley’s 1969 study of the signals and warnings of the German invasion of Russia in 1941 are significant for how the Allied intelligence services drew very different interpretations from these warnings .
 Deception and Denial of information by the adversary of their intentions and actions are a major obstacle they are up against in their efforts to provide better assessments and estimates to their policy makers . The lesson that intelligence services have drawn is that .
 Michael Handel has distinguished military surprise as an integral part of military planning from diplomatic surprise . Surprise in military planning is to gain a strategic advantage over the adversary who must be then deprived of knowledge of moves against him .
 Diplomatic surprise is about moves and signals to the adversary of planned changes in foreign policy which may surprise the other . In contrast, diplomatic surprise is not about surprises, it is about signals and signals of changes to foreign policy .
 The 1971 US-Chinese rapprochement is an instance of a major diplomatic surprise de-escalating US-China tensions . The 1971 U.S. and China's diplomatic relations have been strained for decades .
 The second category of explanations for intelligence failures are the cognitive biases driving intelligence analysis . The cognitive biases drive intelligence analysis, the author says . Intelligence failures can be explained by cognitive biases, he says .
 CIA veteran Richards J Heuer, Jr16 has advised his staff that there are biases in the evaluation of evidence . Heuer: "There are also biases in estimating probabilities and finally hindsight biases in evaluating intelligence products"
 Studies by a generation of scholars from Roberta Wohlstetter in her 1962 classic study of Pearl Harbor,17 to Richard Betts, 18 Robert Jervis19and a generation . post-Yom Kippur Israeli scholars lead by Michael I Handel 20 and including Z
 The third category of reasons for intelligence failures to forecast crisis and surprise attacks are attributed to the management and organization of the intelligence services . The management of intelligence services is a key factor in intelligence failures .
 This has been the finding of most Commissions of Inquiry from Pearl Harbor to Agranat Commission on failures in Israeli intelligence leading to Israel being surprised in 1973 .
 Handel’s insights into surprise and intelligence failure are examined and further developed in Richard K Betts and T Mahnkam, eds., Paradoxes of strategic intelligence . Handel's insights are examined further in Richard Betts' new book .
 I thank Zvi Lanir, who served in the Israeli Defence Force intelligence, for discussing his work with me in the late 1980’s .
 The challenge in reforming the intelligence services is the delicate checking of overcentralisation and balance with decentralization and pluralism . The challenge is the balance between decentralisation and decentralization, pluralism and decentralisation .
 Failure of intelligence to warn policy makers of an impending crisis may be rooted in their relations to their policy maker . Failure to warn their policy makers is rooted in relations between intelligence agencies and policy makers . The failure to warn of a crisis may also have been rooted in the relationship of intelligence agencies
 The mainstream expectation of the intelligence analyst is that he is to provide an objective and accurate picture of ‘what is out there” to his policy maker . The expectation of an intelligence analyst to be objective is to be accurate, he says .
 He is not necessarily a part of the policy process to ensure that his estimates and assessments are not biased and politicized, he says . He says he is concerned that his estimate and assessments not biased .
 Intelligence analyst, unaware of policy needs and tensions, risks producing estimates and assessments which are irrelevant to policy needs . But separated from the policy process, the intelligence analyst, cannot be separated from policy process .
 The challenge is how to be close to the policy maker without being caught in the policy process, says an intelligence analyst . Intelligence analyst: "The challenge is to produce politicized products which rationalize and justify policy goals rather than advising on the possible responses these policy goals might evoke from the
 It assumes that the policy maker is in some control of his environment and assured of being able to decide his future in an orderly, stable and predictable world . Policy makers assume they are in control of their environment .
 The quote attributed to Kissinger at the start of this essay typifies this attitude towards our world . Kissinger's attitude towards the world is reflected in his view of the world .
 An international crisis is precipitated by an actor seeking to challenge and change the established order to his favour . Within this ordered world of policy making, an international crisis has been precipitated .
 The intelligence analyst is expected to provide the policy maker the warning for action to deter the actor from destabilizing the status quo .
 North Korea and Iran’s persistence in developing its nuclear capabilities. This, from the perspective of Washington and its allies, is the issue of U.S. and allies . Iran and North Korea are both developing their nuclear capabilities, experts say . This is the case of North Korea
 The challenge for intelligence is how to build a more effective early warning system to anticipate and manage crisis29.29. The challenge is to build an earlier warning system that can anticipate, manage crisis .
 The challenge for policy makers is to recognize that the actor challenging the international order has crossed the Rubicon . The crisis is in progress, and contingency plans to contain the damage and limit the crisis must be launched .
 Harvard Business School, 1999 (which indicates how thinking on crisis management has evolved from 1994 to 1999 in eight classic articles) which indicate how thinking has evolved since 1994 has evolved in eight articles .
 The escalation of a crisis in large part depends upon how the policy maker makes sense of, and grasp the crises as it unfolds . Planning for the inevitable (Backinprint.com.Edition; Cincinnati, Ohio: Authors Guild, 2002)
 Neither can anticipate the nature and extent of ‘blowback’ which will follow that naval confrontation or detention of a fishing vessel . Neither can predict the nature or extent of "blowback" that will follow .
 Today we continue to argue about the alternative explanations and narratives of what happened and the appropriateness of the responses to terminate these crises . We continue to debate about the alternatives to terminate crises .
 Incidents at Sea escalating into political crises are likely to continue as the South China Sea and the East China Sea become increasingly contested . Such incidents at sea could continue to escalate into political .
 The unintended consequences of an Incident-at-Sea between competing Naval vessels or detention of fishing vessels are “wild cards” that are unpredictable and indicative of a complex and chaotic world .
 The instinctive reaction of the skipper to being pursued by the Coast Guard cannot be anticipated and may trigger a series of events which culminates in a diplomatic crisis which was totally unpredictable . The reaction to being chased by a Coast Guard vessel cannot be predicted .
 The policy maker today will not have the time which Kennedy and his advisers had in 1962 to reflect on their proposed responses to Khrushchev . Kennedy's advisers will not be able to come up with their proposals in 1962 .
 Information technology today has created a new matrix of real-time information flows, enabling an unprecedented number of participants in a crises to witness what is happening . Information technology has created an unprecedented opportunity to witness a crisis .
 The crisis maybe compounded by dormant or new stakeholders in the policy process emerging to assert a claim to the crisis for their own agendas . The crisis may also be compounded by new stakeholders emerging in policy process .
 Non-governmental and other political movements or groups may try to push policy makers towards their special interest . Non-political movements may try and influence policy makers to push their special interests .
 The recent incidents-at-sea in the South China Sea involved not only Naval vessels of the conflicting parties, but also their Coast Guards and other maritime agencies with different agendas for how to deal .
 Strategic intelligence will probably be unable to help the policy maker link cause and effect in such crises because they are impossible to determine in the turbulence of the crisis . Strategic intelligence can't help policy makers link cause to effect in crises, says David Cameron .
 This linking of cause and effect maybe apparent only in hindsight, after the crisis . It makes it difficult, if not impossible, for the policy maker to decide how to intervene in the unfolding course of events to alter the effect .
 Donald Rumsfeld’s now infamous 2 February 2002 statement on the absence of evidence linking Saddam Hussein with the supply of weapons of mass destruction to terrorist groups . “There are known knowns; there are things we know we know,” he said in 2002 .
 We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say there are some things we do not know . We know there is some unknowns, but we also know that there are also unknowns .
 Dave Snowdon, consultant and researcher in the field of knowledge management, explains that in the world of unknown-unknowns the ‘leader’s immediate job is not to discover patterns but to stanch the bleeding .
 Studies of how corporate chiefs react to crises shows that they act to bring events and structures into existence which they hope will contain, if not terminate, the crisis .
 This decision of whether to escalate or de-escalate the crisis or go for a stand-off is shaped by a range of cognitive biases . Decision of whether or not to escalate the crisis will be shaped by the cognitive biases of a crisis, says Simon Tisdall .
 Our minds, as Daniel Kahneman has demonstrated, are wired to think fast and slow . Our minds are wired for thinking fast and slowly, says Kahneman .
 Fast thinking enables us to balance on a bicycle without falling, multiply 2x2 or orient to the source of a sudden sound and detect hostility in a voice . Fast thinking can help us balance on bicycles without falling or multiply 2 x2 or find a source of hostility .
 It is this system of fast thinking that usually drives our reactions to the world around us, and in this case, respond to a crisis . It is that fast thinking is what drives our reaction to the events around us and our reaction .
 The slower, more deliberative and logical system of our mind is only activated when fast thinking confronts a problem it has no immediate response to, like multiplying 17x24 . The slower system of the mind is activated only when it is confronted with an immediate problem, such as multiply 17x
 The role of intelligence must be to support the slow thinking reflective system of the policy maker’s mind. Intelligence must support slow thinking, say experts . Intelligence must also support a reflective system in policy makers’ minds, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Arguably, intelligence support for the fast thinking system of the policy maker’s mind has been its nemesis when it provides the desired evidence, for example of the presence of WMD in Iraq .
 Intelligence should feed the slow thinking system of the policy-maker's mind to break the instinctive fast thinking system’s move to action because that action will not be taken . Intelligence should then feed slow thinking to the slow-thinking system of policy-makers’ mind .
 Amos Tversjy received the Nobel Prize in 2002 for his work on decision-making and uncertainty in 2002 . His work was published in Penguin Books in 2011 .
 It is a dynamic decision problem requiring the policy maker to make sequential risky choices in a rapidly evolving and complex environment . Policy makers must choose sequential risky decisions in a rapid evolving environment .
 The policy maker has to make sense of the feedback and consequences of his choice and decide how to respond to the next round of crisis .
 Policy makers can try to anticipate, but cannot control how a decision he makes now will impact on his options later in the unfolding crisis . Further, policy makers can't control how decisions he makes will impact his options in future .
 The sequential risky choices made by adversaries in a crisis create an uncertain and unpredictable environment not under their control, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The challenge for intelligence is to advise policy makers on the adversary’s capacity for risk, sensitize the policy maker to the possible consequences of his risky choices and open up his mindset to divergent outcomes of the crisis . Intelligence is the role of intelligence to inform policy makers about the
 There are multiple possible outcomes as competing parties in the crisis manoeuver and act out their scenarios to contain the crisis . Rather than a single outcome, there are multiple potential outcomes as parties act out scenarios for each other .
 Dave Snowden has pointed out that in a complex and chaotic world there is not one future we are working towards . Dave Snowden: In a complex, chaotic world, there is no one future that we can work towards .
 There are multiple futures we could work towards which we need to probe, make sense of and then respond to . Rather, there are multiple future futures which we could explore and respond to, rather than just make sense .
 The start point of policy is not necessarily the past leading into the known present and then work towards the knowable future . It is not the past, but the future, and the start point should be the future .
 The more useful start point may be the multiple futures which a crisis could lead to and probe for patterns among them which can then be worked back to our present . Rather than a crisis crisis may lead to a crisis, it should be a focus on the future .
 Understanding China's position on its claims to the South China Sea will involve identifying the various Chinese agencies who have emerged or are emerging as interested parties claiming a stake in the issue . Understanding China’s position will involve trying to make sense of their different claims .
 The ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on their positions and claims of some to the South China Sea are even more complex . Making sense of the strategic ambivalence and ambiguity of the ten members is even more complicated .
 See J Gleick, Chaos on the ‘butterfly effect’ 41 See the International Crisis Group, Asia Report no.3, “Stirring up the South China Sea ” on trying to make sense of Chinese policies .
 The issue maybe more complex than poor or lack of coordination between China’s different state agencies claiming an interest in the South China Sea, as this report suggests . Each of these agencies has a different justification and narrative for their stake in the sea, the report says .
 Traditional data processing is hierarchic, in which mountains of data are processed upwards through layers of ‘experts’ into a single agreed assessment . Traditional data is processed upwards, through the layers of a pyramid of experts, into a one-off assessment .
 SNIE 85-3-62 issued by the CIA assessing it to be unlikely the Soviets would deploy missiles on Cuba . SNIE is the Intelligence Estimate, SNIE-85-2-62 .
 This pyramid has to be inverted in a search for multiple and divergent patterns, says David Cameron . But in the emergent complexity leading to the chaos world of crisis management, this pyramid has been inverted, he says .
 Predictive warning may then be socializing the policy maker into understanding and accepting that there are multiple futures . The ‘dots’ of which need to be connected into various patterns that could form probable futures or scenarios which the analyst and policy maker then needs to keep in view .
 Connecting these multiple futures will be dependent upon the intelligence analyst’s awareness and empathy for the different narratives that justifies the initiation and continuation of a crisis . The intelligence analyst will be responsible for the outcome of the crisis, writes John Avlon .
 Singapore’s reaction to any crisis has or may be involved in is the narrative of its survival against the odds to economic take-off to global city status . Singapore has aspirations to become one of the most successful cities in the world .
 For ASEAN, their narrative of the conflicting claims to the islands, reefs and waters of the South China Sea is about managing conflict in the region the “ASEAN Way” and the 40-year successful track record of what some critics have described as equivocation .
 The challenge for the intelligence analyst is to discern how these foundation narratives are being appropriated, adapted and asserted by different parties in an emerging crisis for different agendas .
 Such a change amounts to a paradigm shift in intelligence practice from attempting to predict the outcome of a crisis to only supporting the policy maker respond to a crisis . The changes amount to a shift in how intelligence practice is being used to respond to crises .
 This essay has argued for a paradigm shift in our understanding of international crises44 and the role of strategic intelligence in the termination of these crises on three grounds . It argues that strategic intelligence is key to terminating these crises .
 The first is the dismal record of intelligence in providing policy makers with sufficient warning time of the onset of a crisis . The second is the failure to provide enough time for policy makers to prepare for a crisis, the authors say .
 This essay has reviewed the variety of explanations and justifications for the failure of intelligence to warn of a crisis which escalates into a surprise attack .
 Intelligence is expected to provide early warning of a crisis within a policy framework that assumes an orderly, controllable world populated by Rational Actors working to maximize their gains . Second, and more problematic, is that intelligence should be expected to be able to detect a crisis in advance .
 It is a view of human society and its nature embedded in Enlightenment vision of the world of men . It is theorized in the work of at least two if not three generations of 20th century social and behavioural scientists .
 This view of our physical and natural world as an orderly and predictable reality verifiable by scientific investigations and codified in theories was undermined by new experiments and theorizing about our physical world from the beginning of the 20th century .
 In Thomas Khun’s phrase, it was a paradigm shift from Newtonian view of the physical world to a more uncertain, complex and chaotic world of sub-atomic particles of quantum physics .
 Behavioural economics challenges the rationality of homo economicus and the Rational Actor assumed in political science . The 'Rational Actor' is a form of behaviour that challenges the 'rationality' of political science and 'rationalism'
 The conundrum for intelligence is how to convince themselves and their policy-makers that the rationality they assume they bring to managing a crisis may be misleading them . Intelligence is often the case in the uncertainty and unpredictability of a crisis .
 Globalization is drawing us closer and making us more interdependent in a tightly networked and complex world . Third is how post-Cold War Globalization draws us closer to each other .
 Information technology is changing our world and how we relate to each other, to governments and to markets . It's changing our current www. world to a new world of complex flows of information and knowledge .
 Unforeseen events, this essay has argued, can reverberate through our tightly networked world with catastrophic consequences, escalating minor events or issues into a crisis . The essay concludes that such events can lead to catastrophic consequences in the world .
 An overload of fragmentary and contradictory information enabled by exponential development of information technology contributes to the confusion of the crisis . It challenges the power of governments to be more transparent, responsive and accountable for its actions .
 A new approach to intelligence support for policy makers caught in a crisis is needed . The new approach is needed to support policy-makers caught in crisis .
 Vietnam-China Relations Since The End of The Cold War . Ang Cheng Guan 2.2.3.4.5.5 . The relationship between Vietnam and China has been strained since the Cold War ended .
 Assessing the Buildup to the 1999-2000 General Elections Joseph Liow Chin Yong 6.6.5.5 . Assess the build-up of the 1999/2000 General Election .
 Reading Discontinuity in Late-Modern Diplomatic Practice Tan See Seng 9.9.5.5 .
 The Case of Regime Maintenance and Foreign Policy Terence Lee Chek Liang 11. The case is the case of the U.S. government's foreign policy in the Philippines . The case was the case for the Philippines, Vietnam and North Korea .
 Framework for Autonomy in Southeast Asia’s Plural Societies . Miriam Coronel Ferrer 14.14.14 .
 Asian Developing Countries and the Next Round of WTO Negotiations . Barry Desker 19.19. The next round of negotiations will take place in China and the U.S.
 The Role of the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation Forum Ian Taylor 20.20. Ian Taylor . Ian Taylor: The role of the Forum is to be seen as an important part of the world's economic community .
 Chien-peng Chung 25. The Effect Of Social Division On InterKorean and Cross-Strait Relations . The effect of social division on InterKorea and cross-strait relations will be studied .
 The Domestics Politics – Domestic Capital Nexus . Helen E S Nesadurai is the author of the book, "Domestic Capital Nexus" She is also the founder of the National Institute for Economic Development and Policy .
 Islam and Society in Southeast Asia after September 11 after 9/11 . Barry Desker 34. His book, "Islam and Society" is published in Asia Asia, Southeast Asia .
 Irvin Lim 36. Not Yet All Aboard…But Already All At Sea Over Container Security Initiative . IrvinLim: "I'm not sure how long I'll be in the air"
 David Kirkpatrick 42. A UK Perspective on Defence Equipment Acquisition . A UK perspective on defence equipment acquisition . A British perspective on the acquisition of defence equipment .
 Razeen Sally 44: Structural Shifts, State-Of-Play And Prospects For The Doha Round of the World Series .
 China and Southeast Asia In The Emerging Asian Order Amitav Acharya 45. China, Southeast Asia in the emerging Asian Order . Acharya: The region's economic ties to China and the region's growing middle class .
 Tatik S Hafidz 47. The War On Terror And The Future of Indonesian Democracy . Tatik is the author of a book, "Indonesia's War on Terror and Corruption"
 Adrian Kuah 49. Sovereignty and The Politics of Identity in International Relations . Adrian Kuaha 49. sovereignty and identity in international relations .
 Alastair Iain Johnston 51. The Correlates of Nationalism in Beijing Public Opinion . The Chinese Communist Party of Communist China is considered to be a major factor in nationalism .
 Evelyn Goh 52. Negotiating the US-China Relationship and Regional Security . She talks to discuss the U.S.-China relationship and regional security .
 Richard Higgott 53: American Unilateralism, Foreign Economic Policy and the ‘Securitisation of Globalisation’ of globalisation . Richard Higgsott 53. American Unilaterism, foreign Economic Policy, and the 'Security of Globalising' of
 Naval Force Protection-Projection, Coast Guarding, Customs Border Security & Multilateral Cooperation in Rolling Back the Global Waves of Terror from the Sea . Irvin Lim 54. The U.S. Navy has been involved in the fight against terrorism in the past .
 Malcolm Brailey 56. An Ethical and Legal Critique of the Bush Doctrine and Anticipatory Use of Force In Defence of the State . Malcolm . Brailey: "An ethical and legal Critique of the Bush . Doctrine critique criticizes the Bush
 Irvin Lim 59. Weighs in on Force Transformation & Speed Kills Post-Operation Iraqi Freedom . Weigh in on force transformation & speed kills post-OIS .
 Chong Ja Ian 61: Buffering, Binding, Bonding and Beleaguering in the Real World . Chong Ja Ja Ian: "Buffering and Binding" in the real world is a form of binding and binding .
 Outline on the Indonesian Parliamentary Election 2004 Irman G Lanti 62 . Irman Lanti was 62. Lanti won the election in 2004 .
 UAVs/UCAVS – Missions, Challenges, and Strategic Implications for Small and Medium Powers Manjeet Singh Pardesi 67. UCAVS are missions, challenges, and strategic implications for small and medium Powers . UCAVs are missions of U.S.
 Joshua Ho 69. The Shifting Of Maritime Power And The Implications For Maritime Security In East Asia . Joshua Ho: Maritime security in East Asia is changing . Ho: Shifting of maritime power and the Implications for maritime security in Asia are significant .
 The Regional Security Implications of Resource Development On The Lancang Jiang Jiang Evelyn Goh 70. Jiang: The regional security implications of resource development on the Lancang region will be discussed .
 John Bradford 76: Threats, Opportunity, And Charting The Course Forward . John Bradford, 76, is the author of the book, "John Bradford 76"
 Deducing India’s Grand Strategy of Regional Hegemony from Historical and Conceptual Perspectives Manjeet Singh Pardesi 77. Deducating India's grand strategy of regional hegemony from historical and conceptual perspectives .
 A Comparative Study of Attempts to Broker Peace with MNLF and GAM S P Harish 78. 78. The study was conducted by Harish Harish . Harish was a member of the National Socialist Socialist Party .
 Amitav Acharya 79. Acharya: Multilateralism, Sovereignty and Normative Change in World Politics . Acharya was a member of the World Council of Statesmen . He was the author of a book entitled "World Politics" Acharya's first major book, "World
 Riaz Hassan 80. The State and Religious Institutions in Muslim Societies in Muslim societies . The State of the Islamic State and . Religious institutions in Muslim . Societies . Riaz . Hassan . 80.
 Arthur S Ding 83: Civil-Military Relationship and Reform in the Defence Industry . Civil-military Relationship . Reforms in the defence industry . Reform in Defence Industry.
 Deborah Elms 84. Bilateral Trade Negotiations and Bargaining Strategies . Bilateral trade Negotiation . Negotiating strategies . Negotiation .
 Sayyid Qutb’s Reading of the Qur’an is the work of Umej Bhatia 87. Autobiography, Politics and Ideology in Sayyids Qutbs .
 Helen E S Nesadurai 96. Sowing The Seeds For Revisioning International Society . Sowing the Seeds for Revisioning . International Society Helen E. S Nedadurai . Sowed The Seeds Of Revisioning. International Society. Helen E . S Nsadurai
 Securitization of Illegal Migration of Bangladeshis to India is part of a plan to crack down on the problem .
 Environmental Management and Conflict in Southeast Asia – Land Reclamation and its Political Impact . Kog Yue-Choong 102. Environmental Management . In Southeast Asia, land reclamation . Land reclamation is a form of land reclaiming in Southeast Asian countries .
 Mika Toyota 103. The case of marginalized stateless minorities in the ThaiBurma Borderlands . The case is the work of a stateless minority minority in Thailand .
 The LTTE’s Online Network and its Implications for Regional Security Shyam Tekwani 105.5.5 . The LTte's online network is the largest in the world, with more than 1,000 members of the group .
 Inchon and Stalin in the “Trigger Vs Justification” debate . Tan Kwoh Jack 106.9: "Trigger Vs. Justification" Debate .
 ASEAN Cooperation against the Illicit Trafficking and Abuse of Drugs Ralf Emmers 107 . Emmers is the leader of the region's anti-drug cooperation group . He is also a member of the United States.
 TEMPORAL DOMINANCE Military Transformation and the Time Dimension of Strategy Edwin Seah 110 . Edwin Seah is the author of a new book, "The Time-Dimension of Strategy"
 UNCLOS and its Limitations as the Foundation for a Regional Maritime Security Regime . Sam Bateman 112. UNUNCLOS is the foundation for a regional maritime security Regime, he says .
 Paul Mitchell 113. Freedom and Control Networks in Military Environments . Paul T Mitchell 113 . Paul Mitchell. Paul Mitchell . 113. Mitchell . Mitchell: "Freedom of Control Networks"
 Kwa Chong Guan 114. Rewriting Indonesian History . The Future in Indonesia’s Past . The future in Indonesian history .
 Muslim Political Discourse in Late 19 th and Early 20th century India Iqbal Singh Sevea 116. Muslim Political discourse in late 19th and early 20th . century India . Sevesa: Muslim political discourse in India .
 Some Thoughts on the Nature of Iran’s Ambitions in the Middle East . Christoph Marcinkowski 125. Some thoughts on the nature of Iran's ambition in the Mideast .
 Chinese Military Modernization and the Rearming of Southeast Asia . Richard A Bitzinger 127. China's military modernization and its rearmament to Southeast Asia. China is one of the world's most successful nations .
 The De-escalation of the Spratly Dispute in Sino-Southeast Asian Relations Ralf Emmers 130. Ralf . Emmers. 130. Emmers . 130.
 Islamic Polity’s Basis of Inter-State Relations: War, Peace or Neutrality . Muhammad Haniff Hassan 131. The Islamic State of Islam is the birthplace of Islam .
 The AMM and the Transition from Conflict to Peace in Aceh, 2005–2006 Kirsten E Schulze 132. Kirsten Schulz 132. The Transition . The transition from conflict to peace was a transition period .
 Revolutionary War and Counterinsurgency in Southeast Asia . Ong Wei Chong 137.1.2.5.1 .
 Muhammad Haniff bin Hassan 139. 139. Contextualizing Political Islam for Minority Muslims . Islamic history of political Islam .
 Modernity and Its Discontents at the Pondok Pesantren al-Mukmin of Ngruki, Surakarta . Farish A Noor 140. Modernity .
 Geoffrey Till 141. Implications of and for and for the Modern / Post-modern Navies of the Asia Pacific . Geoffrey Till is the author of a new book, The Modern Navies and the Post-Modern Navies .
 Islamic Militancy, Sharia, and Democratic Consolidation in Post-Suharto Indonesia . Noorhaidi Hasan 144. Islamic Militantism, Sharia and Democratic consolidation of Indonesia . Hasan 144 .
 The Indian Ocean and The Maritime Balance of Power in Historical Perspective . Emrys Chew 145. The maritime balance of power in the Indian Ocean in historical Perspective .
 U.S. Primacy, Eurasia’s New Strategic Landscape,and the Emerging Asian Order . Alexander L Vuving 148. U.V. Vuving: The United States Primacy .
 The Asian Financial Crisis and ASEAN’s Concept of Security Yongwookook RYU 149. The Asian Economic Crisis and aSEAN's Concept of . Security is a key part of the A.E.I. strategy for A.S. to deal with
 Richard A Bitzinger 151. Implications for the United States and Singapore . Implications of the U.S. and Singapore in the future . Richard A
 The Islamic Opposition in Malaysia: New Trajectories and Directions . Mohamed Fauz Abdul Hamid 152. The Islamic opposition in Malaysia is the Islamic Opposition .
 Farish A Noor 153: Modernization and Reform of Islamic Higher Education in Indonesia . Farish Noor: Reforms and Modernization of Islamic higher education in Indonesia. 153: Reform and Reform in Islamic Higher education. Noor. 153.
 Outlook for Malaysia’s 12th General Elections . Mohamed Nawab Mohamed Osman, Shahirah Mahmood and Joseph Chinyong Liow 154. 154.
 JN Mak 157: Sovereignty In ASEAN and The Problem of Maritime Cooperation in the South China Sea . JN 157: The problem of maritime cooperation in the S.C. Sea .
 Military Organizational Behaviour and Civil-Military Relations in Indonesia Evan A Laksmana 162. Military Organisations Behaviour in Indonesia . The Indonesian military has been described as a 'military community' in Indonesia.
 Emerging Sub-regional Integration between China and ASEAN . Gu Xiaosong and Li Mingjiang 169. 169. China's relationship with the region is one of the world's fastest-growing economies .
 Hizbut Tahrir Indonesia’s Mobilization Strategy and Its Impact in Indonesia . Mohamed Nawab Mohamed Osman 172. HizBut Tahrir . Indonesia's Mobilization strategy and its impact in Indonesia.
 Integrated Islamic School and a New Trend in Formal Education Institution in Indonesia Noorhaidi Hasan 173. Noor . Hasan 173 is an integrated Islamic School .
 Farish A Noor 176: The Spread of the Tablighi Jama’at Across Western, Central and Eastern Java and the role of the Indian Muslim Diaspora . Farish Noor: The role of Indian Muslims in Indonesia is to be seen as a role model
 Abu Dujana and Zarkasih’s Verdict . Nurfarahislinda Binte Mohamed Ismail, V Arianti and Jennifer Yang Hui 177. Verdict: Abu Du Jana, V. V. Arianti .
 How ASEAN’s Meta-Regime Undermines Economic and Environmental Cooperation . Vinod K Aggarwal and Jonathan T Chow 178. 178.
 The Capacities of Coast Guards to deal with Maritime Challenges in Southeast Asia . Prabhakaran Paleri 179. The Capicities of the Coast Guards . to deal . with maritime challenges in Southeast . Asia .
 Cambodia's Long Sarou 181. Livelihood Strategies Amongst Indigenous Peoples in the Central Cardamom Protected Forest, Cambodia . Cambodia's Central cardamom protected forest .
 Neth Naro 182. Reintegration of the Cambodian illegal migrants from Vietnam and Thailand . Neth is the first Cambodian to be reintegrated into Cambodia .
 United States and Singaporean Approaches to Strategic Planning . Singaporean and U.S. approaches to strategic planning . Singaporeans and Singaporeans have a history of strategic thinking .
 J Jackson Ewing 188. Climate Change and Conflict in the Southern Philippines . Climate change and conflict in the southern Philippines in the area .
 The Arrival and Spread of the Tablighi Jama’at In West Papua In Indonesia . Farish A Noor 192. 192. Farish
 China's Role in dealing with North Korea’s Nuclear Quandary is at odds with the North Korean government . Chung Chong Wook: North Korea is facing a nuclear crisis in its nuclear program .
 Ralf Emmers 196. The Role of the Five Power Defence Arrangements in the Southeast Asian Security Architecture . The role of the five power defence arrangements in Southeast Asian security architecture is to be considered a model for the region .
 Richard W Carney 197. Agrarian Influence and the Creation of United States Securities Regulations . Richard W. Carney 197 . Agrarians influence and the creation of the U.S. Securities Regulations were created .
 Military and intelligencegathering activities, Marine Scientific Research and hydrographic surveys in an EEZ Yang Fang 199 . The area is located in the Yang Fang region of China .
 Deepak Nair 200. Regional Institutions in East Asia and the Dynamic of Unstated Goals . Deepak's 200.000 words: "I am not satisfied with what I have achieved"
 The 1915 Indian Sepoy Mutiny in Singapore was a case study of the impact of profiling of religious and ethnic minorities . The 1915 incident was the result of a mutiny by Indian Muslims against the government .
 Ralf Emmers and John Ravenhill 209. 209. Consequences for East Asian Regionalism . The result of this article will be published in the New Year's Review of Asia .
 Bhubindar Singh and Philip Shetler-Jones 210. The Function of Globalization . The function of globalization is to be seen as a function of the economy .
 India’s Emerging Land Warfare Doctrines and Capabilities . Colonel Harinder Singh 211. India's emerging Land Warfare doctrines. Doctrine .
 A Trigger for a View into the Insightful Complex of Conceptual and Historical Links Giora Eliraz 215. A Trigger . A trigger for a view into the . Insightful . Complex of . Conceptual . and Historical . Links . A Trigger For a View of the Insight
 The Function of Political Values and State Capacity is the function of political values and state capacity . Christopher Roberts 218. The function of Political Value and Capacity is to determine the state's capacity for political power .
 Muslim intellectualism and the conservative turn in post-Suharto Indonesia . Martin Van Bruinessen: Indonesia's Muslim culture has become more conservative since Suharto .
 Institutional Preconditions for Long-Range Planning in CrossCountry Perspective . Justin Zorn 224.0 .
 Li Mingjiang: China’s Search for a Multilateral World and Its Implications for SinoUnited States Relations . Li also discusses China's search for a multilateral world and its implications for the U.S. He says China is looking for a multi-nation world .
 Leonard C Sebastian and Iisgindarsah 228. Major Strategic Gaps for the Next Stage of Reform for the next stage of Reform . Major strategic Gaps are discussed .
 A Perception Survey of Opinion Leaders Pradumna Bickram Rana, Wai-Mun Chia & Yothin Jinjarak 229. A Perception survey of opinion leaders was conducted in India .
 Teresita Cruz-del Rosario and James M Dorsey 231. Comparative Protest Spaces in Asia and the Middle East . Comparative protest spaces in Asia, Middle East.
 A Cursory Survey of the Social Studies and History textbooks of Indonesia, from Primary to Secondary Level . The survey of social studies and history textbooks in Indonesia .
 Theoretical Implications for Changes of Third-World Security Oriented Institution Kei Koga 235. Theoretically Implications of Changes of 3rd World Security Initiative Kei. Koga. 235.
 Farish A Noor 243. An Ethnic-Cultural Solidarity Movement in a Globalising Indonesia . Farish a Noor is an ethnic and cultural movement that aims to be a globalist .