 Blight and Lang provide a list of six points that they argue will help the reader get into the minds of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro .
 Armageddon is possible, is possible even if leaders are rational, can become highly probable in a crisis, will likely occur inadvertently, and remains virtually inevitable . As a result, nuclear weapons should be abolished, as a result .
 The book is centered on 43 letters and other communications among the three leaders . The authors use the letters to describe events that occurred during those tense thirteen days in 1962 .
 The book is organized like a play with chapters denoting the cast of characters, a prelude, acts 1 through 4, and a postscript . The book has chapters denoted the cast and a number of characters .
 The chapters provide comic strip illustrations presenting scenes of the key actors . The chapters also provide comic strips presenting scenes from the actors .
 The act chapters consist of the actual letters of the leaders during the crisis . The authors provide context that elaborates on events in the book .
 One is tempted to recommend this elegantly written, intense book for all users . The book is published by Simon Cowell, an award-winning author .
 Blight’s argument that fear played an instrumental role in the eventual outcome of that crisis is a central thesis . Blight: Fear played an important role in that crisis .
 The book is an attempt to go inside the minds of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the other participants in that game of near-death . More than that, however, the book is a chance to go back inside Kennedy's mind .
 Using the tools of his discipline Blight tracks the mind-sets of the decision-makers through the crisis . He focuses on the adaptive role that fear played in their decisions, especially during the fateful last 48 hous of the crisis.
 In the course of his analysis Blight takes issue with both the rational and irrational actor schools of analysis . Blight argues that neither approach is particularly useful in explaining what happened in 1962 .
 The argument is provocative, the writing superb, and the lesson important . The lesson is important, and it's provocative, but important .
 At the time, global nuclear war seemed a possibility when the United States discovered the construction of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . The U.S. demanded that the USSR withdraw immediately from Cuba .
 Roberts highlights events that led up to the crisis, details of the standoff, and the shortand long-term implications of standing at the brink of nuclear war . Roberts highlights the events leading up to this crisis, including the events of the crisis .
 This volume offers perspectives from the US, the Soviet Union, Cuba, and these countries’ allies . Includes newly found material from the Soviet archives . The volume includes material from Soviet archives.
 It features an introductory essay, more than 70 alphabetically arranged entries, a large bibliography, and a chronology . It features a large number of alphabetized entries and a bibliography .
 An excellent set of primary source documents enhances the book, including JFK’s “Report to the American People on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba,” exchanges between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, .
 This is a concise, easy-to-read reference for high-school and public libraries and beginning undergraduates . Use this reference to help students with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 Khrushchev acted aggressively defensive, alarmed by United States moves against Castro’s Cuba and by growing U.S. nuclear strength . Khrushchev acted aggressively defensively, fearing U.N. moves against Cuba and growing nuclear strength.
 Kennedy believed that he had to prove himself to his older, wily Soviet opponent . Kennedy believed he had a chance to win over the Soviet Union .
 The two leaders were equally determined to avoid nuclear war . Although each leader misjudged the other, the two were determined not to go to war .
 Khrushchev chose not to threaten West Berlin, and Kennedy was prepared to sacrifice the U.S. missiles in Turkey . Kennedy was willing to sacrifice missiles to protect Turkey .
 Although the author draws on his own reporting, his account is based on the published work of others .
 Frankel questions whether the world was on the 'brink' of nuclear war in October 1962 . Frankel: World was on “brink’s” brink of war in 1962. Frankel also questions whether world was ready for nuclear war .
 Scholars might challenge Frankel’s judgment that Kennedy and Khrushchev maintained command and control during the missile crisis . Frankel: "Kennedy and Khruschev maintained control"
 Contents are organized into sections . The chapters of the first describe the standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union, define the Cold War, and place it in historical context .
 Other chapters describe the US’s adversarial relationship with Cuba and document the reaction by President Kennedy and senior staff .
 Chapter 4 provides a blow-by-blow account of the blockade by the US . Chapter 4 is a gripping narrative about the crisis and the behind-the-scenes diplomacy to avoid war . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 The next chapters address lessons learned and the eventual end—and legacy—of the Cold War .
 Section two includes narrative biographies of leading figures involved, with sources . Section three includes biographies and biographies . Section four includes narrative biographies of leading figures in the story .
 A collection of key speeches, diplomatic cables, and personal letters appear in the third section of the book .
 Each section is introduced with a brief explanation of the document and how it relates to the crisis . Each section includes a brief explaination of the documents .
 Front matter describes how to use the book and offers research topics for students to consider . Front matter includes front matter, front matter and front matter . Back matter includes research topics to consider for students .
 Back matter offers a glossary of people, places, and terms . Includes a chronology of events, chronology, and a list of further monographic, journal, and online readings and photo credits . Back matter also includes a chronological, monographic and online reading list .
 May and Zelikow have prepared the first complete transcripts of the trial . With the help of professional court reporters, the transcripts have been released .
 The editors have also penned an introduction and conclusion and included transcripts of unrecorded meetings and key letters .
 Kennedy positioned himself between advisors, like Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson, who called for peaceful negotiations, and those, like the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who recommended a military assault .
 Throughout the crisis, Kennedy and McNamara seemed relatively precise and clear, clear, and focused . Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara seem relatively precise .
 Other presidential advisors rambled and drifted, especially on October 27, during the height of the crisis . Other advisors also drifted .
 The editors have celebrated Kennedy’s management of the crisis . They downplayed decisions Kennedy took on Cuba and nuclear missiles that helped precipitate the confrontation .
 Questions remain to be answered about the behavior of the US’s closest ally during the most dangerous moment of the Cold War .
 Scott has searched recently declassified British official records on all these questions . Scott has uncovered few surprises in his search for answers .
 This book ranks among the most significant works yet written on one of the most precarious moments in all human history .
 Top administration advisers debated how to respond to the placement of Soviet missiles 90 miles from U.S. shores . Top administration officials debated how they would respond .
 President Kennedy himself is shown to be a consistently moderating figure, ever seeking such options to nuclear confrontation as a swap involving NATO missiles in Turkey . President Kennedy also sought to avoid nuclear confrontation with Turkey .
 Robert F Kennedy, contrary to claims made in his memoir Thirteen Days, was confrontational throughout the crisis . Robert F. Kennedy was a confrontational figure in the aftermath of the Kennedy assassination .
 White has crafted the materials of a Cold War doomsday confrontation into a . historiographical tour d’horizon .
 White's crystalline, structured, evocative narratives are this generation’s definitive account of the famous crisis over Russian nuclear rockets in Cuba . Focusing on the perspectives, motives, and maneuvers of John and Robert Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, Adlai Stevenson, Dean
 White argues that an anxious and harassed Khrushchev to . perilous counteraction, to silence his own Maoist and militarist McCarthyites . White argues an excitable American Cold War rhetoric and the wages of Cold War domestic politics prompted an anxious . domestic politics .
 The Kennedys were determinedly anti-Castro and myopically antiliberal . They ignored genuinely irenic Soviet and Cuban overtures of 1961-61 . They boosted the atomic arms race and noisily plotted the overthrow of Castro’s Cuban communism .
 It took the Kennedys a week to think their way through the politically useful but diplomatically vacuous Cold War propaganda that had cluttered their minds until then . Once these were discovered by United States photoreconnaissance, it took them a week .
 President Obama's first term as president ended in a landslide victory in 2008 . Obama's administration has not been able to repeat the success of his predecessors .
 The book is a guide to how the political world actually works . Recommended to anyone who wishes to learn about the world's politics .
 8 reviews on the conflict between Russian and Ukraine . J Mahoney, Spokane Community College, is the author of the book "Ukraine"