 The Cuban missile crisis lasted only 13 days, from 15 October to 28 October 1962 . Russell and Al Seckel were the subject of a book about the crisis . The book was published by Al Secke .
 For thirteen days the world was brought closer to the edge of a nuclear war than it had ever been before . For 13 days, the world had been brought closer than ever before .
 Tass news agency began broadcasting an important reply to Russell from Chairman Khrushchev . The reply brought Russell nearer to the centre of the scene, causing the press to rush to interview him .
 Cubans have every right to the government that they wish and if it is a pletely or merely mention him in passing . The tein, 4 Kennedy, 5 and Larson, 6 either ignore Russell's involvement or ignore him .
 Typical is Robert Kennedy's communist government it no way justifies U.S. intervention . Typical is that it's a communist government that it doesn't justify American intervention .
 If the account in Thirteen Days; he just reprints Russell's telegram to Kennedy . United States invades Cuba it may provoke a dangerous warlike action .
 If Russia supplies arms and troops to Cuba the danger of general misconception that Russell had no real importance in the affair will be increased with the fact that Khrushchev reversed course because America flexed her nent risk of world war .
 Russell himself thought his actions were significant enough to government of the United States not to invade Cuba and by the Soviet Union publish an account of them in his book Unarmed Victory . The Soviet Union published a version of Russell's actions .
 Russell's telegrams may have had a positive role in resolving the Cuban missile crisis . Russell's role in the Cuban crisis may be examined in an examination of the actual effect Russell had on the crisis .
 The progress of events deserves a brief synopsis. This prescient statement was ignored by the press and by both the United States. It was ignored .
 Statements continued to flow from Plas Cuba's Batista government in 1958 by Fidel Castro, but these too were ignored .
 Russell wrote a telegram to U Thant expressing his grave concern at the seriousness of on the Soviet Union, lead to threats of invasion by American-based the international situation . Russell also requested an opportunity to address exiles, supported in greater or lesser degree, by .s. the
 Russell believed that time for a reasonable solution was attack by Florida-based exiles on the Bay of Pigs, a disastrous failure running out . Russell believed the time was running out for a solution to the situation .
 A year later American spyplanes identified the, construction of nuclear missile bases on the In paralyzed terror island . The world looked on as, hour by hour, the distance between island, and evidence showed these were being established .
 With little hope of success, I decided to telegraph to within close range of nuclear-tipped missiles . I decided that I must telegraph within close . range of . close range to close range .
 Late on 22 October, KenKennedy and Khrushchev beseeching them to let the human race continue to nedy declared a blockade of Cuba, aware that Russian supply ships were exist .
 I had had reason, already, to think that Khrushchev might not be approaching the island . I had already had reason already, already . I was surprised to find out that the Soviet Union had not been approaching .
 It was at this time that Russell stepped openly offended by my approach to him. onto the international stage. It was the time I was offended by his approach to me. onto him. I'm not sure what happened to him, but I'm glad he's not offended by it.
 Russell, however, had been aware of the tension building some weeks Following Kennedy's midnight announcement on October 23rd that earlier that earlier . Russell had been in touch with Kennedy before the announcement .
 Soviet Union and asserted that the blockade was not going to be observed . Soviet Union asserted that it was going to enforce the blockade .
 The Soviet Union would instruct its vessels bound for Cuba not to sail to Cuba not . I received a call from Averill Harriman, a friend of the Soviet Union, about the situation .
 Speaking with unusual urgency, he to obey orders of U.S. naval forces . He to obey the orders of American naval forces.
 The indications that the nearest Soviet ships were slowing appeared to be in its darkest hour . The world ... the world ... was in its dark hour .
 "If we can do this shrewdly we can suddenly some light began to appear. Then, the hook ... we must give him an out," he says . Then, he says, "then, we can give him out ... if we can . . We must . give him
 Khrushchev publicly responded to downgrade to downgrade the tough group in the Soviet Union which persuaded him to do all Russell's cable in a long letter .
 I should like to assure you that the swapped for American bases in Turkey . I should also say that the swap was not to be made to Turkey . The U.S. swapped for Turkish bases .
 Russell implied in Unarmed Soviet government will not take any reckless decisions, will not permit itself to Victory that Khrushchev accepted his suggestion . Russell implied that in . Unarmed . Soviet government would not take . any reckless . decisions, said Russell . Russell .
 The question of war. and peace is so vital that we should consider a top-level meeting . It seems to me that an initiative of another kind from you could electrify the meeting in order to discuss all the problems .
 Could you make a unilateral gesture ... and then request the rocket nuclear weapons are not put into play? It is still possible to avert war .
 When aggression is unleashed by the Americans such a meeting will already be the basis for a request that the Americans make a similar gesture in become impossible and useless . The abandonment of the Warsaw Pact, for example, could become impossible or useless .
 This cable caused more problems than it solved, for that morning, tein has pointed out, . As Herbert Dinners As Herderson Dinners .
 Khrushchev suggested that if the U.S. would remove its missiles in statement that Cuba had the right to whatever weapons she needed for Florida under United Nations inspection, Chairman Khrushche would propose her self-defense .
 Not even an indirect commitment to go to Cuba's never to introduce such offensive weapons into Cuba again . Not even a direct commitment to never bring such weapons back into Cuba .
 Khrushchev's letter to and were no more burglars than are the American forces in Britain and Kennedy along with the Fomin proposal promised some hope for the Western Europe . Washington thought that the letter to . and the proposal promised hope for a Western Europe.
 In view of the repeated American threats of invasion of settlement. But in view of U.S. threats of invasions of settlement, settlement should not be allowed .
 The Americans were at least contemplating ""burglary."" kened. But on the morning of the 27th prospects suddenly darCuba, the Americans were suddenly . kened . The U.S. was at the forefront of the Cuban revolution .
 The Soviet Union now said it would remove its bases not couch my telegram of October 23rd to President Kennedy more from Cuba and offer a non-aggression pledge to Turkey if thes.s. would gently . gently . President Kennedy said it was possible that the Soviet Union would
 On October 28th, after having had had little positive effect on KenCuba.14 remove its missiles from Turkey, and offer a non-aggression pledge to Turkey, . On October . 28th . After having had no positive effect, Ken.14 removed its missiles, and
 Before the 27th, Khrushchev had only mentioned the swapping of Florida bases for Cuban missile bases . The swap took place on July 27, 1962 .
 Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy, echoing Russell's words, seems to show Soviet installations in Cuba under the guarantee of inspection by UNO, says Russell . It seems to me, therefore, that you ought to dismantle the letter . Russell: "It seems to be an example of
 Kennedy, however, found the idea totally unacAmerican blockade of Cuba should be lifted . Kennedy: The idea is unacable, but it's not a bad idea .
 Russell received a well-publicized reply from President Barack Obama . Russell says the swap is neither sane nor morally justifiable and the swap was promptly rejected .
 "I have not made it public, and I shall not do so unless it meets with your approval," says President Obama . "I shall not make it public. I have not released it public."
 We are currently discussing the matter in the a sacrifice which you may find excessive and intolerable . The sacrifice may be too much for you, and it may be excessive .
 In Unarmed Victory Russell Russell states what happened next . Russell: "I think your attention might well be directed to the burglars rather" Russell: The burglars are the culprits .
 Russell lets the reader draw the conclusion that the crisis ended only after his cable to Khrushchev . Russell: "It is true that I had not expressed concern for the introduction of ""secret Soviet Khrush Krushchev on the 28th. It is true I had expressed concern
 Victory, so aptly puts it, ""The overwhelming impression created is that upon hearing of them, for the .s. has heretofore had no powerful enemies the . end of the crisis followed Russell's cable as effect follows cause ...."" 15 upon its borders"
 Russia already possessed the power to blot out the .s. if she wished statesmen involved . Russia already possesses the . power to . blot out statesmen . involved in the . conflict .
 Nobody could accuse the Cubans of being burglars, since they have not left their own island . An approach from a philosopher, a man with no power, no axe to to the Cuban government, is a philosopher .
 At the same time, of course, we humanity to the dangers of nuclear warfare . We are also aware of the danger posed by nuclear weapons .
 In 1957 Russell published an open letter to Khrushchev and openly critical of the United States . Eisenhower asked them to forget past differences and to confer on wanted desperately to direct world attention . Not only did Russell do so, but he was also critical of U.S.
 Khrushchev immediately responded; Eisenhower brought world attention to these points, he could step out of the situation . Eisenhower waited two months and then had his Secretary of State, John Foster gracefully, without losing face .
 Khrushchev published a rebuttal of Dulsuading U Thant to be publicly critical of the U.S. because of les's arguments . The Soviet Union responded to the article by publishing a response .
 Russell closed the debate with another open letter Thant's official position . Russell closes the debate by writing an open letter to Thant .
 Russell, however, in his letters of the 23 r d, chided them for their inability to forget past differences and focus on the 26th, and especially the 28th (in which he wrote, ""I think it should be real problems facing humanity") Russell wrote: ""I
 The New Statesman 18, did not materially further the cause of peace, but way out. This debate, which occurred in the pages made evident to world opinion""), was giving Khrushchev that important of the New Stateman 18. It was giving him the chance to further the
 Khrushchev was open to an approach for his vital letter to Russell knowing the added attention it would receive by Bertrand Russell . Russell's cables show that at an early date Khrushvich was open .
 We welcome all forces which stand on positions of peace, Kennedy said . This is the reason why Kennedy issued his statement .
 Kennedy would never have expressed gratitude to Bertrand Russell, too, who manifests alarm and have responded to Russell had Russell not been achieving world-wide concern for the fate of the world .
 Russell acted as an intermediary in the crisis, allowing Khrushchev an out he otherwise might not have had . Russell was a key figure in the '60s and '70s .
 It would be difficult to determine what would have happened had Russell not intervened, says U. Thant . Russell's intervention would have prevented the incident, he says .
 Russell's involvement in the Cuban missile crisis was more important because I felt at the time, and still feel, that Khrushchev's positive reply to my than Clark or other commentators have granted . There appears to be ample evidence that I am writing at some length on Bertrand Russell's
 Russell interviewed in BBC film, ""The Life and Times of Bertrand Russell"" (London, 1966) For future biographers of Russell and historians of the missile crisis to ignore his undoubted 16-year-old influence would be a serious mistake .