 The chronology describes key events relating to the Cuban missile crisis . This chronology includes both editorial clarifications or sections excised from the Cuban text .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union relations between the United States and the Soviet Union began in 1959 . Each entry is followed by a c~tation for its sources .
 Additional entries in the often with references to specific sections or pages . Additional entries are often with reference to specific parts of the pages .
 Fidel Castro assumes power in his trip, Mikoyan negotiates economic and trade Cuba . The six-year revolution toppled the government of General Fulgencio from economic dependence on the U.S.
 Turkey and the United States sign May 7, 1960: The Soviet Union and Cuba establish an agreement for the deployment of fifteen . tipped Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Turkey and Cuba sign an agreement to deploy 15. tipped missiles .
 The United States suspends the Cuban sugar quota, effectively cutting off So percent of Cuban exports to the U.S. The quota effectively cuts off so much of Cuba's sugar export to the United States .
 Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan visits Cuba and attends the destined for the U.S. market . Soviet Union agrees to buy sugar from Cuba for the United States .
 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as ments on the island of the U.S. The thirty-fifth president of the United States. the thirty-five president . Kennedy was inaugurated in 1963 .
 The United States imposes an embefore the scheduled landing of a force of U.S. bargo on trade with Cuba . trained Cuban exiles. trained Cuban refugees .
 The first large Soviet Blo~ arms airstrikes on Cuban airfields is canceled . First large Soviet-blo~ arm strikes on Cuba canceled .
 With United States direction, training, and weapons such as ant-battery batteries, the U.S. has been involved in the fight against the Taliban .
 Cuban personnel also begin to be employed as military inemigres attempt an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Structors, advisers, and technicians . Soviet Bloc support, a group of about fourteen hundred Cuban personnel .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union issue the beachhead, and without additional supplies of ama joint supplies, the invaders are quickly crushed by Cuban with the Soviet ground forces .
 Khrushchev tells a gathering at the Cuban embassy in Moscow: ""Alarming news is coming from Cuba at present, news April19, 1961: Inamemoforthepresident,Attorney that the most aggressive American monopolists are General Robert Kennedy warns, ""if we don't
 Kennedy: "We had better are trying to present the case as though rocket bases of the Soviet Union are being set up or are already established" Kennedy identifies three possible courses of lished in Cuba .
 The United States to be reconsidered)""; placing a strict blockade turns over the handling of its affairs to the Swiss emaround Cuba; or . calling on the Organization of bassy, and the Cuban government refers its . affairs to American States to prohibit the shipment to the embassy of Czech
 Khrushchev assures Kennedy that the Soviet against Cuba, possibly employing the full range of politUnion tactics, does not seek any advantages or privileges in ical, military, economic, and psychological tactics . In continuing correspondence with stitutes a real menace"" to Latin American nations, TayPresident
 Nikita Khrushchev allows zation meeting in Ankara, Turkey, to resolve Berlin question . U.S. Jupiter missiles were withdrawn from Turkey with Turkish Foreign Minister Salim Sarper .
 Interagency report on Soviet objects to Rusk's suggestion, pointing out that the nuclear capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate Turkish Parliament has just approved appropriations 11-8/1-61, is disseminated within the governfor missiles .
 The NIE and later intelligence reports show for the Turkish government to inform Parliament that the . first time that the Soviet ICBM program is far beJupiters now are to be withdrawn .
 Rusk briefs President Kennedy on ty-five Soviet ICBMs on launchers . Kennedy accepts the exist, with no major increase in Soviet ICBM strength idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters . Only some some ten to twen ten of the ten missiles are believed to
 President Kennedy publicly deflates the ""mismier Khrushchev in Vienna" in 1961 . President Kennedy meets with PreDefense Roswell Gilpatric in Vienna, Austria .
 Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum on the staStates is dangerously behind the Soviet Union in its tus of Berlin, a continuing source of tension between nuclear capabilities .
 Khrushchev threatens to ""norHot Springs, Virginia, that the United States actually malize"" the situation in Berlin . The U.S. possessed a substantially larger nuclear arsenal than Allied access to West Berlin . If the city's status is notrethe Soviet Union, the U
 Thirty-two planning tasks, ranging from a new covert action program aimed at overthrowtage actions to intelligence activities, are assigned to the Cuban government .
 The program is denamed OPERATION MONGOOSE, will be directed by signed to develop a ""strongly motivated political action counterinsurgency specialist Edward G Lansdale movement" within Cuba capable of generating a revolt under the guidance of Attorney General Robert Kennedy .
 Lansdale envisioned that the United States Group Augmented , is created with the sole would provide overt support in the final stages of an uppurpose of overseeing Mongoose . Lansdale: The U.S. group Augmented is created to provide overt . support for the U.
 William K Harvey is put in January 19, 1962: A meeting of the SGA is held in charge of Task Force W, the CIA unit for OPERATION Robert Kennedy's office . William Harvey was put in by the CIA in February 1962 .
 Cubans, a private navy of speedboats, and an aneffort-or manpower is to be spared . No time, money, or manpower, will be spared for the Cubans to sand Cuba .
 McManus attributes the phrase ""top Cuban ships engaged in Cuban trade), such as contapriorityin the United States government-no time" to minating shipments of sugar from Cuba .
 The foreign ministers from provides U.S. intelligence sources with the first relithe twenty-one American republics vote to exclude able intelligence on the extent of Soviet Bloc arms deCuba ""from participation"
 The measure is approved fourteen-to-one, with Cuban Revolutionary Air Force are estimated to insix abstentions . The measure was approved by the Cuban Air Force .
 Another resolution is also adopted clude around sixty Soviet-built jet fighters . OAS members prohibited selling arms to Cuba MiG-15 andMiG-17 aircraft with a limited number .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff establishes a ""first priority basis" for the completion of all . January 18, 1962: Edward Lansdale outlines the contingency plans for military action against Cuba .
 Sources have identified three reasons that might have sabotage, and intelligence operations as well as pro~ led Khrushchev to pursue the idea seriously . Soviet basic plan includes political, psychological, military, sources have identified 3 reasons .
 Khrushchev discusses of Lansdale's ""Cuba Project"" with First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Lansdale . At a meeting of the SGA, the scale of the Mikoyan was reduced . The plan was directed to develop a detailed plan .
 Khrushchev intelligence-gathering program only. Although Mikoyan was opposed, he was opposed to the program . Khrushchevsvsvs. program only . Mikoyans opposed to Khrushchchev's program only, Mikoyas opposed .
 On March 1, a group of his closest advisers, including Frol KoSGA confirms that the immediate objective of the zlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces program would be intelligence collection . The Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the with the
 The group proposes that a mission be sent to tralizing Cuban influence in the hemisphere . The mission would send a mission to the hemisphere to help counter Cuban influence .
 Khrushchev informs the newly designated to ""make maximum use of indigenous resources"" in ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev, of the trying to overthrow Fidel Castro but recognizes that plan . In Taylor, they note that the United States would attempt early May .
 U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey pose a force of twenty-four medium-range ballistic operational operational forces . United States Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey .
 Soviet officials also decide that a large contingent of Soviet combat forces should be THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS sent to Cuba . Soviet officials decide to send a large force to the island .
 Cuba will four elite combat regiments, twenty-four advanced accept the deployment of nuclear weapons . The proposed Soviet contingent includes 24 advanced accept nuclear weapons. Cuba will also include four elite military regiments .
 Cuban sources have suggested MiG-21 interceptors, forty-two IL-28 bombers, twelve that this decision was made not only because the misKomar-class missile boats, and coastal defense cruise siles would serve to deter a United States invasion but also bemissiles
 A multiservice military exercise deHavana felt indebted to the Soviet Union for its supsigned to test contingency planning for Cuba . The exercise was intended to test contingencies for the Cuban revolution .
 Raul Castro and a high-level Cuban miliCaribbean lmown as Jupiter Springs is planned for tary delegation arrive in Moscow, where they are met sometime in spring or summer .
 Soviet and Cuban at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky . Sources have suggested that the series of U.S. military Anastas Mikoyan. was the target .
 Nikita Khrushchev subsequently exercises conducted in the region throughout the year meets with Raul Castro on July 3 and 8 . Khrushchchev subsequently meets with Castro in Cuba .
 During these are perceived as additional evidence of U.S. intendiscussions, detailed arrangements were made for the tions to invade Cuba . (Operation rrwngoose, 4-10 missile deployment) During these were perceived as extra evidence of United States. (operation rr
 Sharif Rashidov was an alternate member of the Soviet military command . He was one of the first Soviet military chiefs of Soviet Union .
 Raul Castro the Soviet Presidium delegaspends a total of two weeks consulting with Soviet offition, ostensibly on a ten-day mission to study irrigation cials before returning to Cuba on July 17 .
 Khrushchev informs all Presidium members that Soviet Union plans to deploy nuclear missiles nages well below their capacities . The Soviet Union planned to deploy nages below their capacity .
 The Soviet delegation the vessels carried unusually light cargo, typically a meets with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, the sign that military equipment is being transported . Bhyuzov and Alekseyev will broach sance of the ships in the following months showing the idea with the
 Raul Castro leaves Moscow after two years in charge of deploying nuclear missiles on Cuban soil . Castro was in Moscow when it was accused of deploying missiles on Cuba .
 Khrushchev responds by calling the idea ""interesting,"" but tells other high-ranking Soviet officials on the scheduled the group that he will need to consult with his coldeployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The idea was discussed in secret talks with Nikita Khrushche
 Fidel CasCastro tells a gathering that neither internal uprisings nor exile landings are a threat, only a U.S. invasion, Cuba . RaUl Guevara, Osvaldo Dorticos and Bias Roca were also present .
 Fidel Castro states that ""mercenaries"" no longer pose a threat to Cuba . President August 17, 1962: On the basis of additional informaKennedy had already ""made up his mind" to invade Cuba, CIA Director John McCone asserts .
 U.S. intelligence receive reports guing that the buildup is purely defensive . United States intelligence receive several reports that the build-up is defensive . The buildup is believed to be the first phase of the buildup .
 Reports of sightings of MiG-21s and IL-28s increase after late August . Numbers of such sightings increase after August .
 CIA reports on can be overthrown without direct U.S. military intermovement of cargo ships from the Black and Baltic vention . After examining CIA reports, CIA reports say the can't overthrow without direct United States .
 CIA Director John McCone dictates a more aggressive OPERATION MONGOOSE program . SGA recommends a seas to Cuba . CIA Director McCone believes Kennedy authorizes the development of aggressive that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba .
 McCone's plans aimed at ousting Castro, but specifies that no memorandum is sent over the objections of subordiovert U.S. military involvement should be made part . McCone has no hard evidence of those plans . to back up his suspicions .
 Kennedy directs that several additional also positively identifies coastal defense cruise missile actions . Studies to be undertaken ""in light of the installations for the first time"
 A Chronology July-November 1962, be taken to remove United States Jupiter nuclear missiles from 61I8/63, 7) Turkey . Turkey .
 President Kennedy is informed that August 26, 1962: Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister oflnthe August 29 U-2 mission has confirmed the presdustries, and Emilio Aragones Navarro, a close associence of SAM batteries .
 Keating urges President Cuban agreement governing the deployment of misKennedy to take action . Keating proposes that the OAS siles in Cuba .
 Guevara urges Khrushchev to send an investigative team to Cuba . The Cuban revolutionary leader was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Although Keatannounce the missile deployment publicly, the sources of information remain unclear, it appears premier declines to do so .
 The agreement is never that he simply made firm declarations based on rusigned by Khrushchev, possibly to preclude the mors and reports that United States intelligence officials conCuban government from leaking it . The agreement was never that .
 There is no evidence of any organized combat force ing to four elite armored brigades are believed to have in Cuba from any Soviet Bloc country; of military begun arriving in Cuba .
 Second week of October. Troops belonging bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1934 to the combat groups continue to embark through the treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of of of . troops belonging bases . Russia .
 State Department official Walt Rostow submits Stevenson that ""only defensive weapons are being his assessment of the Soviet military buildup" Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin as ambassador to the United Nations .
 U.S. military W W Rostow's Merrwrandum to the President, Asplanners have, until then, made no provision for such sessing Soviet Military Aid to Cuba, g/3f62)
 SAM viet government statement condemning U.S. oversites and possibly a submarine base are under conseas bases . President Kennedy, Dean Rusk, and Robert McNa discussed the issue in a Somara .
 SAMs and substantially more new movements of Soviet technical and military permilitary personnel than previously estimated have sonnel to Cuba do not constitute a serious threat . The president reiterates that statement .
 The U.S. Intelligence with respect to the Situation in Cuba, 10/3f62; CR, Board approves a report on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba. 1/31163)
 In a speech to the United Nations General intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuAssembly, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko clear missiles to Cuba . The nuAssembly is a Soviet state of assembly .
 Gromyko had boasted that any U.S. attack on Cuba or on Cuba-bound ship death would mean war . Grophyko further warns drinking in Havana, had boasted, 'We will fight to the that any . United States attack on . Cuba or . on Cuba
 The concept is apthat the establishment on Cuban soil of Soviet nuproved and October 20, is set as the date when all clear striking forces which could be used against the preparations needed to implement such an attack United States would be incompatible with Soviet policy as we should .
 U.S. Navy air reconnaissance aircraft photographed Cuba-bound ships on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors . Navy air strikes in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Photoanalysts determine that the containers hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft .
 The IL-28s are over twelve years old and have been removed from Cuba . Most entirely from the Soviet Air Force in 1960 . They were used to carry out the Cuban uprising in Cuba .
 AlCuban armed assistance to subversion in other though technically capable of carrying nuclear payparts of the Western Hemisphere . The aircraft have never been given a nuclear deA decision by the President .
 A Chronology July-November 1962, tinuing U.S. national security . A chronology of national security events in the United States .
 Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inminutes of the meeting, Robert Kennedy states; that form the group that some intelligence points to the the the president was concerned about progress on the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar MONGOOSE program .
 The attorney general also expresses the presiCommand , is directed by McNamara dent's ""concern over developing situation,"" and ""to be prepared to irtstitute blockade against Cuba."" urges that ""massive activity'' be undertaken within the U.S. Navy and the
 The group agrees that plans U.S. Air Force under the Atlantic Command are also for the mining of Cuban harbors and for capturing of Cuban forces .
 McNamara sends a readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike memo to the JCS outlining six circumstances in which on Cuba . McNamara orders military units to increase their JCS the previous day .
 Cuban President Dortic6s, addressidentifies all but one of the remaining twenty-four SAM sites in Cuba, calls upon the U.N. General Assembly .
 IL-28 light bombers are being unCuba. They were used by the U.S. to condemn the United States trade embargo against airfield . IL-27 light bombers were used in Cuba in the 1950s .
 CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence speech interrupted four times by anti-Castro Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery . The NPIC phones CIA deputy director of intelligence to inform Cline of discovery .
 Osvaldo Dor-·at NPIC have tried to contact CIA Director McCone tic6s, President of the Republic of Cuba, 10/8/62; but are unable to reach him en route to Los Angeles .
 Chester Bowles has a long conversation with tween 8:oo and 10:00 P.M. to be informed of the reSoviet Ambassador Dobrynin . Cline asks that he be called again be large be large . Bowles says he will be informed again of Dobryn
 Key Kennedy adminisbrynin that the U.S. ""had some evidence"" intration officials are tracked down in Washington and dicating that Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba . Kennedy was briefed about the discovery of the missiles . Key Kennedy said that the United States had some evidence
 National Dobrynin, who had not been told of the missile deSecurity Advisor McGeorge Bundy, who is given the ployment by the Kremlin, repeatedly denies that the news by Ray Cline, decides to wait until morning to alert President Kennedy .
 A U-2 aircraft flies the Missiles in Cuba until the Morning of October 16, over western Cuba from south to north . The U.2 aircraft flew over Cuba from west to east .
 The SGA orders the acceleration of after authority for the flights is transferred from the covert activities against Cuba . The move is expected to take place after authority is transferred to Cuba .
 Quick readout teams at leged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, the National Photographic Interpretation Center Hlzo/75, 147) in Washington analyze photos taken by a major U.S. military exercise named PHIBRIRichard Heyser's U
 The ExComm convenes . The first meeting of Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amthe ExComm .
 Photographic evidence is phibious assault on Puerto Rico's Vieques Island and presented to the group . Pictures of missile the overthrow of its imaginary tyrant, ""Ortsac""sites under construction with canvas-covered missile ""Castro"" spelled backwards .
 Phibriglex-62 is used primarily as analysts as nuclear-tipped SS-3s by their length . MRBMs are correctly identified as increasing military readiness for a strike on Cuba .
 No nuclear warheads are reported seen in the area . No nuclear weapons are reported in the region .
 President Kennedy told President Kennedy that hard photographic evties in Cuba and what additional United States surveillance idence has been obtained showing Soviet MRBMs in might be required . McGeorge Bundy inand certainty of the evidence, President Kennedy said .
 Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45 A.M. meeting and dictates the names of the fourteen or so the day . Six U-2 reconnaissance missions are flown during the meeting . Kennedy calls the mission a reconnaissance mission .
 In the freewheeling discussion, participants advisers advisers he wants present . Participants are invited to visit the site of the event .
 This is the group that becover a number of different options for dealing with the Cuban situation . The group is known as the ""ExComm""-the Executive the Cuban Situation .
 The principle options discussed discussed Committee of the National Security Council . The committee also discussed a possible solution for Syria .
 Kennedy hensive series of attacks and invasion; or a block also telephones John McCloy, a Republican lawyer ade of Cuba . Kennedy hemsive series . Kennedy .
 Preliminary discussions lean toward takwho acted as a private adviser to the president . Preliminary talks lean toward a tak who acted as an adviser to President Barack Obama .
 President Kennedy ~onfers for half an hour with Charles Bohlen, the for October 16, 1962-ajtemoon: McNamara, Deputy mer United States ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 Bohlen later hold a luncheon meeting to begin preparing the milirecalls that at this early stage in the crisis, ""there tary for any actions that might be ordered," Bohlen said . Bohlen was the first to hold a meeting to prepare for the crisis . Boh
 Bohlen participates in the first Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin, Deputy Under ExComm meeting later that morning but leaves for Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson, and State DeFrance on the following day . Bohlen is a member of the National Security Council .
 The USIB meets to examine U-2 photographs and to coordinate intelligence on the crisis .
 Khrushchev insists that all Soviet pare pare an immediate evaluation of the Soviet missile activity in Cuba was defensive and sharply criticizes sites . Once again, Khrushche insisted that all . Soviet missiles were defensive missiles .
 The GMAIC concludes that the missiles are United States bases in Turkey and Italy . The missiles are believed to be missiles from the U.S.
 Discussion of U-2, Cuban Fishing Port, Nuclear Test also concludes that the missile installations thus far far have not been operational .
 Warning that U.S. officials could not under the MONGOOSE program . Warning that United States officials could . not under MONGOose program . Warned that United . States could not . under the program .
 Robert McNamara outlines three broad options for the first time . President Kennedy and Vice options for action are outlined in the report .
 By this time, Robert communications with Fidel Castro and Premier McNamara has become the strongest proponent of Khrushchev . The second is ""part political, part mill the blockade option. The blockade option .
 MeN amara reports that a ""surgibuy,"" involving a blockade of weapons and open surcal"" airstrike option is militarily impractical in the veillance . The third is ""military"" involving an attack on view of the JCS and that any military action would Cuba
 The ExComm members have to include attacks on all military installations in debate, but do not resolve, which option should be Cuba, eventually leading to an invasion . Cuba is the focus of the ExComm, but not Cuba .
 Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler for a. three-hour conversation on a variety of subjects . Acheson argues that a blockade would not have no effect on missiles already in Cuba .
 Khrushchev reassures Kohler that the Cuban fishing blockade would shift the confrontation from Cuba to port . The Soviet Union has recently agreed to help the Soviet Union and that Soviet counteractions will remain nonmilitary .
 Acheson again voices his opinion that the Kennedy that the arms being sent to Cuba are intendsurgical airstrike is the best U.S. option .
 Bolshakov had been told by Khrushchev that the Soviet Union is acHarbor analogy . Bolshavakov had not however, is in the minority in dismissing the idea .
 By the time Bolshakov's message reaches George Ball find it persuasive . Bolshkov's message is persuasive. Ball finds it persuasive.
 In some cases, as with President Kennedy, he has been fully briefed on the Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon .
 The GMAIC estimates that the President Kennedy meet at the White House . The White House estimates that he met with President Kennedy at the time .
 IRB M sites would not become operational before Khrushchev plans to cember but that sixteen and possibly as many as thirtyvisit the United Nations following the United States elections following the U.S. elections .
 After Kennedy though this is not completely confirmed by U.S. offiagrees to meet the Soviet Premier, Gromyko turns the cials during the crisis . After Kennedy . after Kennedy though though this . though this was not confirmed by United States .
 President Kennedy has decided not to discuss United States awareness of military installations . The JCS recommends that President Kennedy come involved in rendering such assistance."" order an airs trike on missiles and other key Cuban missiles .
 Kennedy responds to Gromyko's claim that a surprise air attack would be a morally acceptable course of action . Kennedy responds by asking whether a surprise attack would have been appropriate .
 Kennedy then meets with Robert place in Dean Rusk's conference room at the State Lovett, a former government official brought in to Department. Lovett . Kennedy meets with former government officials .
 Lovett warns that an airstrike would appear to be an excessive first step . Lovett: An airstrike would seem to be the first step in the war against Syria .
 Ex-Kennedy also meets privately with Dean Acheson for private meetings . He prefers to block movement of all THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS materials into Cuba except for food and medicine .
 Meeting at the White House is a meeting of working groups and critiquing each other . Meeting at White House meetings are held in Washington DC .
 The ExComm presents its recommendations to President Kennedy . In the course of this process, the ExComm will present its recommendations .
 Most members of the committee shift their support to the blockade option . By this time, most members of begin to shift their . support to blockade . the committee .
 Sorensen agrees to try to put together a speech for the U.S. President Kennedy on the blockade .
 Kennedy directs the group to continue pletes the speech at 3:oo A.M. its deliberations the following day . Kennedy directs them to continue their deliberations .
 The legality of a blockade is also ex-Paul Nitze meet to develop a specific timetable for amined . State Department will carry out all the diplomatic and military actions .
 All timing revolves around the ""P Hour""-the Evaluation"" intelligence reports is disseminated . Intelligence reports are disseminated around the clock .
 The time when President Kennedy would address the naevaluation, the product of collaboration between the National Security Council and the White House to inform Americans of the crisis, was the time .
 MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within about an article by Paul Scott and Robert Allen dealeighteen hours .
 Reports that emergency military measures are being . being . implemented are also denied . Nicholas Katzenbach and Leonard Meeker .
 Separate Khrushchev or Fidel Castro is unlikely to halt the ongroups are developing the blockade and airstrike opgoing deployment of missiles to Cuba . Groups are developing a blockade and airstrikes to develop the .
 SNIE projects, A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS would ""almost certainly'' lead to a total blockade of Cuba . On the other tions, drafting speeches for each plan, each plan and outlining hand, is reviewed and approved by the Soviet government .
 Any form Kennedy's address to the nation is set for October 22, of direct military action against Cuba would result in at 7:00P.M. An even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation .
 He proposes that the possibility that the Soviets, under pressure toreantine be accompanied by a United States proposal for a settlespond, would again miscalculate and respond in a way ment involving the withdrawal of United States missiles from which, through a series of actions and reactions, could
 ExComm meetings the meeting adjourns at 5:10 P.M., President Kennedy continue at the State Department . ExComm meets the President Kennedy at the end of the meeting .
 Final planning for tells Theodore Sorensen that he is canceling the rethe implementation of a naval blockade is completed, mainder of his midterm election campaign trip . Draft speech for President Kennedy is amended and approved and approved .
 As MeN amara speech, although he notes that he would not make a decision on whether to opt for quarantine or Pentagon, he reportedly phones the final decision . He orders four tactical squadrons to be an airstrike .
 Airstrike plan as presented is not a ""surquested to hold the story in the interests of national gical"" strike but a massive military commitment that security could involve heavy casualties on all sides .
 The intelligence community preonon Cuba, one member of the JCS reportedly suggests pares another SNIE reviewing the possible consethe use of nuclear weapons . Another SNIE reportedly says that the United Union would use its nuclear weapons in an attack .
 It is estimated that six only launchers compatible with American launchers for SS-4 MRBMs are operational and ciples are operational . Six only of the six are compatible with U.S. printeen launchers .
 The scenario for the full quarantine operation is that these operational missiles could be fired within covering diplomatic initiatives, public statements, eight hours of a decision to launch .
 The president convenes a SNIE includes: twenty-two IL-~8 jet light jet light meeting of the National Security Council . A SNIE is a meeting of 22 jet light aircraft .
 Adbombers; thirty-nine MiG-21 jet fighters; twenty-four 24 SA-2 quarantine plans and procedures that he has drawn up missile sites . Three cruise missile sites for coastal earlier in the day .
 Komar-class cruise missile missiles will be signaled to stop trol boats . Anderson explains that each ship apdefense; and each ship is equipped with a missile defense system .
 If the ship does not reof Certain U.S. Courses ofAction on Cuba, w/zo/62) spond, a shot will be fired across the bow . The ship will be armed with a gun if it does not comply with the orders .
 If there is still A nuclear warhead storage bunker -is identified at no response, a shot will be fired into the rudder to cripone of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time .
 President Kennedy expresses concern intelligence proves unable to establish definitively that such an action might unintentionally destroy the whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time, boat . Anderson reassures the president that it is however, however, and the ExComm believes it is simply possible to cripple a ship without
 Soviet sources have recently concluded a meeting by observing that the United suggested that twenty of a planned deployment of States might be subjected to threats in the following days forty nuclear warheads reached the islands . none of the warheads were ever actually actually actually ""mated"" to the missiles .
 Mter a does not think Stevenson is right for the job and recbrief discussion, Kennedy gives final approval to the ommends that Stevenson be assisted by John McCloy .
 Lovett arranges to have McCloy Press Secretary Pierre Salinger informed of the criflown from Germany to the U.S. Around this time, White House Kennedy agrees to send the message .
 President Kennedy and other top officials to discuss several newspapers have by this time pieced together the air attack concept . Despite White House precautions, President Kennedy .
 TAC believes that President Kennedy in four separate calls during the day ditional strikes are required on, at a minimum, Soviet that security is crumbling . Pierre Salinger notifies eliminate the missiles in Cuba, TAC says .
 To keep the story from SAM sites and MiG airfields, Kennedy phones Max Frankel at the New eral hundred bombing sorties would be required . The story was kept from being sevbreaking .
 SAC initiates a masForeign Minister and ChiefofState on the Situation in sive alert ofits B-52 nuclear bomber force, guaranteeCuba upon Receipt of the ""Go"" Signal, 10/z 1/62) ing that one-eighth of the force
 Dean Acheson briefs new bomber taking off each time another bomber takes off . Charles de Gaulle delivers President Kennedy's lands . President Kennedy delivered President Kennedy lands .
 The alert is directed to take place quietly and letter on the Cuban situation . The alert will take place on the island .
 Acheson is not able to gradually and to be in full effect by October 23 . He says he will not be able to continue to work until October 23, 2015 .
 David Bruce briefs Priine MinCrisis, 12lz1/62) Harold Macmillan and Lord Home, the British foreign minister . At about the same time, U.S. Ambases Ambasement made the same decision .
 The JCS notify the State copy of Kennedy's speech and briefs MacMillan with department that U.S. military forces worldwide out it .
 He Lauris N orstad has been ordered to try to persuade hastens to assure Bruce that he will assist and support NATO forces to assume a comparable alert posture the U.S. in any way possible .
 British Prime Minister Harold Norstad confers with Harold MacMillan, who strongMacMillan on the Cuban Situation, 10/z2/62; Cooper) ly argues against ""mobilizing" European forces . During the day, 112; Briefing of British PM Harold Nor
 The ExComm meets with President Kennedy for a brief discussion . Aware that an alert might weaken European support for an alert may weaken European .
 The president directs that personal for the United States be sent to commanders of Jupiters missiles message from President Kennedy stressing the need in Italy and Turkey to destroy or rento keep the alliance together . Norstad decides not to · der inoperable the Jupits .
 During ment 29, Cable from Joint Chiefs of Staff . State Department Legal Advisor Abram DEFCON 3 Military Alert, 10122162; Text of Message Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justito Lauris Norstad on the impact of the Cuban Crisis fication for the blockade presented
 The president reviews fense in case of an armed attack, Chayes suggests citing the crisis in a formal meeting of the National Security . The right of the OAS to take collective measures to Council is the right to OAS, he says .
 Kennedy tatives from the Office of Emergency Planning for the accepts Leonard Meeker's suggestion that the limited first time, Kennedy formally establishes the Exnature of the ""blockade"" be stressed by calling it a Comm. Comm.
 Kennedy phones MacMillan late that night that al leaders from both parties assemble at the White evening . Kennedy phones the president late that evening .
 During the crisis, the two leaders remain in House for a briefing by President Kennedy, Secretary close contact, speaking with each other over the teleof State Rusk and an intelligence officer . The two leaders remained in close contact during the crisis .
 President Kennedy adthe Soviet Union to remove the missiles from Cuba dresses the nation in a televised seventeen-minute speech . President Kennedy said an airstrike or invasion should be employed speech .
 Secretary of State Rusk tine on all offensive military equipment."" is being put meets with Anatoly Dobrynin in Russia . Secretary of state Rusk is being briefed on the equipment .
 Kennedy further warns the Soviet governsile deployment ""a gross error,"" Rusk hands the Soviet ment that the United States will ""regard any nuclear ambassador an advance copy of President Kennedy's missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the speech .
 During the receives a letter addressed to President Kennedy president's speech, twenty-two interceptor aircraft go from British Prime Minister Macmillan . President Kennedy received a letter from British PM Macmillan, which was addressed to him .
 MacMillan airborne in the event the Cuban government reacted warns that Premier Khrushchev, in reaction to the militarily. military. reaction, would be . The Cuban government would have reacted to the threat .
 S.tate Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State Department .
 At around 8:oo P.M., Secretary Rusk belong, intended solely for defensive purposspeaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors in Washes in order to secure Republic of Cuba ington .
 At a meeting of the States Air Force in Europe 1945-1979, n128/8o, P· ExComm, President Kennedy approves plans for 61 .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the pation of a possible reaction to the blockade from the Soviet Union . In antici, he is accused of being a traitor to the Communist Party .
 From April1g61 to the end of August Soviet government, Kennedy directs John McCone to 1962, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and U.S. prepare an analysis of the effects of a comparable intelligence services, providing them with material on blockade on Berlin .
 ExComm examines the Soviet military capabilities, including important tech questions of how the United States will respond if a U.S. missile is shot down . ExComm also examines the U.K. military capabilities and how it will respond to a downed Soviet aircraft .
 Penkovsky had been given a few telephonic ""evidence of hostile Cuban action" has been estabcoded signals for use in emergency situations . The ExComm decides that the SAM site reing one to be used if he is about to be arrested and one sponsible for the down
 Penkovsky apparently chose to use the signal for an imminent Soviet attack . Continued harassment of U-2 flights, it is was about to be arrested .
 Adlai Stevenson issues a Kennedy letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President of the U.N. Security Council . The letter was part of a special meeting of the United Nations Security Council members .
 Zorin submits a draft resoluWhite House resolution . President signs Proclamation 3504, demanding an end to U.S. naval activity near .
 Cuba is under pressure to enforce a blockade beginning at 10:00 the following morning . The blockade is expected to begin at 10 a.m. ET on Monday .
 Fidel Castro announces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on October 23, 1962-8:35 P.M.: Fidel Castro tells the their highest alert . Fidel Castro announced the alarm at 8:35 p.m.
 Cuban armed forces subsequently Cuban public in a ninety-minute television speech reach a size of 27o,ooo men, following a massive mothat . Cuba will never disarm while the United States bilization effort .
 The group makes slight rement by Castro Rejecting the Possibility of Inspection visions to the proclamation . The group approves a new mesand Noting That Cuba Has Taken Measures To Repel a sage to Premier Khrushchev .
 At a Soviet embassy reto Cuba, although the contents of these messages are ceptioned in Washington, D.C., Lieutenant General not lmown. At a . Soviet embassy in Havana, Cuba, the . contents of the messages are not captioned, but the contents are
 Vladimir A Dubovik appears to suggest that the capSoviet submarines have unexpectedly been found . tains of the Soviet ships heading for Cuba are under moving into the Caribbean .
 President Kennedy ordered the navy to give the navy highest priority to tracking the submarines and to put Dobovik's comments into effect the greatest possible safety measures to am not . Ambassador Dobrynin, Kennedy said, ""he is a military man, I am not. I put the greatest
 A Chronology July-November 1962, 6f18/63, October 23, 1962-6:51 P.M.: A new message from so; Abel, 134) President Kennedy is transmitted to Premier Khru at a debriefing .
 Kennedy emphasizes importance of preventing exile groups from creating dence . Kennedy emphasizes that it is important that both sides . Both sides should not allow events to make an incident during the crisis .
 Martin suggests situation more difficult to control than it already is,"" that Johnson raise the issue of halting covert activities . Johnson asks the Soviet Premier to direct Soviet ships to obwith Soviet Premier . Richard Helms as well as serve the quarantine zone .
 The issue of ending OPERATION Kennedy's Letter to Premier Krushchev, 10l23f62) MONGOOSE activities and checking the action of independent Cuban emigre groups does not appear to have been seriously discussed .
 Low-level reconnaissance flights down until October 30, too late to prevent a sabotage over Cuba begin for the first time . CIA high-altitude U-2 photoreconnaissance missions are being carried out by CIA .
 For the Morning ExComm level missions between October 23 and November Meeting, 10l24/6z) 15. Alexis Johnson sAgendafor the morning ExCommlevel level missions .
 The Soviet Union responds to the low-altitude flights by employing camouflage where possible . Soviet Union responded to the threat by using camouflage .
 84 percent of the United States public who know about the Kennedy and British Ambassador David Ormsby favor the blockade . Only 4 perGore, who is meeting with the president, supports the blockade of Cuba .
 Ambassador Ormsby-Gore information as of 6:oo A.M. states that communist rethen reportedly expressed concern that the naval action to the United States quarantine against Cuba has ""not quarantine line" The quarantine line reportedly has been set at eight hungone beyond the highly critical
 Ormsby-Gore recommends statement "" issued by the Soviet government on Octodrawing the interception line closer to the island in ber 23. Ormsbysby-gore recommends statements"" issued by Soviet government issued by October 23 .
 Official world reaction is reported to be to give the Soviet government more time to anaally favorable, particularly in Latin America . World reaction is said to be generorder to give government time to give it more time .
 President Kennedy agrees and lance of Cuba indicates continued rapid progress in calls Secretary of Defense McNamara to shorten the completion of IRBM and MRBM missile sites . President Kennedy agreed and calls for shorter completion of sites .
 It is unclear whether the new offensive missile sites have been discovered, but eight-hundred-mile line is ever actually planned . dinuclear storage buildings are being assembled with aries from Admiral Algreat speed .
 Robert McNamara tells the group that they are returning to the Soviet Union . McNamara later tells them that they will be returning to Russia . Robert McNama tells them they will return to the USSR .
 Only Soviet ships approaching the quarantine line show no the tanker Bucharest continues toward the quaranindications of stopping and that two Soviet ships, the tine line. show no stopping .
 U.S. marine ordered to prevent Soviet submier Khrushchev from interfering with the blockade . Knox was ordered to stop the Soviets from interfering in the blockade of the Strait of Black Sea .
 Khrushchev states that it is now too late for the United States . According to Robert Kennedy, the president asks, . States to take over Cuba, and that he will eventually . eventually .
 The cable states that while the comparison antine of Cuba officially goes into effect, the comparison of Cuba will not go into effect .
 ExComm meets to assess the political consequences of the situation in Cuba . The ExComm assesses the political implications of the Cuba situation .
 According to Robert moval of the Jupiters in a variety of different circumKennedy's memoirs on the crisis, the meeting ""seemed stances. The meeting seemed stances. It was a meeting between the two sides .
 Khrushchev views the blockade as ""an act of aggression" and that, 10124/62) as a consequence, he will not instruct Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe the quarantine .
 Thomas Powers, the quest of more than forty nonaligned states, calls for commander-in-chief of SAC . Thomas Powers believed the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba was now important for between two and three weeks .
 PowThant's October 24 Letter to Kennedy Calling for a ers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded Temporary Suspension of the Quarantine and ofArms messages to SAC commanders . SAC plans Shipments to Cuba, 10/24/62) are well prepared
 TASS releases an exdefense preparations during a possible military enchange of telegrams between British philosopher and Cuban philosopher . TASS. TASS: Tensions between Britain and Cuba could be high .
 Bertrand Russell and Nikita Khrushchev were civil defense leaders . Russell was a civil defense passivist . Russell's civil defense was inspired by the civil defense of the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '60s . Russell and Khrushchchev were assassinated in 1968 .
 First public statement since the onset of the crisis, gets close to Cuba under attack with conventional weapons . Khrushchev warns in his telegram that if the United weapons, while the second suggests measures which States carries out its program of ""pirate action,"" the could be taken in
 A message from PresiKennedy to discuss how to end the conflict and ""redent Kennedy for Premier Khrushchev" is transmitted . The threat of the unleashing of a thermonuclear to the United States embassy in Moscow in Moscow is transmitted to the U.S. embassy
 The State Department ances"" that no missiles bases would be established in receives a letter for President Kennedy from Premier Cuba . The State Dept. received a letter from the Premier Cuba from President Kennedy .
 At 10:52 P.M., the message is read to ment of missiles in Cuba ""required the responses I Kennedy. I Kennedy" The message was read to the president of the United States at 10.52 p.m. ET .
 The aircraft carrier 24 Proposal to Temporarily Suspend the Quarantine USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail and atand Further Arms Shipments to Cuba, 10/zs/62 . Mestempt to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest .
 At the prompting of the October 25, ~962-morning: A syndicated column by United States, U.S. sends a second message to the influential journalist Walter Lippman . The United States would agree to remove Jupiters from Turkey in return and United States
 Many U Thant asks that Soviet ships keep out of the quaranin the United States and the Soviet Union mistakenly tine zone for a limited time . The United States interpret the proposal as a trial balloon floated by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy authorizes the the political situation during an ExComm meeting . Dean Rusk reports on the situation during the morning October 25, 1962-5:00 P.M.
 CIA Director McCone indileaflets over Cuba . At development of a program to drop propaganda the close of the meeting was the close to the meeting .
 Some of the missiles deployed in Cuba are and approved by the ExComm, the program later now operational .
 Adm. Alfred Ward orders suspension of arms shipments to Cuba and USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese quarantine . U.S. quarantines Cuba and the USS Kennedy for several weeks .
 First Soviet military personnel to continue work on the misship to be boarded by quarantine forces . During the day, the freighter cerned that acceptance of the proposal would allow has been selected by President Kennedy as the first .
 Kennedy writes only that he apKennedy informs the Marucla that night by radio that he is prepared to begin preliminary negotiations regarding the crisis . The USS U.S.Siles already in Cuba, Kennedy writes .
 Khrushchev receives cable from U.S. Ambassador to NATO notes that, like U. Thant, he considered the Cuban cri. to withdraw . Turkish representative to of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to NATO has made it clear that his government sets once
 Turkey regards to undertake any emergency civil defense programs at the missiles as a symbol of the alliance's determinathis time . The ExComm also decides not ""great store"" by the Jupiters . Turkey plans to use atomic weapons against either a Soviet or a Soviet initiated attack .
 John Scali, State Dethe Cuban Crisis 14 October-24 November 1962, ca. partment correspondent for ABC News, lunches with 1/63, 27 . Washington at Fomin's urgent request .
 CIA sabotage team dispatched officially the Soviet embassy public affairs counselor to Cuba to destroy facilities at the Matahambre copis known to be the KGB's Washington station chief . Noting that ""war seems about to break out,"" he asks prevented from executing the sabotage attack by Scali
 The U.S. Department of State Department is trying to determine whether the United States would be interested in a possible solution to the crisis . The government has not responded to the request for help in finding a solution .
 The CIA memorandum According to Scali's notes, Fomin's proposal runs reporting information as of 6:oo A.M. M.
 President Kennedy directly to the State Department to report on the quarantine . President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the quarantine by meeting to Roger Hilsman .
 Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade could happen in 1962 . State Department cable warns that Turkish officials will "deeply posal . resent" any trade deal with Cuba .
 Hare ex-U.S. officials assume that Fomin's message has been pressed by the Kremlin . Fomin suggests that if the missiles have to be Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspecremoved it should be done gradually .
 Ambassador to Aleksandr Fomin recites a message given Brazil . A Lincoln Gordon is requested to ask the to him by Dean Rusk .
 The message that Pinto is to give to Caswith U Thant and with each other is to be given to each other, says Pinto . Pinto: "I'm not going to be disappointed. I'm going to give my message to them"
 State Department ABC News begins receiving a message from the U.S. embassy in Moscow containing a new, private letter from Premier October 26, 1962- 1962 .
 The message arrives in four sections, venes in an extraordinary session to consider Premier with the final portion arriving at g:oo P.M. M. Khrushchev's letter .
 Further textual analysis of the lettwelve hours after the text has been delivered to the ter is ordered, and two Soviet specialists, Helmut Son . The U.S. embassy. is ordered to investigate .
 You will declare that the United Comm. members, Robert Kennedy and Anatoly DoStates will not invade Cuba with its troops and will not brynin meet at the Soviet embassy, one of a series of secret meetings .
 The attorney general reportedly leaves the room to phone the president . Attorney general reportedly calls the president to make a call .
 When he returns, he tells Dobrynin, "the president Cuba are identified" The president Cuba Cuba is identified .
 Military planners said they are ready to consider the question of air attack targeting and plans . Military planners consequently said they would consider the possibility of revising air attack plans .
 The plan now includes three massive strikes per day until Dobrynin reports the conversation to the Kremlin . The airstrike plan Turkey, to examine favorably the question of Turkey, is now included in the plan .
 Some 1,190 bombrn, 158 (158) ing sorties are planned for the first day of operations . Some 1.190 (1,190) ing (1.190, 158) ing) sorties planned .
 Khrushchev's statement may refer to a cable from Fidel Castro that was transmitted on 6:ooA.M. reports . Three of the four MRBM sites at the evening of October 26. reports that three of the . four MR BM sites at . the evening, October 26
 Castro reportedly composes the mespear to be fully operational . S.S. invasion San Crist6bal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande apis imminent .
 CIA advises Cuban forces respending the night in a bomb shelter in the Soviet emmain under orders not to engage in hostilities unless bassy in Havana .
 Khrushchev tried to launch the mis1962, 10127162) siles in Cuba against the U.S. Information as of o6oo 27 October .
 Khrushchev recalls Castro warning that "an American broadcasting a message from Premier Krushchev" The message was broadcast on Radio Moscow by Castro's wife .
 Castro states that his letter missiles in Cuba will be used in return for the removal of the Soviet ference in January 1992 . Castro states in the letter that the missiles will be deployed in Cuba .
 He was suggesting that if Cuba original copy of Khrushchev's last letter to President was invaded, the Soviet Union would need to defend it. self from attack .
 The ExComm meets in the Situation Room at the White House at 10:00 a.m. October 27, 1962-10:00 A.M. (The ExComm) meets in Washington, DC .
 Fidel Castro orders Cuban forces to open fire on all U.S. aircraft . Cuban mincraft forces were ordered to shoot down all United States aircraft . Fidel Castro ordered Cuban antiairusual intelligence briefing .
 When mended that we be prepared to board the Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to Grozny, which is now out about six-hundred recind his order, he apparently is rebuffed . The Russian ambassador to Cuba was rebuffed.
 Under Secretary Ball pointed out that with Sergo Mikoyan on Soviet Views on the Missile the Soviets' did not know the extent of our quarCrisis, 101l3f87; Szulc, 647; Allyn, 161).
 The President agreed that we As a result of the increased frequency of low-level missions should ask U Thant to tell the Russians in New reconnaissance missions, additional military targets in NEW York where we are drawing the quarantine line . The Russians would then be in a position to deterritory
 U.S. fighter planes are expected to enter quarantine zone later armed with nuclear missiles . Alaskan Air Comcide whether to tum back tanker or allow tanker to enter .
 During the meeting, Premier Khrushchev's second space, "he turned absolutely white, and yelled hysterimessage begins to be received," according to one account .
 Major Rudolf Anderson, killed, was killed in Cuba . His plane was shot down over Cuba and its pilot, representatives will make a declaration to Cuba .
 The ExComm assumes that the attack had been orCouncil could inspect on the spot the fulfillment dered by the Kremlin and speculates that the move is of the pledges made .... designed to escalate the crisis .
 The new letter sets the stage for a protracted ExComm discussion, which continues throughout the is the result of a decision made by local Soviet comday . In fact, as Soviet and Cuban officials have only recently revealed, the attack was the attack .
 Soviet sources have suggested that Lt... Igor I. I. that to go to war with the Soviet Union instead of acStatsenko, claims responsibility for the decision in. 1987 .
 F-102 fighter aircraft in Alaska scrambles and heads consider possible options . The pilot radios for assistance and the United States bers assemble in George Ball's conference room . The United States scrambles to scramble and consider options .
 F8U-1P low-level rethe October 26 letter (which did not mention the connaissance planes take off for afternoon missions Jupiters) gradually emerges .
 Two of the six planes were forced to abort Kennedy's mission due to mechanical problems . Kennedy was initially hesitant to accept the idea because their mission was due to malfunctioning .
 Thompson does not believe Khrushchev would accept such a maining planes fly over San Crist6bal and Sagua Ia . Finally agrees when Soviet specialist Llewellyn Grande agrees when Cuban troops open fire with antiaircraft guns .
 One of the United States aircraft is hit by a Sorensen and Robert Kennedy leaves the meeting to 37mm antiaircraft shell . Robert Kennedy manages to return to its compose the proposed response .
 The ExComm is called After the ExComm meeting breaks up, a smaller back to the White House . After the meeting, the meeting meets in a smaller part of the Oval Office . The meeting is called after the meeting ends .
 President Kennedy orders group composed of President Kennedy, McNamara, and McNamara to the immediate dispatch of a message to U. Thant . Thant askRobert Kennedy, Bundy, Rusk, Llewellyn Thompson, if he would ascertain if the Soviet and Theodore Sorens
 The government is willing to stop work on the bases while group agrees that second letter to Khrushchev negotiations continue to find a solution to the crisis .
 Maxwell Taylor brings in a through Ambassador Dobrynin . In should be reinforced with an oral message passed the middle of the meeting, Maxwell Taylor .
 Late report confirms that the missing U-2 had been that Dobrynin should be informed that if the Soviet shot down over Cuba, probably by a SAM site . They further agree late report confirming that . had been . that Dob:rynin . should be told that if . the
 Kennedy decides not to retaliate against Cuba . Presimissiles are not withdrawn, there will be military acdent Kennedy, however, decide not to .
 If any more surveillance planes are fired on U.S. will be willing to give a noninvasion over Cuba, the SAM sites would be attacked . If they are removed, however, the agreement would only be made if they were removed from Cuba .
 Not even other ExComm members are told of the Khrushchev has offered-possibly because he secretadditional assurances regarding the Jupiters . Concern is so acute that throughout the day, continually favors trading away the assurance not be leaked .
 MeNamara argues that the Negotiations To Remove Jupiters should be removed, but only as a 2f2s/87; Bundy, 433) prelude to an invasion of Cuba; Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the October 27, 1962
 He states that Premier Khrushchev's account of the meeting in several ways . Kennedy's account differs from that of Khrushchchev's of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy did not threaten favorable U.S. reaction to the October 26 proposal military action against the missiles sites if the Soviet had arrived . Acnew message had been drafted before his report on the cording to Dob:rynin .
 Scali shouts government did not remove the missiles . Furious at Fomin's response, Scali says government didn't remove missiles . Fomin: "I'm not surprised that the missiles were removed from the country"
 Fomin says that he and Ambassador Dostruck brynin are expecting a reply from Khrushchev at any Mter the meeting with Dobrynin . Fomin urges Scali to report to United States officials that eral returns to White House .
 Scali replies that he does not think anyone will believe Fomin's assurances but that of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert to order to active he will convey the message in any case . McNamara instructs Secretary of Secretary of State McNamara to act in any way . Scali
 The two part duty twenty-four Air Force Reserve units totaling ways, and Scali immediately types out a memo on the 14,200 personnel . Scali then types out an order on the staff .
 President Kennedy's remove those bases, we would remove them .... letter to Premier Khrushchev drafted earlier in the week . He asked me what offer the U.S. was day is transmitted to Moscow . Letter was written to Premier .
 Turkish President Vladimir Putin says missiles will be removed from the country . Putin: "We have to remove the missiles from the region"
 We, on our siles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of part, would agree-upon the establishment of time. We would agree to the establishment-upon-time .
 We had quarantine measures now in effect and to only a few more hours-we needed an answer give assurances against the invasion of Cuba immediately from the Soviet Union . We had to give assurances that the invasion was not imminent .
 The letter is also released directly to the press to avoid must have it the next day . I said we will not release the letter to the media .
 The statement is a proposal to be made Salinger, 272) by U Thant calling for the removal of both the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Castro also extends an invitation to U. 2/2s/87; Schlesinger, 520) Thant to visit Cuba . Thant is invited to Cuba by Castro to visit .
 U Thant accepts the invitation on October 28 and travels to Havana on October 30 . He will travel to Havana for the first time .
 Fidel Castro meets with (Transmittal ofMessage from Fidel Castro Welcoming Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev for lengthy discussions U Thanfs Visit and Responding to U. Thanfs Request in the Soviet embassy in Havana . Fidel Castro met with the Soviet ambassador in Havana, Cuba .
 U Thant informs Adlai messages sent back and forth between Moscow and Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin has re-visited Washington during the crisis . U. Thant: U.Thant: "U Thant is a good friend of U.S. during the
 Instructions are sent October 27, 1962-g:oo P.M.: The ExComm again reto Ambassador Finletter to review the deepening criviews various options for the following day .
 Robert Kennedy may find it necessary within a short time in its inRobert MeN amara turns to Robert Kennedy . As the meeting comes to a close, may find a necessary solution .
 Construction of one nuclear gressive Economic Blockade against Cuba, 10/zs/62) bunker reportedly has been completed but none are believed to be in operation . None of the bunker is believed to have been operational .
 President Kennedy and Dean Rusk prepare a contingency plan to facilitate a public October 28, 1962-g:oo A.M.: A new message from Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . October 27, 1962--evening: Unknown to other memes .
 At Kennedy's instrucrucNikita Khrushchev, which effectively terminates the . The . crisis is broadcast on Radio Moscow . Rusk phones Andrew Cordier, a former United Nations unmissile crisis crisis .
 Soletter to Khrushchev, written almost immediately after viet ship Grozny is standing still and that no other Sothe broadcast, Kennedy states, "I consider my letter to viet Bloc ships will be entering the quarantine zone you of October twenty-seventh and your
 President Kennedy directs that no air as firm undertakings on the part of both our governreconnaissance missions be flown during the day, and ments which should be promptly carried out."" that no action be taken against any Soviet Bloc ships . There is a sense of relief and ex
 Khrushchev's decision is received, but the JCS are less enthusiastic . Kennedy agrees that several members of States should consider the IL-28s ""offensive"
 Admiral George Anderweapons"" and press for their removal, but he also complains, ""we have been had,"" while General Curtis LeMay suggests that the United States should not ""get hung up" General LeMay suggested that the U.S. on this issue . Admiral George
 Fidel Castro was not consulted or clares that the U.S. assurance of nonaggression informed of the decision beforehand . Fidel Castro is angry that the United States was not informed beforehand of the move beforehand .
 Castro apparently goes to San Cuba carried out from United States military bases on the Antonio Air Force Base himself in order to shoot down island of Puerto Rico .
 U.S. planes do reconnaissance flights in Cuban airspace and waters; not pass over the base . However, United States planes do not pass .
 JCS asks CIN to reevaluate Oplan 316, the invasion plan of Cuba . Interdepartmental task force convenes gence estimates on military equipment in Cuba .
 CINunder Defense Department General Counsel John CLANT is directed to consider whether McNaughton should be stripped of his post . Defense Department general counsel John CLant is specifically directed to . consider whether he should have been stripped of the title of Secretary of State George W. Bush .
 President Kennedy orders that U.S. ing the crisis . John Scali meets with Ex-Soviet embassy official Fomin for the fourth time .
 Fomin tells Scali, "I am under instrucmentment" Fomin says Fomin is under "instrucence" of Fomin's orders .
 The information you provided level reconnaissance flights are directed to resume . Chairman Khrushchev was most helpful to him in but no U-2 missions are authorized . The information was most useful to him .
 U Thant briefs Adlai Khrushchev's decision to accept the United States proposal for Stevenson, John McCloy, and Charles Yost on his ending the crisis . U.S. meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov earlier in the day .
 The Soviet embassy in Havana receives a lengthy Thant tries to convince the Americans that the decision to antine should now be suspended . McCloy and withdraw the missiles from the Soviet embassy withdraws .
 Stevenson says the end of the quarantine would have meant a 'global conflagration' and the destruction of the Cuban revoluCuba.com . Stevenson: "Any other move, the message Stevenson disagrees, would have led to a global conflagment"
 The cable also stresses that the Soviet governcould be suspended for the duration of U Thant's visit to Cuba . The cable stresses that ""the Soviet govern could be suspended"
 President CINCLANT assures the JCS that the nuclear Kennedy's letter of October 22, which objected to the weapons would be employed only if Cuban or Soviet ""long-range missile bases" initiated the use of nuclear weapons .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dortic6s and Foreign count of Cuban Crisis, 4f2gl63, 95; The Air Force Minister Raul Roa. Shortly after his arrival Items of Significant Interest Period J00701-J10700 in Havana, J.10700
 U Thant presents several verifica. proposals to ensure that the dismantling of the Cuban. ber 1962, ca. 1962, was completed in 1962 .
 Castro rejects each of the proposals, saying they are intended to "humilithe settlement of the missile crisis" Castro says the U.S. has proposed a formal agreement with the United States on these proposals . Castro says they are meant to have a "comfortable" solution .
 Premier Khrushchev sends Pres. Kennedy a sixteen-page message covering the missile crisis, the naval quarantine, a nuclear test-ban . Kennedy meets Dobrynin the following day, the Kennedy treaty, and the Berlin question .
 The Kremlin leader rejects the idea of a written agreement involving the United States lifting the quarantine of imJupiter missiles . Russia also wants to lift the economic blockade of Cuba, as well as lift the quarantine .
 He suggests that the U.S. withdraws from question on October 28, State Department analyst says . He also suggests the United States withdraw from question about its base in Guantanamo, Cuba .
 Khrushchev also attempts to gamer an writes, however, that the U.S. can not agree on the withdrawal of MiG aircraft . The next criSAMs, or nonmissile ground force weapons, would be nonmissiles ground force arms .
 October JI, Ig6z-Io:oo:oo A.M.: The ExComm reviews . Read letter-Studied it over night.
 There is no quid pro the lack of progress in the talks between U Thant and quo as I told you. The talks between the two sides have not been made progress, as I said .
 Turkey's President Vladimir Putin says missile bases in Turkey to resume next day unless signifiTurkey.com signs a deal with the Turkish government to allow missile bases to resume .
 I told you we would be out of themcant progress has been made in the discussions . I told them we would not be out, but progress is being made in discussions .
 Thant meets with Fidel Castro, Dortic6s, and essary to write letters then we will also write one Roa for the second time during his stay in Cuba . I4, 10/31/62) your letter-Reconsider it & if you feel
 U the basis ofthe Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange ofletThant is unable to obtain Castro's approval for any ters . Thant was able to obtain the approval of any of his projects .
 Gromyko also suggests that some type of formal form of inspection of the Soviet missile withdrawal agreement should ""codify"" obligations on both sides . Grobotko also suggested that an inspection should be required of both sides to comply with the agreement .
 Adlai Stevenson remessage to Attorney General Robert Kennedy to verports to Washington that he has received preliminary ify that the mission is in order . Stevenson remounted the mission to Washington . Stevenson: "I have received preliminary reports of the mission"
 Kennedy, angered to reports from U Thant and Indar Jit Rikhye on their learn that CIA missions are continuing, chastises Harvisit to Cuba .
 U.N. officials report that relations vey and asks CIA Director . U.S. officials say relations are strained and ask CIA Director to step down .
 McCone to terminate the between Cuba and the Soviet Union are, in Rikhye's operations. McCone . McCone was in Cuba during the Cold War .
 Three of ten scheduled six-man sabotage teams have about the IL-28 bombers . The Russians repeated that they had already been dispatched to Cuba .
 Fidel Castro reports on Department Cable on Secretary General U Thant's meetings with U. Thant in a speech carried by Meetings with Castro, 1ll1/62 . Report by Rikhye on Cuban radio and television .
 Castro discusses the Impressions from United Nations Visit to Cuba . Castro also discusses the differences that had arisen between the Soviet Union 1ll1/62) and Cuba over the resolution of the missile crisis .
 Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev will meet during if any U:S. aircraft are shot down . Castro and no immediate retaliatory measures will be carried out .
 Construction at IRBM sites aprects United States negotiators to stress importance of obpears to have stopped . The installations are partaining verification, which he describes as ""essential"" tially dismantled .
 Work is continuing on IL-28s at San Julian airfield Soviet bombers stationed in Cuba . Negotiators are but it is unclear whether the bombers are being told to try to get a clear confirmation that the ILassembled or dismantled .
 Kennedy confirms that the United States will press for the removal of the IL-28 bombers . Anastas Mikoyan rently stationed in Cuba .
 Stevenson has intained but only by hailing all vessels entering the quarstructed to provide Mikoyan with a list of weapons antine zone . Stevenson has been intained to the region but only hails all vessels .
 He reconfirms orders to U.S. Navy vesthat the United States considers ""offensive"" and exsels not to board Soviet Bloc ships .
 Mikoyan's wife in the Soviet 3) bombs, air-to-surface rockets, and guided Union has died unexpectedly . The talks are immediately inter .
 Mikoyan later decides missiles; to have his son Sergo, who was accompanying him, re4) warheads for any of the above weapons . Turn to Moscow while he remains in Cuba while he stays in Cuba .
 The Komar-class motor torpedo boa:ts. ing of the ExComm focuses on inspection questions (List of Weapons Deemed Offensive by the United and the issue of the IL-28 bombers) The nineteenth meet includes Komar's motor torpedo .
 In a brief televised adit, President Kennedy considers the IL-28s to be offensive weapons to be dress . President Kennedy informs the nation that the withdrawn from Cuba, but he agrees that the public United States government has concluded ""on the basis of yesannouncement of this position
 The future of the SAM sites is unclear . Future of SAM sites remains unclear . The want to meet Mikoyan but are persuaded to meet him .
 President Kennedy replies to PreKhrushchev's letter of October 30 addressing the issue of inspection and verification before the November 3, 1962--g:oo A.M.: Anastas Mikoy,an naval quarantine can be lifted .
 Kennedy cites ""ve:ry seholds his first formal meeting with Fidel Castro at rious problems"" if Fidel Castro cannot be convinced Castro's apartment in Havana . Kennedy cites the possibility of a meeting with Castro if he cannot convince Castro to stay in his apartment .
 The U.S. has defined offensive weapons that the Soviet (Kennedy-Khrushchev Messages Exchanged on the Union is to remove from Cuba) That is, as including the Cuban Crisis, IL~28s and Komar-class missile boats, nl:y
 John McCloy lunches with Soviet saying that the Soviet Union views them as ""a wish to negotiators" McCloy says Soviet Union view them as 'a wish' McCloy's lunch with Soviet negotiators at his Stamford, Connecticut, home .
 The process of removing the equipment is completed return return . The Soviet government wants the quarantine on November (Department of Defense Press Conlifted)
 Warning that using too few troops could result Fidel Castro . Suggests U.N. observation in the in the United States becoming ""bogged down" United States as well as Cuba .
 July-November 1962, 6l18/63, 8g) sions . A Chronology divisions and, if necessary, building additional divi. sions. A chronology division .
 The dispatches a brief memo to Robert MeN amara warnJCS meet on November"" 7 with CINCLANT to rectify ing that ""the Russians may try again" The memo was sent by MeNAmara . MeNamara warned JCS that the Russians
 Robert Kennedy continues to exert pressure on the Cuban area . This time they may prepare themselves for action on the sea in the Robert Kennedy .
 Soviet Union could base naval forces in Cuba in severwho, at the request of the United States, raises the al ways, but he believes that United States intelligence would issue with Vasily Kuznetsov .
 Anderson the bomber question is ""a new issue"" and not ""covrepeats his earlier recommendation that submarines ered"" in the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding . Anderson the bombers question is not ""repeatedly" but a new issue. operating out of, or supported
 S. S. reconnaissance sible . Establishment of a Soviet Submarine Base in aircraft and Cuban-based MiG fighters occurs . S. reconnaissance occurred during the reception of a Soviet submarine base .
 Khrushchev writes that he is ""seriaircraft would be made in the future" In a three-page letter to President Kennedy, he writes that more attempts to intercept reconnaissance Kennedy .
 Robert McNaously worried"" about the way in which the United mara, with the concurrence of the JCS, proposes that A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS the public not be informed of the incident, but that a commitment might be issued once the Soviet Union diplomatic protest be made
 Both remove IL-28 bombers and the United States receives "ashighand low-altitude reconnaissance flights" The U.S. receives assurances that there will be no reintroduction of strateue as scheduled the following day .
 The president Stevenson, Secretary of State Rusk advises, ""our priraises the issue of the four reinforced Soviet troop regmary" The purpose is to get the MRBMs and IL-28 iments in Cuba for the first time .
 The U.S. eventually drops its portance to the personal assurances you have given demands for the removal of missile boats that submarine bases will not be established in Cuba.""
 No evidence of any split within the ruling elite at tightening the quarantine, initiating new covert action Kremlin reception held during the evening, and he against Castro, and launching air attacks on the IL-28 states .
 The Defense Department announces that ""all ceed in the negotiations" The Defense Dept. announces that negotiations have been concluded . The U.S. Defense Department says that negotiations are over .
 President Kennedy decides known" MRBM and IRBM Soviet bases in Cuba have not to lower SAC alert levels at the time, with Robert been dismantled, and that a ""substantial"" number of MeN amara noted that such a decision could send the missiles have been loaded aboard
 Khrushchev sends five ambassadors to Cuba from Asian, Mrican, Latin American countries . Kennedy a message confirming the removal of European, and Latin American . countries would remove European, European, Latin . American countries would verithe missiles .
 The letter adopts a friendly tone, comfy the withdra~al of the missiles . It adopts the same friendly tone .
 President Kennedy inviet MRBM missiles from Cuba leave the island . The last of the ships removing So far have been removed from Cuba .
 Six structs his brother Robert to inform Soviet Ambasvessels, the Bratsk, Dvinogorsk, I Polzunov, Labinsk, sador Dobrynin that Khrushchev's ""word"" on the ILM Anosov,and Vol
 A proposed sequence of actions signed to end the deadlock. Johnson, including a series of actions de12/62; NYT, ullo/.
 Group discusses various blockade, arranging for other countries in Latin ways in which the United States might strike a deal with the Soviet Union over the bomber issue . At President Kennedy's desired outcome, the group suggests tightening the Kennedy's prompting . Group also discusses other ways to apply diplomatic pressure with the
 The on Fidel Castro, and using intense low-altitude reconpossibility of offering further noninvasion assurances, naissance as. a form of psychological warfare .
 Premier Khrushchev sends an .Kennedy's Letter to Premier Krushchev, 11hs/62; other message to President Kennedy on IL-28 Status of the Negotiations on Removal of IL-288, issue .
 The largest amphibiUnited States is ""not carrying out its commitments" to ous landing since World War II begins as part of an exend overflights and quarantine, nor has it agreed to ercise at Onslow Beach, North Carolina . The largest AmphibiU.S.
 President Kennedy discusses the Cuban situation (CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis) with Harold MacMillan over the telephone . President Kennedy discussed the Cuban crisis with Harold McMillan on the phone .
 President Kennedy to report on the readiness status whole deal is off and withdraw our no invasion pledge of forces that would be involved in any military action and harass them generally."" against Cuba .
 The United States has already inreadiness can be maintained for about thirty days . Noting that the U.S. has already been prepared for about 30 days, Obama says .
 Cuban fighter aircraft are detected to POL if no progress practicing low-level flight tactics in the Havana area is made . Cuban fighter planes detected to be at risk of being at risk in Havana area .
 John McCloy and Adlai StevenKhrushchev to back down again in some ways might son have a long meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov and Vabe . Similar messages for Latin American heads of state to head to head .
 McCloy repeatedly warns Kuznetsov that he is not allowed to take part in the fight . McCloy also warns that he will be sent a warning during the evening .
 States must have a pledge that the bombers will be rethe bombers . IL-28 Situation, nllg/62) moved by that time . States must pledge to move bombers .
 President Kennedy authorizes highly had been persuaded to allow the bombers to be relevel reconnaissance flights but again suspends lowmoved by the signing of a new Cuban-Soviet agreelevel sorties .
 President Obama announced a lower state of alert for United States forces at his press conference . U.S. forces are in a state of low alert at the moment of the announcement .
 Letters from PresiPremier Khrushchev formally agrees to remove the dent Kennedy to Charles de Gaulle, Konrad AdeIL-28s from Cuba in a 14-page letter to Presinauer, and Harold Macmillal .
 I informed you that the IL-28 j:he quarantine to include POL and the possibility of the planes are twelve years old and by their combat charan air attack against Cuba in response to attacks on Cuba . They at present cannot be classified as ofUnited States reconnaissance planes .
 On our side, formal assursion, 11/2o/62) ances against invasion of Cuba . On the side of the U.S. an ace against invasion, Cuba .
 U.S. and Soviet Union issue Khrushchev's letter agreeing to remove ILlel declarations before the UN Security Council . Preissue by having the U.N. Security Council issue the letter .
 The president officially lifts the naval quarantine of the hemisphere in the future ... and if Cuba is not used Cuba, and measures .are taken promptly by the U.S. for the export of aggressive Communist purposes, Navy to return to a normal readiness posture .
 The JCS orders SAC multaneously, the Soviet Union and other Warsaw to return to its normal airborne alert status . effective Pact nations announce the cancellation of the special immediately . SAC is ordered back to normal status .
 SAC forces lower their military preparedness measures that had had been put alert status from 0 EFCON 2 to 0 . Other U.S. military into effect on October 23 . The move comes during the day, when the military lowers alert status .
 Premier Khrushchev sends a November 21, 1962-g:49 P.M.: In a cable to Adlai five-page letter to Kennedy regarding the Soviet Union . Cuban leaders, he observes, are ""young, expansive have taken the missiles out of the missiles"
 McCloy: 'Spaniards in a word, to use it far from the pesomething, Mr McCloy. But I want to tell you people-Spaniard in a . word, I say . But he wants to tell me people-spaniards . in a
 ExComm members discuss future policy toward Cuba at a working meet . The ExComm held without President Kennedy .
 The group remeets with President Kennedy to discuss intelligence views United States planning for future overflights of Cuba . President Kennedy directs the State Department to prepare a into Cuba .
 In a three-hour meet with President Kennedy and Secretary of State U.S. Anastas Mikoyan repeatedly presses for a . guarantee not to attack Soviet-controlled bases in Cuba .
 Kennedy ment on on-site verification even though all the misdoes state that if the Soviet Union abides by the exsiles and planes have already been removed from change of correspondence, the U.S. will as Cuba .
 Ifpublic presumes this with Soviet negotiators at the Waldorf Suite in New York . objective is on-site verification, more and more York City .
 Earlier, in one of the final sessions between importance will be attached to such inspection as the United States and Soviet negotiators, Vasily Kuznetsov met . The negotiations continues .
 President Kennedy offers some of his thoughts on the crisis . In a television and radio interthan to have succeeded, President Kennedy offered his thoughts .
 Khrushchev sends a nine-page Wednesday in the first twenty-four letter to Kennedy on the situation in both Cuba and hours, I don't think we would have chosen as prudentBerlin. Kennedy .
 The Soviet Union have come to the final stage of the tempt to install missiles in Cuba as ""an effort to mateCuban affair. He characterizes the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy tells recrisis we relieved mankind of the direct menace of porters . He writes, ""with the elimination of the Cuban At a press conference, President Kennedy told recrisis that, in the best judgment of the United combat use of nuclear weapons that impended States, all strategic
 Continued negotiations subsequently lead mier Khrushch.ev in response to Khrushchev's Deto.ev . Continued negotiations later lead to the eventual signing of a limited test-ban treaty cember 11 message .
 The Unittro" became a standard item in lists of policy alternaed States would not consider any non-invasion assurtives considered by the Kennedy administration . Bundy later notes that the "gradual dewere to do the kind of things which would from our velopment of
 Kennedy administration contemplates Pentagon tempt to obtain firm U.S. noninvasion pledge during proposals for military action against Castro . Vasily Kuznetsov and President a wide range of economic and covert programs .
 Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, n/zo/75, assurances. The president declines to extend any further . Plots involve foreign leaders in the plot .
 Fidel Castro declared January 7, I963: The United States and the Soviet Castro declares, ""for us, the Caribbean crisis has not been resolved" In a lengthy televised speech, Fidel said, "for us"
 Stevenson and Vasily Kuznetsov note that while the Castro says, ""we don't believe in Kennedy's words" Regarding a U.S. non-invasion guarantee, Stevenson and . Vasily . Kuznnetsov .
 At its first meeting in over a month end of negotiations at the U.N. negotiations ended at the United Nations. At the end of the month end, the United States.
 Carlos and during subsequent sessions, the ExComm conLechuga, the Cuban ambassador to the United Nasiders various long-range plans to pressure Fidel Castions, send a letter to U Thant two hours prior to the trophy . Carlos and the Excommittees, the
 The United States wants Castro removed from delivery of the U.S.-Soviet letter . Castro is a member of the Castro family . Castro has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Lechuga objects to power but it recognizes that if this proves impossible, it wants him to be independent of the Soviet agreement ending crisis negotiations as ""effective"" Union . Cuba recognizes that Cuba cannot regard any of its own leaders as 'effective'
 Policy papers suggest that the ultimate objecunless it meets the ""five points" Castro had articulated tive is replacement of the government by ""one fully" on October 28, 1962 .
 Dean Rusk testifying at a closed replaced by a different oversight organization . Rusk testified at a hearing before the Senate foreign relations committee .
 The Task United States never made an unadorned commitForce W, continues to exist as the Special Affairs Staff . Rusk delocated at the CIA's Miami station .
 Rusk adds that the head of Task Force W, is replaced by Desmond in 'the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings-on-FitzGerald as head of the Special Mfairs Staff .
 Covert site inspection and assurances against the reintroducoperations against Fidel Castro continue during 1963 . FitzGerald did not fulfill his promise to send strategic weapons into Cuba .
 In addition to continuing attempts by the Cuban and Soviet governments, there are also ongoing attempts to get access to the island .
 The anti-Castro group L-66 attacks disrupting the Cq.ban government and economy . and sinks the Soviet ship Baku as it loads Cuban sugar . The Soviet ship was sunk as it loaded Cuban sugar in Cuba .
 At Premier Khrushchev's direcously protested by the Soviet Union and Cuba . At least one of the world's most famous dictatorships, the U.S. was overthrown by Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The first Polaris submarine is deployed 2121/63 in the Mediterranean Sea in 1963 .
 Soviet Union's handling of the Cuban crisis may have contributed in Soviet Union . Five-week, fourteen-city visit to Cuba begins .
 Castro negotiates renewed pledges of directly to his loss of support among the other high-Soviet aid in the event of a U.S. attack . Castro also negotiates changes in Soviet-Cuban sugar agreements .
 Soviet Charge Yuli Yuli _the missile cpsis. Apparently prompted by Cuban fears the Soviet Union and the United States as a result of of of an invasion by the U.S. The missile was launched in Cuba .
 Castro later reveals that it is only at M Vorontsov meets with National Security Advisor this time that he learned that the withdrawal of nuHenry Kissinger some eight years after the Cuban clear missiles from Turkey had been part of the crisis . Kissinger was trying to reconfirm the Kennedyment settling
 On August 7, Kissinger meets with President Kennedy approves a new sabotage program Vorontsov, and both give their word that the underagainst Cuba .
 Anatoly Dobrynin meets with Henry Kissinger in an attempt to defuse increasing diplomatic tensions over the Cienfiegos ""submarine port,"" An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that the port was a submarine port .
 The Soviet ambassador hands Kissinger a note reaftween the United States and the Soviet Union estabfirming the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding . It lishing a ""hot line"" between Washington and Moscow states that ""in the Cuban question, the Soviet governis signed"
 The note lists five specific actions that the U.S. would consider violations of the 1962 agreement . Castro for the withdrawal of Soviet strategic missiles .
 President Reagan states that his administration is from August onward make diplomatic exchanges a . President Reagan's administration is . actively reviewing the Kennedy-Khrushchev underpart of the . U.S.-Soviet understanding on Cuba .
 The Soviet government has given President Carter assurances that no shipments of arms to Cuba had or not been intercepted . Crisis in Hawks Cay, Florida, is a major conference on the Cuban Missile .
 The State Depart.Schlesinger, Jr., reviewed the deployment of orge Bundy, Theodore Sorensen, and Arthur Soviet MiG-23 aircraft to Cuba . The most prominent crisis scholars, among them Graham T Allison, Ernest May, and Ernest May .
 The documents, declassified for the first time as a result of Schelling, were declassified by Schelling . Joseph Nye, Richard Neustadt, and Thomas Schelling.
 The National Security Archive provides the of a FOIA lawsuit filed against the State Department, from which emerges a offer a better understanding of events leading up to the missile crisis . The lawsuit was filed in response to a FOIA request by the State Dept.
 The N.N. proposal on trading measures and psychological operations, were intended to provide Soviet missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles, but broke down between the superpowers .
 Process of which would ""require decisive military intervenceedings from the conference, as well as those from a . tion"" by the United States . Process ofwhich would ""necessarily require decisive military intervention" by the . U.S.
 The National Security Archive files twenSoviet missiles were then deployed for defensive reaty-seven Freedom of Information Act requests for sons . The missiles were used for defensive purposes .
 The third in a seFOIAs are filed in the name of Professor Philip ries organized by James G Blight, the conference Brenner, a Cuba specialist and board member of the Cuba specialist . Brenner is a Cuba expert .
 A second conference on the GOOSE documents, significant new facts about the Cuban missile crisis, organized by James G Blight, crisis are disclosed .
 Khrushchev's former speechwriter and adviser; Sergo Sergo . The real figure was over forty thousand . The former Soviet leader's former aide says the real figure is more than 40,000 .
 The Cubans expected the U.S. to inMikoyan; and Georgi Shaknazarov, a personal aide to vade and predicted up to eight hundred thouths . Mikoyan, son of former First Deputy Premier Anastas, was the son of
 At least twenty nuclear warheads were actually in one-sided history of the crisis; the conference results Cuba but were never mounted on the rockets . General Dmitry Volkogonov: This is why Premier Khrushchev decided to deploy the misthe first confirmation that the Soviets had mansiles
 Sorensen, MONGOOSE, the covert program authorized by Presiwho edited Robert Kennedy's memoir of the cri. S.S.-Soviet settlement of the S. S.-Soviet crisis .
 Fidel Castro is the last surviving world leader on the island of Antigua . Attended all four sile crisis, ""Cuba between the Superpowers,"" is held days by Fidel Castro .
 S.-Cuban and Soviparalleled accounts of his personal role in the events, et-Cuban dynflmic and Cuba's role in crisis . as well as that of Cuba as a nation .
 National Security Archive releases correspondence from the Kremlin in the event of a tween Kennedy and Khrushchev .