 On the 14 September 1917 a escuadrilla de aviación was formed for operation in France . The Cubilla Cubaine was formed in France in 1917 .
 During September 1918 Cuban pilots and mechanics started to train in the United States at Kelly Airflied in San Antonio, Texas . The first Cuban pilot flight took place in September 1918 .
 World War One ended before the escuadrilla was operational and in April 1919 the Cubans returned home, without going to war . The Cubans went to war in 1918 but never went on to fight .
 A second squadron was planned for activation but this never materialized . The squadron was never activated .
 During the next years Cuba bought only small quantities of aircraft and most of these planes were destroyed during a desastrous cyclon in October 1926 . Most of Cuba's aircraft were destroyed .
 During the 1930s the CAEC received about two dozen aircraft as replacement . The CAEC was given about 30 aircraft as replacements . During the 30s, CAEC aircraft were replaced by aircraft .
 A uprising in 1931 against President Machado led to the first bombardment of a civilian town by combat aircraft . A revolt against the president in 1931 led to a bombardment of civilian towns by aircraft .
 CAEC bombarded Gibara on 18 August 1932 . The town was subsequently abandoned by the rebellious forces .
 After the revolution in 1933 and the overthrow of President Gerardo Machado y Morales and the subsequent reign of Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar led to a reorgainsation of the Cuerpo de Aviación del Ejército .
 The service was divided into the Cuerpo de Aviación del Ejército de Cuba and the Aviacaón Naval . The fleet was one of Cuba's most successful airliners .
 The new organisation finally became effective in 1934, at the time of the renewal of the US-Cuban Treaty .
 On 3 June 1940 the ANACRA (Academia Nacional de Aviación Civil Reserva Aérea) was activated at Campo Brihuegas . Addiational airfields were established at La Habana, Camagüey, Kawama,
 Cuba declared war on Japan on 9 December 1941 and on Germany and Italy on the 11 December 1941 . After the attack on Pearl Harbor Cuba declared its war against Japan and Germany . Cuba also declared war against Italy, Italy and Germany in 1941 .
 During the next years the CAEC received 48 aircraft through the Lend an Lease Program from the United States . CAEC received 48 aircraft from the U.S. through the program .
 The USAAF operated a squadron of P-39 Aircobra from San Antonio, while the United States Navy operated aircraft from San Julián . The U.S. Army Air Force operated aircraft in San Antonio .
 In 1947 the ""Legión de Caribe" was formed in Cayo Confites, in the north of Cuba, to overthrow the Dominican dictator Rafael Leónidas Trujillo . The party was formed to overthrow Trujillillo .
 Spies of President Trujillo discovered the plot and launched a media campain to stop the activities in Cuba . But spies discovered the plan and launched the media campaign to stop it .
 Fidel Castro started the Cuban Revolution a second time in 1956 . He landed with 81 supporters, coming from his exil in Mexico City, in Cuba . Fidel Castro is the Cuban leader of the second Cuban Revolution .
 Cienfuegos Naval Station was bombed in September 1957 . The attack took place on the 5 September 1957, when the station was attacked by the Spanish Navy .
 During the struggle with Castros forces President Batista tried to purchase additional aircraft from the United States . The United States government embargoed for example the purchase of 10 T-28 Trojan aircraft .
 During 1958 aircraft of the FAEC supported operations of the Cuban Army against Fidel Castros forces . The FAEC aircraft were used in Cuba's anti-Castros campaign .
 The Fuerza Aérea Rebelde were formed on the 2 May 1958 . They made their first combat operation with a captured, captured, former FuerzAérea Naval, Kingfisher aircraft, against positions of the Cuban army .
 On the 10 November 1958 B-26s made their first night time combat support operations . They were the first night-time combat support aircraft to fly .
 From 16 to 24 December 1958 the FAEC flow 70 combat support operations with B-26 and F-47 . The Kingfisher and T-28 of the FAR flow 4 bombing missions . From the 16-24 December 1958 F-26 flow 70 support operations .
 The last battle of the Cuban Revolution was fought on the 28 December 1958 in Santa Clara, in central Cuba . The battle was fought in the Santa Clara district of Santa Clara .
 B-26, F-47 and Sea Fury aircraft supported the operations of the Bastista forces . The aircraft were used to carry out operations in support of the military .
 On 1 January 1959 President Batista resigned and fled with a DC-4 to the Dominican Republic and landed at the Base Aérea de San Isidro in Santo Domingo . Batista landed in the base at the base on 1 January .
 CIA negotiated with Guatemalan government to establish two secret bases . One was for training soldiers and the other, a small air base to complete the training of pilots .
 JMTrax is located on a coffee plantation called 'La Helvetia' in the foothills between Quetzaltenango and Retalhuleu departments . It served as a training camp for the ground forces of the brigade . The camp was located on the coffee plantation '
 Cubans pilots were there too, since their Airbase was under construction yet, but two weeks after the arrival, they were finally moved . Two weeks after their arrival, the Cubans finally moved to the base .
 The Airbase, code-named 'JMMadd' (known to the Cubans as 'Rayo Base') was basically a 4800ft long paved runway, coupled with an array of barracks, warehouses and supply shops scattered around a main building .
 This base was very near to Retalhuleu city, right between the road to Champerico port and the railroad to Mexico . It was very close to the city of Retaluu city . The base was located near to the town of Champerica .
 The only way to accomodate the planes was lining them up, one behind the other . The planes were lined up behind each other to accommodate each other .
 JMMadd was disguised at all times as a Guatemalan Air Force base . Despite the obvious lack of local personnel, the base was disguised as a military base .
 Cubans and CIA pilots involved in the operation trained in aircraft sporting the blue-white-blue colours . The local Air Force pilots wondered where the new planes were .
 Most of the Cuban pilots were also checked out in C-46s, but their main task was to become efficient B-26 drivers . The Cuban pilots had the chance to prove themselves over the skies of Playa Girón .
 North American pilots concentrated efforts in flying supply missions between JMMadd and JMTide, which was the code-name for the CIA airbase in Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua .
 The flights were carried out by 'foreign national' pilots, mainly from Europe and Asia under CIA's contract .
 The end of JMMadd as a CIA secret base began in late March when the B-26 crews were transferred to Nicaragua . The last troops were flown to JMTide together with all the equipment for the invasion .
 Eight CIA B-26B, with FAR markings but piloted by cuban exiled crews, took off from Happy Valley in Nicaragua and headed to Cuba in 1961 .
 At 6:00 AM, planes attacked La Libertad airbase where they destroyed a Sea Fury, among other planes . A Sea Fury was also destroyed .
 Later that same morning, another Sea Fury was destroyed in a hangar of the MOA bay mining company . Another Sea Fury destroyed in the same hangar .
 Shortly after, the San Antonio de los Baños Airbase and the Antonio Maceo Airport were attacked by the B-26Bs . Shortly after the attack, the airbase and Maceo airport were attacked .
 By the end of that day, the FAR was left with less than half of its original air power . The FAR had been left with fewer than half its original power .
 There remained only two B-26C, two Sea Furies, and two T-33A at San Antonio de los Baños Airbase . Only one Sea Fury remained at Antonio Maceo Airport .
 Two of the attacking B-26s were damaged by ground fire . One of them managed to reach Key West with one engine feathered and low on fuel . The other landed at Miami IAP in almost the same conditions .
 Around 2:00 AM on 17 April, the CIA/cuban exiled assault force reached the shore at Playa Girón but soon they were discovered by an army patrol . The CIA/Cuban exile assault force was discovered by a patrol .
 The soldiers alerted the nearing bases and several skirmishes broke up . Soldiers alerted the approaching bases and skirmishes break up .
 The two surviving Sea Furies were deployed from the San Antonio airbase . Within 15 minutes they were over the area, strafing and strafing the invading forces .
 The Sea Furies headed to the sea in search of the mother ships . When the FAR B-26Cs arrived and began to attack the invaders, they headed for the sea . The sea Furies were attacked by the Far Eastern forces in the early 1900s .
 One of the Sea Fury , was lost to AAA fire from an invading ship while he was trying to shot down a Curtiss C-46 of the invading forces .
 The ships were trying to reach international waters . Soon after, the four T-33A arrived and began strafing the ships . The four aircraft arrived and strafed the ships as they tried to get into international waters.
 Four B-26B were deployed from Nicaragua, but after entering the area, one was shot down by a T-33A and another by the Sea Fury . One of the planes was shot by a Sea Fury and another was shot in the area . The situation worsened due to the
 From then on, the two surviving Sea Furies concentrated only on ground attack missions against the invasion forces . The two surviving sea furies concentrated on ground attacks .
 Within 72 hours, the FAR gained total air superiority over the invading force . Within the next 72 hours of the war, the Far Eastern forces had total air supremacy .
 By 20 April two more B-26B were shot down by the FAR’s T-33A, and on 21 April, ten of their twelve B-25B were destroyed .
 Attempts to escort the bombers with Nicaraguan Mustangs were made by the invading force, but the idea was quickly discarded . The Mustangs could not reach Cuba, engage in combat and then return to Nicaragua .
 By wednesday april 21, the invading troops were pushed back to their landing zone at Playa Girón . By wed Wednesday april 22, the invasion troops were pushing back to the landing zone .
 Surrounded by the cuban army and constantly hammered by FAR aircraft, some began to surrender . Others fled into the hills .
 The Sea Furies, and the rest of the surviving combat types in service with the FAR, were replaced finally in May 1961 with the arrival of at least 60 Mig-15 to form three combat squadrons . One at least being at the San Antonio de los Baños Airbase
 U.S. discovered Soviet-supplied missile installations in Cuba in fall of 1962 . American-Cuban relations grew even more perilous in the fall of that year .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy then announced a naval blockade of the island to prevent further Soviet shipments of arms .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle and remove nuclear weapons in October 1962 . This was followed by a series of days of negotiations to remove the weapons .
 They frequently tried to intercept US RF-101 and RF-8 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba . They often intercepted US aircraft over the island .
 During 1962 the first Mig-21 arrived in Cuba with a soviet air defence regiment . During 1962 it arrived with a Soviet air force in Cuba .
 The first Cuban MiG-21F-13 regiment was officially established in August 1963 . It was not until 10 August 1963, that the first Cuban regiment was established .
 With this, Cuba obtained the first Mach-2 airplanes in all of Latin America . Cuba also obtained the . first Mach .2 airplanes . Cuba obtained . the first mach-2 airplane in Latin America.
 Several MiG-21s overflew the Bahamas to send a pointed message to the Bahamian government . The Bahamas was holding 14 Cuban fishermen it claimed had been fishing in its waters .
 The Fuerza Aérea Revolucionara got equal status with the Army and Navy in 1972 . It got the status of the Army, Navy and Air Force .
 Fidel Castro sent a squadron with 9 MiG-17Fs and one MiG 15UTI to the FAPLA (armed forces of the MPLA ""Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola"") in December 1975 .
 The MiG-17Fs flow in Angolan markings . They are believed to be part of the FLEC (Cabinda Enclave Liberation Front) separatist movement .
 Their zone of operations was in Cabinda and the north of Angola . MiG-21MFs worked south and east of Angola, while Mi-22MFs were in the east .
 In the years following the Cuban MiG-17s operated against UNITA, they were replaced by newer Mi-21s, when they were passed to the Angolans . In the 1990s, the Angolan government passed on the MiG17s .
 In January 1976, giant Antonov An-22 transports airlifted one squadron to Angola from the Soviet Union . The Antonov aircraft were used to airlift one squadron from the USSR .
 A flight of four MiG-21MFs surprised a Fokker F-27 on the ground discharging arms . One of the few combats of the war involving enemy aircraft happened in March 1976 .
 MiG-21MFs overflew Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic to press for the release of the merchant ship Capitan Leo, which had violated Dominican waters and been interned by the authorities . The ship was en route to Angola and was interned .
 The plan was to bomb Puerto Plata and Santiago de los Caballeros the next day if the Dominican government didn't cede the ship, but after hurried negotiations it did . After hurried negotiations, the government ceded the ship .
 One squadron of MiG-17s and one squadron of MiG-21bis were employed in operations against Somalian forces invading the Ogaden in December, 1977 . The latter were pushed completely out of the region by 13 March 1978 .
 MiG-17s and Mig-21s made 1013 combat support missions during this conflict . The MiG 17s and 19s were involved in the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan . MiG17s were used in more than 100 combat missions .
 Cuban MiG-17s flew combat missions alongside Ethiopian F-5A/B/Es against Somalian MiGs-17 and MG-21s . Ethiopian MiGs were also involved in the Ethiopian conflict .
 The last Cuban soldier and aircraft left Ethiopia in September 1989 after 12 years of continuous combat operations . The last Cuba aircraft and Cuban soldiers left the country in 1989 .
 On 10 May 1980 two FAR MiG-21s attacked the Bahamian patrol vessel HMBS Flamingo, which had arrested four Cuban fishing vessels . The attack was the first of its kind since the attack in May 1980 .
 A South African Air Force Mirage F-1CZ shot down a MiG-21MF over Angola with 30mm gunfire . The plane was shot down in November 1981 .
 Second aerial combat of the war took place on 5 October 1982 . Almost a year later, the second aerial combat took place .
 The MiGs broke contact and returned to their base in Lubango, Angola, without encountering any further problems . The MiGs broke contact with each other and returned safely .
 In 1984 Cuba obtained fifty MiG-23MLs which were sent directly to Angola . They were employed in primarily in the air-to-ground role until late in the war .
 According to South Africa (and the International Air Transport Association) they actually shot down a civilian C-130 registered to the Angolan government airline . South Africa shot down the plane, which was registered as a civilian aircraft .
 The best-documented loss of a Cuban-flown MiG-21 over Angola was on 28 October 1987 when an armed two-seater MiG -21UM was downed by ground fire near Luvuei .
 During late 1987 to middle 1988 the time of the Cuito Cuanavale battles the Mig-23ML began to be used also as interceptors against the South African Air Force . The Mig-22MLs were used as interceptor against South Africa Air Force during the C
 With the intensification of the conflict by the end of 1987, some aerial combat with the MiG-23s takes place . Some aerial combat takes place during the conflict .
 MiG-23MLs took off to provide cover for a helicopter rescue mission at the Cuito-Canavale area in 1987 . MiG 23MLs provided cover for helicopter rescue missions in the area .
 Two South African fighters crossed the Angolan air space, heading North . They received a ground-based radar warning regarding two South African fighter aircraft .
 The MiG-23ML followed the radar instructions to intercept the Mirages, and approached them on a head-on direction . The Mirages were the first to be shot down by the U.S. Air Force .
 The two pairs of fighters crossed head on head on, and attempted to get behind each other . The two teams of fighters attempted to cross head on .
 The MiG-23ML has a clear maneuvering advantage over the inert Mirage F1 . Its turning radius is shorter and its turning radius has a shorter turn radius .
 An R-60MK exploded in the tail of a Mirage F1CZ that exploded in its tail . In a few seconds one pilot manages to position himself behind SAAF Mirage . F1Z ""206"" and fires from a distance of 300m .
 The other Mirage upon seeing the fate of its companion, immediately dives down and leaves the combat, flying very low towards Namibia . The two Mirage fighters are separated from each other .
 The MiG-23MLs consider that the first Mirage has been shot down and attempt to pursue the fleeing Mirage . The first Mirage had already reached the limit of their fuel supply, and had to head back to base .
 The pilot managed to get out of the combat, albeit with a damaged airplane, dives down in order to go unnoticed, and heads to his base in Rundu, Namibia . He dives down at the highest possible speed, heads to the base in Namibia, where he is
 The R-60MK missile exploded near the exhaust, and damaged the wings and controls . The braking parachute broke loose, but the worst damage had been done to the hydraulic system, which powered the flight controls, and began to fail . The hydraulic system powered the missile's flight controls began
 The Mirage F1CZ veered off the runway and crashed, losing the landing gear . The pilot could hardly control the plane, and when attempting to land, veered into the air .
 Upon impact, the ejection seat activated but the parachute did not have enough time to fully deploy, and hit the ground, heavily . The parachute did have too much time to deploy, hitting the ground heavily, causing the accident .
 The pilot's spine was severely damaged and he became paralyzed . The pilot became paralyzed after the accident . His spine was damaged in the accident and he was severely injured .
 His Mirage F1CZ ""206"" is withdrawn from use, and is employed as a parts source to repair Mirage F1 ""205"" which also had been out of service . His Mirage CZ ""205" is also withdrawn from service and used to repair parts of his
 Castro indicated to the Cuban command in Angola that according to intelligence information the SAAF was planning a surprise attack, and ordered that MiG-23s be prepared to bomb South African bases in Namibia and other objectives .
 Eleven Cuban MiG-23MLs with demolition bombs appeared over the hydroelectric dam at Ruacana-Calueque, protected by the South African Army . The dam provided electricity to most of Namibia and provided power to the country .
 All the MiG-23 returned to base without even a scratch . Surprise was complete, and all the MiGs-23 were safe .
 UNITA downed a MiG-23ML and a Mi-23UB in 1985, the latter on 9 December 1985 . The latter was the first of two Mi-24MLs downed in 1985 .
 Rafael Del Pino comments on how three MiG-23s were lost in one week during combat in Angola . Also, in ""General Del Pino Speaks"" Rafael del Pino talks about how three of the MiG23s lost in a week .
 Surviving MiG-23MLs were shipped to Cuba and later used by the 23.MLs . When Cuban forces withdrew in 1989 surviving MiGs were shipped back to Cuba .
 Today the FAR operates 2 multi-purpose regiments and 1 transport regiment . The FAR operates two regiments, one transport regiment and one multi purpose regiments .