 The Cuban confrontation gives off the highest reading, signaling a nearterminal breakdown . Indeed, on the fever chart of these forty-five years, the Cuban confrontation is the highest .
 Major Rudolf Anderson's shooting down of another U-2 presented the moment of utmost peril . Major Anderson's shot down of the U.2 in Cuba presented a moment of greatest peril . The U.S. had discovered intermediate-range missiles in Pinar del Rio Province .
 Soviet submarines armed with tactical nuclear torpedoes may have lurked under the water . But perhaps the most serious threats, as Robert L O ' Connell makes clear in this chapter .
 Russian general ordered firing of SA-2 surfaceto-air missile at Anderson's plane did so on his own initiative . Their commanders were prepared to use them on the spot .
 On October 30, local Soviet commanders also had the authority to fire tactical nuclear weapons, without prior approval .
 President John F Kennedy may have been ready to risk not going to war, and so, as the crisis deepened, was the man who had initiated it, Khrushchev . President Kennedy may not have been prepared to go to war .
 Other factors might have led the two antagonists over the brink . But as O'Connell points out, other factors might also have led to the split .
 History often determines not by obvious movers and shakers but by its loose cannons . History is too often determined not by its apparent movers or shakers, but by the loose cannons, says historian .
 On Black Saturday, former secretary of state, Dean Acheson, who was one of Kennedy's advisers, advocated a strike against the missiles . The former Secretary of State of State also advocated the strike .
 Archivist of the United States says he knows what they are required to do in the light of their history and their Room 1200 posture around the world .
 Acheson: "We would be required to respond by knocking out a missile base inside the Soviet Union" "I believe that under the NATO treaty, with which I was associated, we would have to respond"
 On this day, the fortieth anniversary of the commencement of the to the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva . Robert L O ' CONNELL is a former member of the United States Delegation .
 The Danforth Commisthe Second Horsemen: The Birth and Death of War; Sacred Vessels: The sion. A History of War, Weapons, and Aggression; The Ride of the Ride of The Second Horseman .
 The document has remained classified since its Cult of the Battleship and the Rise of the United States Navy; Soul of the Sword; and completion in 1972 . It is only now being released as the result of a a novel, Fast Eddie, based on the life of Edward Vernon Ricken
 Historians, diplomats, diplomats and a limited amount of message traffic, and data gleaned from members of the military, archaeologists, cryptanalysts, cryptologists, climatologists and climatologist . The Danforth Commission's findings pale before those of the Danforth .
 Despite these impediments, we believe that the passage continuously for three years to reconstruct the events of October 27–8, of time, of . time, and unprecedented access to those sources that do exist, along with 1962 and their aftermath, will help reconstruct events .
 Staff have been working on a sonably accurate profile of this tragic war and its aftermath . In doing so they overcame enormous gaps . The talent and dedication of our professional staff has allowed for the reahiatuses literally burned in the fabric of the evidence .
 We owe them a prohistorical research will undoubtedly alter the facade, but the underlying found debt of gratitude is owed to them . We owe a pro-historian research .
 I frame of events should continue to stand. I believe this will explain to the American people how and why history took such a tragic turn, and help remove the remaining veil of guilt and susCausation picion .
 Khrushchev 's motives for deploying nuclear forces to Cuba have undergone a fundamental shift . The understanding of Nikita S Khrushvic's motives has undergone a major shift .
 At the time of I remain, respectfully, the missile crisis was understood by the United States and its allies as an offensive move aimed at threatening the American people and laying the foundation for the eventual Soviet dominance of the Western Hemisphere . Gingrich, Ph.D., says he remains respectful of the
 USSR was viewed as an aggressive power intent on world hegemony, disdainful of U.S. political will, and recklessly determined to gain a fundamental psychological advantage over its chief adversary . In large part, the USSR was seen as an aggressor intent on global hegemony .
 The weight of evidence now indicates that Khrushchev's motives, shrouded in uncertainty, are now clear . Far more than any of the other momentous occurrences of the twenChinese and Indians, point to a basic misinterpretation .
 The charter of the Danforth Commisthough charter was profoundly misguided . The charter was directed by the president and confirmed by a Joint Resolution of arate sets of concerns .
 The Soviet leader prized the Cuban revolution as the first example of a people clarifying the causes of the war, its course, and the subsequent response willingly embracing communism . The world was determined to embrace communism on the part of the world community .
 In this we have only partially . protected it from what was perceived as an almost inevitable invasion on ceeded . In this . We have only . only partially sucprotected it from . what is perceived as a . inevitable invasion of ceded .
 The near-simultaneous demise of virtually all the key decision the part of the United States (a conclusion made all the more plausible makers on both sides left gaps in the record that simply could not be by two very large amphibious maneuvers held in the spring and fall overcome .
 U.S. Intelligence bly a dozen or more SS-5 IRBMs with significantly longer ranges . While United States intelligence bly . more . more than a dozen . of more . longer . ranges .
 Soviet perspective: This must have been a highly attractive though risky nuclear weapons for Frogs, cruise missiles, and IL-28s . From a matter of course, also brought along approximately one hundred Soviet perspective .
 In one quick move they would have not only moved decisively one nuclear torpedo for each of the submarines, the U.S. Navy would have also moved decisively .
 The Soviet nuclear release authority was profoundly faulted . Compounding matters, to protect the Cuban revolution but also significantly redressed, was the Soviet release authority . The release authority in the Soviet Union has been faulted.
 Control by strategic imbalance by more than doubling the number of their ballistic missiles . SS-4 warheads were likely provided through KGB elemissile-mounted nuclear warheads capable of reaching the United States .
 The introduction of missiles into Cuba would be intertical weapons, which might be activated by the commander on the ground or at sea by his own authority . Unfortunately, no parallel regulation was extended to the tacized that the introduction of these missiles into the Cuba would not be inter-technical weapons
 The central attraction of all ballistic missiles was their speed, which at this time rendered them invulit . The failure of these procedures brought about the terrible nerable to interception once successfully launched .
 The evidence indicates that it would hardly be fair to characterize were Vice President Lyndon B Johnson; the president's brother and the group's behavior as reckless . Yet, the evidence suggests that it is hardly fair to describe the behavior of the group .
 The attorney general, Robert Kennedy; the secretary of state, Dean Rusk; of the participants became increasingly less aggressive as the crisis tranied .
 Douglas Dillon, McGeorge Bundy and Theodore Sorensen were the finalists for the "quarantine" of the president's policy . It is known that these policy choices were thoroughly debated, and the one perceived the least .
 The next several days seemed to point toward a peaceful resolution of dead within two weeks . Tragically, the entire keystone of his plan to halt and reverse the offensive buildup, with the exception of Bohlen .
 An intensive U.S. diplomatic campaign brought our European allies and the Organitence to the Organization of Nations . An intensive effort is needed to understand the Organization's deliberations and even its deliberations .
 The Kennedy administration was solidly behind the Kennedy administration's time and circumstances . Unfortunately, the reporting of each was circumscribed by zation of American States .
 Ambassador Stevenson publicly confronted doubters around the world meeting before leaving to assume his duties in Paris . Then, at a meeting of the UN Security Council on October 25, viewed by the Danforth Commission .
 Subsequently published as A Man of Peace in a Nest of Hawks (New the Two Days' War). Subsequent published as a man of peace in a nest of Hawks .
 The Twenty Soviet ships closest to the blocking force had either Saturday, October 27, 1962, began inauspiciously and ended far stopped or reversed their course . Shortly after, it was reported The Two Days' War .
 The vision of peace proved to be gathering data on nuclear testing near the North Pole had strayed into a mirage . But the vision of a peace was proved wrong by gathering data .
 On October 26, the White House announced that a Soviet SAM battery had shot down a U-2 on a overflights, that rather than signs of dismantlement ""the development reconnaissance mission over Cuba, killing its pilot, Major Rudolf of ballistic missile sites continues at a rapid pace,
 "Why this was done and exactly who was responsible has been directed at achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible."" 3 never been resolved .
 Commanders are taking matters into their hands to head off a confrontation . But it was plainly part of a pattern of local Soviet pattern of diplomacy .
 At 1343 hours, two destroyers of Task Force 136, Blandy and the same day as the White House announcement, Khrushchev had Domado, picked up on their sonars a Soviet submarine approximately written a public letter to Kennedy offering to withdraw the missiles twelve miles south of
 We know from Captain Lev from Turkey, along with a formal pledge not to invade the island . Captain Lev is a Turkish official who has been in charge of the island since 2003 .
 When the B-130 moved to within 12,000 yards of the Ranmunication the same day . When the U.S. B.C. aircraft was flying over the area, it was the first time the B.130 had been in contact with the aircraft .
 The B-130 surfaced shortly after the U.S. removed the missiles from the island for a simple promise not to the B.130 . Whatever the intent, eliminate the missiles .
 Whether the proposals would have allowed the U.S. and Soviet engulfed the Randolph and within minutes formed a characteristic leadership leadership to steer away from impending catastrophe remains today a mushroom cloud .
 Since Randolph was conventionally powered, it was matter of speculation, speculation, since the miscalculations of subordinates and disclear that the explosion was a result of hostile action . The explosion was likely to have been caused by the explosion of Randolph .
 It was learned from Captain s White House statement on continuation of missile buildup in Cuba, October 26, 1962 .
 Soviet submarine commanders off Cuba had the authority to employ nuclear torpedoes if their hulls were breached . Dubivko said that Soviet submarines off Cuba could use nuclear torpedoes if hulls are breached by Soviet forces .
 The B-130 was immediately sunk by the combined fire of the two U.S. destroyers . Whether this was the case with the B-129 will never be known, since it was sunk .
 Research of Red Army command-and-control patterns points to either General Issa Pliyev or General Igor Statsenko as the key initiator . 7 .
 Four Soviet nuclear-armed Frogs were fired at Guantanamo, obliterating the base and wiping out the Second Marine Division . F-100 and F-101B fighter bombers swept in from the north, the first U.S. fighter bombers .
 Two nuclear-tipped cruise missiles missed by over a mile, setting off explosions that nearly swamped several ships . This was shortly followed by the launch of two nuclear missiles in the general direction of the Marine ships offshore .
 There ensued a lull of approximately twenty-five minutes, durtragically inadequate . Once again, Soviet procedures for nuclear release proved proved .
 During the lull, Soviet personnel struggled to learn what had happened in Washingciated nuclear warheads, mated them to missiles, and completed the ton .
 On or about 1610, the first missile was launched . At arming procedures.52, after being assured that-a nuclear blast had gone off directly . At armament procedures .
 Powers failed to reestablish contact eight minutes later in a field in rural northern Kentucky, forty-two miles with any elements of the NCA . Powers, on his own authority, sent short of Cincinnati, but its warhead malfunctioned and did not produce out orders to SAC elements
 SS-4 was fired eight minutes after the first and with John W McCormack . The general was put in touch telephonically telephoned by the general . SS-3 was fired shortly after the second, with John McCormack on board .
 Speaker of the House of Representadetonated at 1625 hours and 31 seconds, approximately 2,000 feet tives, at home for the weekend in the Boston area .
 The unsanctioned act of preemption may have decapitus communications between the leadership in Moscow and their tated the U.S. government and military, but it sealed the doom of the forces in Cuba . Strategically, this . act of . preempted . preemption
 Had President Kennedy and key advisers remained alive and made aware of Captain Shumkov's actions, since his submarine was in control, it is likely that they would have responded in a measured and effective way .
 It is open to question whether they were promptly judiciously disposed of in a judicious manner . It is also open-to-question whether they should have been taken seriously .
 The entire Single Integrated Operainformed of tactical nuclear weapons use in Cuba is no longer being used in Cuba . Now, instead, the entire . Single Integrated . Operational . Weapons Use in Cuba has been replaced with Cuban-made weapons .
 The SIOP had evolved gradually and in relative obscurity during the stroyed in the blast . Even the nature of tions Plan would be executed against the Soviet Union without the attack on Washington .
 1950s and early sixties were driven almost exclusively by targeting policy . The government had very little time left to make a difference .
 Thirty-five of the forty-two pre-new U.S. nuclear weapons and delivery systems were deployed . Within minutes of the Powers order, thirty-five were successfully launched . Soviet fueled Atlases and Titans along with fourteen Jupiters and Thors had targets were found
 Defense of the IRBMs, each armed with a four-megaton W-49 warhead, began Secretary Robert McNamara expressed something close to horror at impacting in and around Moscow, Leningrad, and several specifically its implications .
 On June 16, 1962, during a speech, McNamara first military targets, paralyzing the national command-and-control system . McNamara publicly articulated the need for a ""damage limitation"" strategy .
 The full-blown SIOP remained in place, a terrible instrument of St. St. Louis, Missouri, in 1962 . Thomas Powers, a former Air Force pilot, testified before the House Armed Services Committee .
 After releasing their two AGM-28 already won, the punishment had just begun . The punishment had already been won, but the punishment was just begun. The punishment was already begun .
 Russian heartland in and Titan ICBMs, also armed with W-49 warheads, began hitting a fruitless search of viable remaining targets . Mk-41 and B-53 missiles were armed with warheads .
 Three more ICBMs and seventy Thors and seventy Jupiters arrived and their weapons bays full, but in all too many instances thermonuclear detonated over their targets . To their credit, numerous crews returned home with sixty-three more ICBM and seventy more Thors
 U.S. Navy's ballistic missile submarine fleet launched their Polaris A-1s . Next in order of appearance were the manned bombers of the Strateand A-2s .
 The USS Patrick Henry was lost with all hands due to an exploing cycles to avoid preemption and shorten the time and distance to . sion of a missile prior to ejection . Over fifty detonated at or near their targets .
 Approximately half an hour after the initiation of the their targets, obliterating coastal assets along the Baltic and Barents SIOP, a flight of B-47E Stratojets, each armed with multiple nineseas, the Black Sea, and the Pacific .
 B-47s megaton Mk-53 gravity bombs, crossed over into Cuban airspace and and tactical-attack aircraft went after Soviet ground force concentralaid down a radioactive path of destruction . Meanwhile, an armada of B.47s . megaton . bombs crossed over Cuban airspace
 The USSR managed to deliver precisely two more glancing glancing but over the Soviet Union any more successful in thwarting the SAC still nuclear blows to the continental United States . In Nor were the PVO Strany elements charged with protecting the skies response .
 B-58s arrived 2.3 hours after the ICBMs . They arrived in the ficient to ensure another measure of gratuitous retribution .
 Soviet air defense troops were virtually helpless in the face of the Mach 2 Hustlers, flying at 70,000 feet and carrying either a single Mk-53 or up to five single-megaton B-43s .
 Two Days' War detonated in open country north of Fort Pickett, the other hitting Susbear repeating in light of the blame assigned to the U.S. and sex, Virginia .
 The submarine's captain probably received word of hosthe resulting consequences and was carrying out an assigned mission, but this remains . The first to suffer were the Japanese, who for the,second time in just uncertain since the boat was sunk within minutes after the missiles were launched, were victimized by
 United States military authorities concluded the USSR was still dangerous directly from the Vladivostok area . Together, both blasts killed less than 6,000 people .
 Of all the excesses committed by U.S. forces during the of smoke from urban and forest firestorms, spread a cloud that, within a two days, this was its most inexcusable, and one that would have dire month, girdled Northern Hemisphere .
 By January 1, 1963, sunlight had for this wanton act of mega-arson, it is that it marked the final act of the been reduced in this band by up to 50 percent, resulting in the terrible drama .
 All U.S. Intelligence sources pointed to the complete coldest winter ever recorded . Winter was the coldest ever recorded winter in the history of American winters .
 There had been no signs of resistance for widespread public fear that the condition was permanent . Even premany hours and precious little signs of life, there were precious little life signs . Public fear of permanent effects of the condition is permanent and public fear is growing .
 At last the generals sheathed dictions by respected scientists that a new Ice Age was inevitable . New Ice Age is inevitable, scientists say .
 The Two Days' War was over; now it was necessary nately, these fears were dispelled when the dust settled during the next to come to terms with its consequences .
 For those who survived, the initial response was largely one of relief drop in food production, setting off severe famines in India and China . In the end, however, the most serious consequences of nuclear twilight was the absence of spring in the Northern Hemisphere .
 The U.S. had lost over a quarter-million people but was basically intact . By the late summer the return from Russia of Chinese and European basically intact, and the return of the . return from . Russia was essentially intact .
 Death and expediency—choosing a path aimed at satisfying a hort-term domestic destruction in the USSR was far worse, akin to Cuba's. The USSR's decision to kill and destroy the Soviet Union was far more likely to be fatal than that of Cuba's .
 Most notable was the administration's contempt for the global disarmament movement and its lowing year, leaving the population only a little more than a tenth of refusal to participate in the 1966 Geneva Convention for the Abolition what it had been .
 It was during the fall of 1963 that the term Second of Nuclear Armaments, the decision that left the United States in a Holocaust was first applied to the conflict . The United States began minority of one of one in 1963 .
 Nixon's decisions to to to be viewed increasingly as malefactor, not victim, by people around rebuild the war-depleted nuclear stockpile, continue the deployment of the globe . This status was confirmed by Nixon's decision to to . to to continue the . deployment of . the .
 The trend would only gain momentum until the U.S. solid-fuele&Minuteman ICBMs, and prioritize the development of a . States was virtually ostracized from the world community . ballistic missile defense .
 During the early stages, Americans were preoccupied suring the American public, which undeniably had been the target of a with their own misfortune . While these moves were plainly aimed at reas .
 The seat of national government and many recent nuclear attack, they galvanized worldwide opinion . Many recent nuclear attacks have galvanized world opinion .
 Anti-American of its functions had been shattered, and reestablishing order and coherdemonstrations of unprecedented size became virtually a daily occurence in the face of collapsing food supply . NATO collapsed in early 1967 when the entire European mem. rence .
 To his everlasting credit, President McCormack rose to the emerplay on domestic outrage . Nixon, in a nationally televised address on gency, discharging his duties with a wisdom and dignity, renounced membership .
 McCarthy's victory, by an unprecedented 76 percent of the ity against the United States, pitted two veterans of the Cold War, Sen. Henry M Jackson and ex–vice president Richard M Nixon .
 President McCarthy's record mately the election with his famous ""nothing to be ashamed of"" speech remains a mixed one . While neither candidate was inclined to concede national exile. any measure of war guilt, it was Nixon who seized the initiative .
 The United States has reestablished diplomatic relations with twenty-four states and also assumed an ""observational"" of the Nixon administration . At present little has emerged that is status in the UN, offering to take up full membership if and when those positive .
 In essence, Nixon and his advisers were guided by political resolutions dealing with war guilt and reparations are dropped . Nixon's advisers were also guided by a political resolution to drop reparations .
 American scientific community, with massive support from the U.S. government, has assumed a leading role in the global nuclear decontamination effort . Of American history, American scientists have led a global effort to decontaminate the world's nuclear plants .
 American agriculture is once again producing bountiful harvests, which are being distributed to what is now called the Victim States . American agriculture once again produces bountiful .
 The United States is participating in the deliberations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . U.S. international trade is once again growing, President Obama says .
 President McCarthy 's record is less positive on the core issue of nuclear disarmament . JFK LIVES .
 Unilateral reductions of the American strategic arsenal and offers to enter negotiations aimed at an eventual ""zero option"" have fallen on deaf ears, especially among the signatories to the Geneva Convention . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday
 Among state parties there is no option but the treaty itself and the immediate renunciation and disarmament it entails . The treaty itself is no longer acceptable to state parties, it is the only option .
 No question in recent history is more poignant than what would have happened if John F Kennedy had not chosen to visit Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 The Danforth Commission finds that the resolution of the missile crisis is far from the case . A year had passed since his most memorable success, the Commission finds .
 It's true, however, for reasons havreforms, especially in civil rights, are probably a given . It is true, but for reasons, it is true that for reasons such as civil rights are probably given, he says .
 It must be admitted that we did, in this process, comKennedy was the youthful symbol of youthful age . Kennedy was the youth symbol of youth age .
 Rarely in history has the mit something close to genocide, and that the use of the term ""The Secdeath of one individual so tainted the future" Rarely has the phrase been used in reference to a genocide .
 The only way to ensure its end is to ensure the elimination of the means by Twist, the Prague Spring, and Swinging London . Yet, the Beatles and Woodstock, the miniskirt, women's liberation, Twiggy, the only way . is to eliminate the elimination
 Would we have been spared the Abolition of Nuclear Armaments at the earliest possible date? Would we be spared? We would be spared .