 This was the most serious crisis between the U.S. and USSR in the history of the Cold War . The crisis was the 'most serious crisis' between the two countries in history .
 In October 1962 United States spy planes identified nuclear missile sites being built in Cuba . U.S. spy planes believed to have identified missile sites in Cuba in October 1962 .
 Batista who was president/dictator at the time was viewed as safeguard against communism by the USA . But when revolutionary Fidel Castro overthrew him in 1959 they became suspicious . The USA became suspicious of Batista when he overthrew Fidel Castro .
 Castro introduced socialist reforms and started trade negotiations with the Soviet Union . Castro introduced the reforms in Cuba . Castro also started trade talks with the USSR . Castro was the first president of Cuba .
 In April 1961, with backing from the CIA, an armed force of Cuban exiles, with supplies from Kennedy, invaded Cuba . The invasion was backed by a force of armed exiles and supplied by the CIA .
 Castro’s forces easily defeated the invaders, killing them or taking them as prisoners . This was a huge failure as Castro's forces easily killed or taken prisoners . Castro was easily defeated by the invaders .
 This affair was deeply embarrassing for the U.S. as their involvement in the incident had been publicly exposed, and also because it was so badly planned and executed . The affair was 'deeply embarrassing' for the United States .
 Castro agreed to the construction of Soviet missiles in Cuba . To avoid another US-backed invasion of Cuba and to co-operate with Krushev, Castro agreed .
 When the U2 spy plane flew over Cuba in 1962 showing that nuclear missiles were being built shit went down . The Americans watched this happen happen with great alarm and the Americans watched it happen . The U2 plane was used to spy on Cuba .
 John F Kennedy's attempts to achieve peace and preserve our relationship had resulted in the complete shutdown of trade between the U.S. and Cuba up until January 2015 .
 The United States was forced to remove offensive missiles in Turkey and has further tainted our relationship with Russia . The U.S. has been ordered to remove the offensive missiles from Turkey .