 The Cienfuegos submarine base dilemma of 1970 was never framed as a crisis, was out of the public eye, and was equally successful at repealing a Soviet threat . Conversely, it was also successful to repeal the threat of the Soviet threat, not a crisis .
 We offer a Force Dilemma model that suggests the president’s problem definition process should produce crisis classifications sparingly, considering and employing less confrontational instruments of power, without prematurely sending unnecessary signals .
 In 1962, a repeat of this scenario, potentially more dangerous than the first, never reached the level of brinksmanship in 1962 . Fast-forward to 1970, there was no repeat of the same scenario .
 Two conflicts, two potentially disastrous results, two paths to solution, both culminate in the United States’ victories over the Soviets’ use of Cuba in a game of nuclear warfare . The U.S. won’t be surprised by the outcome of the two conflicts,
 The authors thank Scott Wolford and three anonymous readers for their insightful comments .
 Previous versions of this paper were presented at the 2010 Southern Political Science Association Annual Meeting in New Orleans, Louisiana, and the 2009 American Political Science .
 The noncrisis in Cienfuegos has been studied so little that Siniver recommends two journal articles and six books . Siniver: Three of the books are memoirs by the then Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Kissinger, and Nixon . None of them are
 Neorealism argues that international relations can be explained by the structures of the international system, forcing states to act in specific ways . This has been the established theory to understand the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 We suggest that it is the latter approach where the Cienfuegos case has its foundation, although we do not explicitly adopt a constructivist framework here .
 An examination of Cienfuegos suggests that a president’s problem definition process should produce crisis signals sparingly . The president's crisis signals should be produced sparingly, an expert says .
 This distinction allows for the consideration of additional courses of action, many of which employ less confrontational instruments of power . The distinction is important to consider, especially in the future, for example .
 This paper examines the extant literature on the president’s rhetorical leadership and the nature and myriad definitions of crises . It examines the nature of the president's rhetorical leadership .
 We provide a parsimonious, but effective presidential Force Dilemma model, with force as a catalyst, for determining when signal choice might be important for labeling a potential conflict . We provide an effective model for the president .
 We suggest that labeling a potential conflict as a crisis leaves little room for solutions other than force . The U.S. government should not label potential conflict a crisis, we suggest .
 Tulis argues that the general theory of presidential rhetorical leadership is concerned with institutional practice, political authority, influence, and the exercise of presidential power . Tulis says that the theory of rhetorical leadership concerns institutional practice and political authority .
 Bachrach and Baratz and Cohen suggest that not mentioning politically relevant content has important implications as well . Not mentioning political relevant content can also have important implications, they say .
 The Supreme Court ruled that the president is the “sole organ” of the nation’s foreign policy . This is generally understood as certain by members of Congress and specifically by the Supreme Court .
 What the president says formally, and informally, and how that message is interpreted by the media, the public, political actors, and so forth, help to shape our theory . What is the president's message to the media and the public?
 Lebow and Haney provide several definitions of crises in the academic literature . They concede that there is little consensus on the exact definition of crises .
 Crises can be important situations, violent situations, turning points, situations characterized by different levels of threat, time to respond, and surprise . Crises are important situations and violent situations that are characterized as turning points .
 The former attempts to address and expand theoretical issues related to the concept of presidential power . The latter tends to examine methods of communication, while the latter attempts to examine the concept .
 Fearon says troop deployments and public threats make crises public events, locking leaders into positions from which they cannot back down . Fearon: Troop deployments, public threats are public events that lock leaders in positions that cannot be backed down .
 There is little consensus on an exact definition of crises, but there is agreement that crises consist of some threat, and the time to deal with the threat is finite . Crisis is defined as a threat and time is finite, and there is no shortage of resources .
 The explosive nature of high stakes , limited time, and surprise are all catalysts prone to move decision makers to the high end of a notional response rheostat . High stakes and limited time are all the catalysts for a decision maker's response .
 The expectation that crises legitimately warrant increased levels of response serves as a self-priming pump . It ratchets up reaction prospects regardless of the veritable threat posed . The expectation of increased response to crises is a self priming pump, says David Frum .
 In each of these, only through the declaration of a crisis was the military response initially received as legitimate by the U.S. population .
 Cienfuegos does not fit neatly into the literature and, as we shall see, neither does the Force Dilemma model that we present later . Most of the existing literature assumes that a crisis exists .
 Private tactics and quiet maneuvers is common practice, despite existing literature that quiet diplomacy is ineffective . However, “private tactics” and “quiet maneuvers” are common practice . Despite existing literature, quiet diplomacy has been ineffective in the past .
 Lebow argues that once leaders are committed to brinksmanship, they become insensitive, in varying degrees, to information that challenges the prospect of its success .
 Fearon’s work suggests that once the president has signaled a crisis and is committed to brinksmanship, there is a political cost to backing down . Fearon: Once the president signals a crisis there is no political risk to back down .
 If the president does not back down, they will stay locked in their position . They will be unable to back down due to political consequences at home . The president and the target will be locked into their positions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 These “audience costs” ultimately signal credible threats to a target, risking a hardening of position where both sides prefer a fight, rather than negotiation of a settlement . These ‘audiences costs’ risk hardening the hardening position .
 Khrushchev wanted to turn Cuba into a missile base . To threaten the U.S. and strengthen relations with Cuba, he wanted to strengthen ties with Cuba . He wanted to threaten the United States .
 When you combine this literature with the handful of scholastic writing regarding Cienfuegos and Haney’s challenge to “…understand the politics of problem definition”, ultimately deciding first and foremost if a problem exists at all . We thus employ a
 The definition of crisis fits the Ury and Smoke categories of high stakes, little time, high uncertainty, and a narrowing of options . Crisis fits the criteria of a crisis with little time and little time .
 Near-crisis can be defined as relaxation of one or all of these categories . Non-Crisis cannot be defined by high stakes, little time, high uncertainty, or a narrowing of options . Near crisis is defined by relaxation of some of the categories .
 Column II: Force Expectation is the public attitude toward the use of force in a crisis . Column III: Force Tolerance/Legitimacy is the favorability that domestic political actors assign to a crisis, members of Congress, bureaucratic actors, and interest groups .
 Force Expectation and Force Toleration outcomes are directly proportional to the problem label choices Crisis, Near-Crisis, and NonCrisis . Force expectations and tolerance outcomes are proportional to a problem's severity .
 Leaders may find their options extremely limited and held to the mercy of Fearon’s audience costs . Fearon used those costs in the same context that Fearon did in the book .
 Columns IV and V are Leadership Perception with Force and . Leadership Perception without Force, given the problem definition labeling . Columns III and IV are Leadership .
 Failure to use military force in a decided Crisis will likely be perceived as weak and irresponsible . For example, failing to use force in such a crisis is likely to be seen as weak .
 Force might be viewed as an overreaction or premaForce Dilemma . Conversely, using force for a Near or Non-Crisis might be seen as a pre-reaction . Force may be used for a near or non-crisis crisis .
 Presidents may be best served initially defining a problem at the low end of the problem label scale . This allows for greater response options, while reserving the decision to escalate higher if warranted .
 Using the Force Dilemma Model, Kennedy’s actions signal that the threat and urgency of the situation is high, that there will be an expectation of force . Any action on the part of the United States that does not use force will be seen as a weak and tep
 Families built bomb shelters in their back yard . Schools implemented bombing drills at school, while families built shelters .
 The cumulative effect put into motion a showdown that could escalate into a large-scale, nuclear conflict . It could be the first time a nuclear war broke out in North Korea .
 President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev agreed in principal that the U.S. would not invade Cuba if the Soviet Union removed its weapons from Cuba . Five days later, on October 27, 1962, President Kennedy  agreed to remove Cuba's weapons . President Kennedy: "The United States
 Kissinger memo: “…the “understanding” we have with the Soviets…is an implicit one, which was never formally buttoned down.” According to a memo that Kissinger would request eight years later on the interpretation of the agreement, “The “
 In the fall of 1970, the Soviet Union made a bold move that was certain to provoke the United States officials . Surprisingly, it went largely unnoticed publicly . The move was not surprising .
 The significance of such a base in this region dwarfs the concerns of land-based missiles in Cuba less than a decade earlier . Such a base would have been a major concern in the past decade .
 The clandestine operations of submarines make their exact whereabouts, capabilities, and intensions unknown . Unlike that of land-based missile systems, submarines operate clandestinely .
 Kissinger said the agreement left no room for any other understanding except that of the United States’ position permitting no offensive weapons in Cuba . This inquiry surprised Kissinger and appears more of a challenge than a serious search for understanding, he said .
 U.S. intelligence indicated signs of a rapidly growing submarine base in Cienfuegos .
 The Cienfuegos situation was not happening in a vacuum . It was not a vacuum for the U.S. to get involved in a nuclear war . It is not the first time a nuclear bomb has been used .
 President Nixon was seven years removed from the last nuclear showdown with the Soviets . The era of Soviet détente had not yet blossomed . The spread of communism was on the move in Vietnam .
 The Soviet’s backing of Syria in an invasion of Jordan was a continuing threat to the peace of that region . The Soviet backed Syria's invasion of Syria was a threat to peace in the region, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The Soviet's backing was continuing to be
 Pro-Marxist activity was gaining steam in Latin America with Chile successfully electing a socialist government . Additionally, pro-Marxists were gaining momentum in Latin American politics .
 Nixon was able to temper the highly diverse, emotional, and clearly conflicting advice from his staff . Despite these factors serving to weaken the President’s normally strong resolve in such matters, Nixon kept his options at the low end of the Force Dilemma Model .
 Nixon’s Secretary of State, Bill Rogers, thought the entire matter ill timed for the upcoming November elections and recommended a delaying tactic . Bill Rogers thought the issue was ill timed .
 Nixon’s response was a mixture of both political preservation and unfeigned responsibility . Nixon's response was to the situation in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 The country would not well receive an emerging conflict while currently failing in another, he says . Political motivations included concerns of his failing popularity and upcoming elections .
 Perhaps the greater impetus was his keen appreciation of just how serious a threat he was facing, he said .
 Like in 1962, nuclear weapons were the central issue in the Cold War . While Communist expansionism was heretofore accomplished indirectly, this challenge meant meeting the enemy face-toface .
 This would alert the Soviets to the United States’ knowledge of their efforts, but the information would be void of detail and appear nonthreatening in tone . The U.S. would send the information to the Soviets, but it would appear non-threatening .
 The White House would not confirm the press reports nor would the issue be raised in any external meetings or conferences . The issue would not be discussed at external meetings .
 Third, open dialogue between Kissinger and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Kissinger and Dobrynlinin had open dialogue . Kissinger: "Open dialogue"
 Secretary Kissinger would ensure the Soviets understood the “way out” offered by the U.S. Secretary Kissinger ensured the Soviets knew the "way out" offered by Kissinger . Kissinger: "The way out was the way out"
 A Pentagon briefer inadvertently provided a highly detailed account of the Cienfuegos base development to include all background information to the press .
 Impassive, Nixon held his ground, keeping the matter in his purview while proceeding to execute his planned schedule which included traveling to Europe .
 This approach was crucial to keep the Soviet “way out” alive, since a Soviet change of course in Cienfuegos would be a clear humiliation if it appeared they backed down again under increasing United States’ pressure .
 Kissinger resumed talks with his Soviet counterparts focusing on the U.S. understanding of the 1962 Kennedy– Khrushchev agreement . The potential for a showdown if the Cuba base plans continued, and the fragility of a future Moscow summit should this not be resolved diplomatically .
 Kissinger disarmed the press with a ‘wait and see’ approach, and persistent press inquiries were consistently met with ‘No comment” stonewalling . Nixon kept Nixon above the fray of the mounting commotion and allowing diplomacy to work its course .
 The Soviets were convinced of the unacceptable political cost to pursue an operational submarine base in Cienfuegos . The Soviets backed down after being forced to back down on the plan .
 Nixon administration's success in keeping the issue on the low end of a problem definition scale . This outcome was the result of effective diplomacy, most specifically the creation and sale of a face-saving escape .
 It was also Nixon’s refusal to ratchet up the rhetoric, allowing the complementary use of diplomacy to work in a noncrisis atmosphere, keeping force expectations low, working less in the public arena .
 President Kennedy also has a little-known, but effective noncrisis success that has received scant attention from scholars . Second, he says, President Kennedy has an effective non-crisis .
 President Kennedy was practically a cocontractor on the Wall’s construction with Khrushchev, Reeves argues . Reeves argues that agreement might have gotten Kennedy impeached had it been widely known in 1961 .
 This agreement gradually reduced the threat of nuclear war until the Wall fell in 1989 . This agreement, however, gradually reduced . The agreement was agreed to reduce the threat .
 If there were to be a nuclear war in those years…it was going to be in Europe, and it would begin in Berlin . Berlin was the focus of the war in the 1950s .
 It would have happened if the Soviets had made good their threats to take Berlin, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Berlin would have been better if they had taken Berlin .
 The people of East Germany and other communist countries, at the rate of two thousand a day by the middle of 1961, were using Berlin to escape to the West . The doctors, engineers, writers, lawyers, lawyers and young people were among those fleeing the East .
 Our problem was that our allies, the British and French, had only fifteen thousand soldiers in West Berlin and they were surrounded by dozens of divisions of the Red Army . The Red Army was surrounded by hundreds of thousands of Soviet troops .
 "If we intended to keep Berlin, or keep Germany, or perhaps even keep all of Europe, we had to use nuclear weapons," says President Obama . "Perhaps even keeping all of Germany, perhaps even keeping Europe," says Obama .
 Khrushchev’s real problem was only refugees on the run, the two politicians…were able to work things out . The two politicians were able to find a way to work out .
 JFK did not appear in public for three days after the Wall went up on Communist territory on August 13, 1961 . The Wall was erected in the Soviet Union's territory in 1961 . JFK was in the midst of a three-day blackout .
 From the day the Berlin Wall went up until the day it went down, the chance of nuclear war in the world declined every day . And, from the . day the . chance of war in . the world declining every day, experts say . The chance of . nuclear war declined every
 The Berlin Wall is already gone, and while it holds historical value, its strategic value is limited . Two explanations could be that the Berlin Wall was already gone .
 Kennedy kept his options at the low end of the crisis spectrum, recognizing that while Berlin was a potentially dangerous spot that may require future military action, the building of a wall on their territory did not rise to that level of commitment .
 Bachrach and Baratz argue that ‘nondecisions’ that never enter the political arena can be as important to the policy process as those that are transparent . “Nondecision’s” never enter political arena .
 This nondecision allowed Kennedy to avoid conflict, while also limiting exposure of these issues to the public . Kennedy avoided conflict, but also avoided exposure to these issues in the public, he said .
 It would be a mistake to interpret these conclusions as an appeal against the use of force, or that noncrisis and near-crisis definitions are less serious than crisis situations . Despite these observations of successful quiet, diplomatic actions, don't think these conclusions are an appeal .
 Presidents must be careful in the realm of problem labeling since courses of action are likely to be set long before decision makers truly appreciate the nature of the problem at hand . Put another way, presidents must also be careful .
 The murder of over three thousand innocents demanded justice, and reducing the likelihood of future attacks rightly became a necessary imperative . Without question, the murder of more than 3,000 innocent people demanded justice .
 Bill Clinton signaled that he and al Qaeda organization was a danger to the U.S. That is until Bill Clinton said he and the al Qaeda group was a threat to the United States .
 Cienfuegos was a much deadlier scenario than 1962, when spy planes could easily account for missiles . 1962 was a far cry from 1962 when planes were able to fly with missiles .
 Nixon and Kissinger successfully defeated the Soviets without having to fire a shot . They did so without even seriously threatening to move the problem to the high-end crisis spectrum of the Force Dilemma model . Kissinger and Kissinger defeated the Soviet Union without firing shots .
 A myth is the notion that the Chinese symbol for crisis represents a combination of danger and opportunity . A widespread myth is that a Chinese symbol of crisis represents danger and opportunities .
 Most accurately translated, it simply means a dangerous moment in time . "Most accurately translated" simply means "dangerous moment in history"
 The idea that crises consist of both risk and possibility has appealed to many strategists . Despite this clear misinterpretation, the idea of crises consists of both risks and possibility, has appealed .
 This attraction implies that the reduction in threat is achieved through the difficult process of choosing the right strategy among what are likely many dead ends . Conceivably, this attraction implies the reduction of threat may be achieved by choosing the best strategy .
 The emerging American way of war appears to unwisely downplay serious consideration for which strategy might be needed for success, perhaps overconfident in its current hegemonic station . The emerging U.S. way of warfare appears to be unwise .
 In the aftermath of 9/11, the U.S. might have prematurely evoked the crisis label in an attempt to satisfy an outraged populace and legitimize a far-reaching military strategy . The United States might have overpromised a crisis label .
 A clearer strategic selection was tragically ignored in favor of “shock and awe’s” strategy . “Shock and awe, ultimately resulting in several missed opportunities.” The U.S. should have made a clear strategic selection,” writes Tom Charity .
 For years, neorealism has influenced the literature—focusing on identifiable, measurable explanations of systems and structures . Instead of a constructivist approach, constructivist approaches may be less straightforward, but potentially richer in explanation .
 We suggest that the Cienfuegos case is best understood through this constructivist lens and deserves more attention . We suggest it's best understood as a constructivist .
 We disagree with most scholars that 1962 was more dangerous than 1970 . However, we make the case that the Cienfuegos case deserves more study and consideration .
 Public Opinion, Presidential Rhetoric and the Domestic Politics of Audience Costs in U.S. Foreign Policy Crises. Costs in United States foreign policy .
 Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of International Disputes. Domestic political Audiences. The Escalating of International disputes. Domestic Audiences . Domestic Political . Audiences of the U.S. and the world .
 Theory and Evidence of Presidential Management of Foreign Policy Decision---Making . Theory and evidence of presidential management of foreign policy decision--making . Theory of Theory of President Barack Obama's foreign policy decisions .