 The event could have gave birth to another World War . Above all, this event was so huge that it could have caused World War II .
 This was a 13-day confrontation between USA and USSR that took place in 1962 . The confrontation took place between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Mainly, it was about the Soviet’s deployment of ballistic missiles in Cuba . The film was shot at the heart of the Cuban missile crisis .
 This confrontation between USA and USSR took place on October 28, 1962 . This confrontation took place in the U.S. and USSR in 1962 .
 It took almost 13 days to resolve the conflict between the two nations . The two nations were at odds for 13 days .
 During those days Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union . During that time he was in charge of the country's most powerful state .
 This competition between the two super powers led to the placement of missiles . The missiles were placed in a range of locations around the world .
 Operations by US US was a big threat when USSR have been planning to place their missiles in Cuba . Operations by the US US were big threat to the USSR .
 Being a member of the NATO, United States was supported by Italy and Turkey . Italy was also supported by Turkey and the United States . U.S. and Turkey are NATO members .
 These nations also gave them the opportunity to place their missiles on their nation . For this reason, these nations also . gave them . the chance to place missiles on . their nations .
 The Soviet union only had the support of Cuba and some small communist nations . On the other hand, the Soviet union had support from Cuba and small communist countries .
 Then president John F Kennedy gave an epic speech to his nation in the wake of the crisis . Kennedy’s epic speech was a speech to the nation .
 He gave the order to quarantine all kinds of military equipment that they were shipping to Cuba . The order was put in place by the Cuban government .
 Some approved of his actions, while others disapproved of him . Some of the world's most famous people approve of his behavior .
 Khrushchev’s important telegram to Kennedy was sent by the leader of the Soviet Union . The leader sent a telegram of support for Kennedy .
 This was a warning for the U.S. intervention in the matters of Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . This is a warning, he says, for the United States .
 Any intervention in their privacy can also lead to war, he said . Above all, he stated that any intervention in the privacy of their privacy .
 Kennedy also responded to the telegram in strict order . Kennedy responded to his telegram with strict instructions .
 He stated that their nation will take strict action if any offensive missile is deployed in the nation of Cuba . He said that they would take strict actions if any missile was deployed .
 "Above all, it only had one purpose, that was to solve the problem without any military action," he said . "It only had a purpose, and that's to solve it without military action"
 Officials from both the sides took many discussions to resolve the conflicts between them . Officials from the sides of the two countries took many steps to resolve their conflicts .
 Soviet Union had to promise for the removal of their missiles from Cuba . The result of the conflict was that the Soviet Union removed its missiles from the country .
 USSR promised to never invade Cuba without provocation . USSR also promised that they would never invade the country . USSR promised never to invade Cuba in any provocation .
 Otherwise, we all know it could have led to full scale war between the two nations . Otherwise, it could've led to war between Britain and North Korea .
 SuttaNews India 2021. Follow us on Twitter @suttaNewsIndia and follow us on Facebook .