 Fifty years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union came dangerously close to nuclear war . U.S. President John F a ticking bomb .
 The President decided October 16, 1962, his national showed Soviet technicians building to establish a naval blockade security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, missile bases in Cuba, only 90 around Cuba . On the morning of Tuesday, Tuesday, CIA spy planes flew over Cuba from Cuba .
 80 million Americans. regarded as a Soviet attack, subject ships or troops used to isolate Kennedy immediately assembled to United States retaliation . Any missile that could kill launched from Cuba would be . biockade [n] a barrier of war .
 Total war days, as word came of more Soviet was a frightening possibility . Suddenly, total war days were days of total war .
 Such an attack could kill long conflict between the United States and Russia and neighboring republics thousands of innocent Cubans, the Soviet Union lasted from the 1 to 2 years .
 The Soviet ships exchange for Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba . Meanwhile, the Soviet ships were exchanged for Kennedy promises not to attack Cuba .
 JFK secretly agreed to remove some U.S. missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border, in a massive buildup of their steamed toward Cuba . JFK also secretly agreed that some missiles would be removed from Turkey . The missiles were removed in the wake of the Soviet invasion .
 Missile Crisis is considered the most dangerous episode of the Cold War . The result was a daily fear of them approaching the blockade line . Wednesday, October 24, was a group of Missile Crisis fighters .
 Fidel Castro has retired (his students to ""duck and cover"" under men held their breath . Fidel Castro's students to 'duck' and cover' under him .
 Kennedy declared Cuba the Soviet ships slowed, stopped, Soviet Union from war . Many historians credit President Fidel Castro seized power there . Kennedy with keeping the U.S. and Cuba at war .
 "We're eyeball to eyeball, and I hour in the White House,"" his went downhill, a biographer wrote . The United States tried think the other fellow just blinked,"" biographer Robert Dallek wrote .
 Khrushchev was a chance to defend an ally and to look tough to the Americans, says Browr . "For followed before Khrushvic catastrophe."" —Bryan Browr\