 Robert S McNamara was Secretary of Defense, 1961-1968 . McNamara served as Defense Secretary from 1961 to 1968 . He served as Secretary of State of Defense between 1961 and 1968 .
 McNamara brings in a new civilian team to apply his more centralized, quantitative approach . McNamara brought in a more centralized approach to the White House. McNamara: "It's time for a new era of quantitative thinking"
 Under McNamaras guidance, his administration develops the policy of Flexible Response . President Obama's administration develops a policy of flexible response .
 The United States would develop the capacity to meet Communist encroachments with an appropriate level of force . The U.S. would develop an adequate force to meet the Communist .
 Initial development of counterforce strategy for United States nuclear forces . Counterforce strategy developed by U.S. nuclear forces.
 Soviets could overwhelm ABM systems by building more missiles/warheads . Soviet Union built more missiles and warheads to counter ABM .
 Soviets might interpret such programs as a sign U.S. thought it could survive nuclear war . Such systems very expensive Such systems are very expensive. Such systems would be very expensive .
 If United States targeted Soviet military targets after U.S. had launched a first strike, the number of such targets was exceedingly high . The number of targets was extremely high, according to the report .
 The about of damage would invariably kill millions of Soviet civilians . Millions of Soviet Soviet civilians would be killed if the damage was not contained .
 Developing such an ability would appear as if the U.S. was building a first strike capability . The ability to launch a strike would appear to be a sign of U.N. military strength .
 Bolsters stability by emphasizing survivability of U.S. nuclear arsenal and capacity to retaliation . Bolster stability by stressing survivability and capacity for retaliation, says U.N. diplomat .
 By developing conventional forces, U.S. would be better able to deter or fight conflicts without escalation to nuclear war . U.N. would then be able to use conventional forces to deter, or fight, nuclear war without escalation .
 Of the increased funds devoted to defense, 80% goes to developing conventional forces . 80% of the increased defense funds go to develop conventional forces, officials say .
 DoD analyses determine actual Soviet threat to Western Europe only 46 divisions, much lower than New Look estimates . U.S. pushes to develop alliances conventional capability United States pushes to . develop alliances . conventional capability .
 DoD analyses determine actual Soviet threat to Western Europe only 46 divisions, much lower than New Look estimates . New Look: Actual Soviet threat was 46 divisions . DoD: Actual threat was only 46 .
 Flexible response gave the impression that the U.S. was backing away from a commitment to use nuclear weapons in Europes defense . The U.N. did not respond to the suggestion that the United States was backing up on the issue .
 CIA arranges a landing of anti-Castro exiles in anticipation of provoking an uprising against the Cuban regime . Nikita Khrushchev states U.S.R. will support wars of national liberation and support socialist governments .
 CIA arranges a landing of anti-Castro exiles, in anticipation of provoking an uprising against the Cuban regime . CIA arranged the landing in Cuba to provoke a revolt against the regime .
 United States 8 th Army pushes North Korean and Chinese forces back up the peninsula . U.S. forces push North Korean, Chinese forces into the Korean Peninsula .
 Objectives Understand how two sides faced off in Europe during the Cold War . Understand how they faced each other during the 1950s and 1960s .
 John F Kennedy was a Democratic senator who was elected President in 1960 . Richard M Nixon was a former Republican . Richard F Nixon was the President of the United States .
 Period of conflict, tension and competition between the United States and the Soviet Union and their respective allies from the mid-1940s .
 U.S. and USSR emerged from WWII as superpowers . Ideological differences. United States and USSR emerge from WWII to be superpowers.
 The United States led the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in democratic Western Europe . The U.S. led the organization in the 1950s .