 President Kennedy made the announcement in a TV address on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy made it clear the U.S. was prepared to use military force if necessary .
 Following this news, many people feared the world was on the brink of nuclear war . Many people feared this was the first time they had seen a nuclear bomb .
 The U.S. agreed to Khrushchev’s offer to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for the United States promising not to invade Cuba . The United States agreed to the Soviet leader's offer in return for the removal of missiles .
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove United States missiles from Turkey . Kennedy also secretly agreed with Turkey to remove U.S. missiles from the country .
 Fidel Castro aligned himself with the Soviet Union after seizing power in Cuba in 1959 . Castro seized power in the Caribbean island nation of Cuba in the early 1960s .
 Under Castro, Cuba grew dependent on the Soviets for military and economic aid . Castro's government was heavily dependent on Soviet aid .
 During this time, the United States and the Soviets (and their respective allies) were engaged in the Cold War . The Cold War was an ongoing series of largely political and economic clashes .
 The two superpowers plunged into one of their biggest Cold War confrontations after the pilot of an American U-2 spy plane photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled for installation in Cuba .
 President Kennedy was briefed about the situation on October 16, 1963 . He immediately called together a group of advisors and officials known as the executive committee .
 For nearly two weeks, the president and his team wrestled with a diplomatic crisis of epic proportions, as did their counterparts in the Soviet Union . The U.S. and its allies were involved in the crisis, as were their counterparts .
 The urgency of the situation stemmed from the fact that the nuclear-armed Cuban missiles were being installed so close to the United States mainland . The U.S. mainland is just 90 miles from Florida .
 If allowed to become operational, the missiles would fundamentally alter the complexion of the nuclear rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . From that launch point, they were capable of quickly reaching targets in the eastern United States .
 The Soviets had long felt uneasy about the number of nuclear weapons that were targeted at them from sites in Western Europe and Turkey . They saw the deployment of missiles in Cuba as a way to level the playing field .
 The Soviet missile scheme was a key factor in the scheme . Another key factor was the hostile relationship between the United States and Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba were hostile relations .
 Khrushchev saw the missiles as a means of deterring further U.S. aggression . The Kennedy administration had already launched one attack on the island–the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 ExCom determined that presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable . Kennedy and ExCom decided that the presence of the Soviet missiles was unacceptable. ExCom considered the situation in Cuba unacceptable .
 The challenge facing them was to orchestrate their removal without initiating a wider conflict–and possibly a nuclear war . The challenge was to remove them without initiating wider conflict .
 In deliberations that stretched on for nearly a week, they came up with a variety of options . They included a bombing attack on the missile sites and a full-scale invasion of Cuba .
 First, he would employ the U.S. Navy to establish a blockade, or quarantine, of the island to prevent the Soviets from delivering additional missiles and military equipment .
 Second, he would deliver an ultimatum that the existing missiles be removed, he said . The president would also deliver a warning that the missiles would not be removed .
 In 1962, the U.S. president warned Americans about the presence of missiles in Cuba . He made it clear that the United States was prepared to use military force .
 People around the globe nervously waited for the Soviet response . Following this public declaration, people around the world nervously waited .
 Some Americans, fearing their country was on the brink of nuclear war, hoarded food and gas . Some Americans feared their country would be hit by a nuclear war .
 A crucial moment in the unfolding crisis arrived on October 24, when Soviet ships bound for Cuba neared the line of U.S. vessels enforcing the blockade . The United States was enforcing a blockade of Cuba .
 An attempt by the Soviets to breach the blockade would likely have sparked a military confrontation that could have quickly escalated to a nuclear exchange . The blockade was likely to have sparked military confrontation .
 The events at sea offered a positive sign that war could be averted, but they did nothing to address the problem of the missiles already in Cuba .
 On October 27, an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba, and a United States invasion force was readied in Florida . The standoff continued through the week .
 Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy in which he offered to remove Cuban missiles in exchange for a promise by U.S. leaders not to invade Cuba . During the crisis, the Americans and Soviets exchanged letters and other communications .
 The Soviet leader proposed that the USSR would dismantle its missiles in Cuba if the Americans removed their missile installations in Turkey . The following day, the Soviet leader sent a letter proposing to the Americans .
 The following year, a direct “hot line’s” communication link was installed between Washington and Moscow to help defuse similar situations . The superpowers signed two treaties related to nuclear weapons .
 In fact, another legacy of the crisis was that it convinced the Soviets to increase their investment in an arsenal of intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the U.S. from Soviet territory .