 The transgression continues to pose a number of difficult questions for policymakers in the U.S. It is not the first time the transgression has been made public .
 Tensions between the U.S. and Russia are not new, but the invasion of Georgia has stirred the argument over engagement versus isolation . The invasion of the Georgia and the United States response once again stirs the argument .
 Conservatives have resorted to the Myth of Munich in arguing for forceful intervention in the Caucasus . Conservatives believe diplomacy and negotiations are ineffective and fail to stop aggression .
 This debate, as before, plays out not against facts, strategic options, and consequences, but rather in political commentary and op-ed pages, surrounded by analogy and conjecture, and in an atmosphere of tough posturing and accusations of weakness .
 President Barack Obama took office in 2009 . Obama's four years in office were as complicated and daunting as his first four years .
 Pursuit of mutually beneficial security agreements often thwarted by mistake, error, or miscalculation . Pursuit to mutually beneficial agreements was often thwarted, say experts .
 Vienna exchange in 1961 was made more difficult by a failed Bay of Pigs . A Vienna exchange was made difficult by the failed 'Bay of Pigs' in the 1960s .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev took to remind countries of the number of hydrogen bombs it would require to destroy them . Nikita told countries it would be impossible to destroy hydrogen bombs .
 Dwight David Eisenhower and John F Kennedy acted to protect America, often against apparent self-interest . Eisenhower and Kennedy managed to protect freedom and avoid war in the face of these tensions .
 Lessons from four dangerous years, the coldest of the Cold War, are valuable for today’s America and its leaders . Lessons from those four years can be valuable for the U.S. and leaders today and today .
 At home, both leaders faced critics who, not unlike those in current American politics, argued that talking with enemies would be a grave mistake and, worse, a sign of appeasement and weakness . At home .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy each chose to hold summits with Chairman Khrushchev . In spite of these criticisms and a number of partisan attacks, the two leaders chose to meet .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy prepared to deal with the most dangerous days of the long conflict . The conversations were not always easy, but the efforts of Eisenhower and . Kennedy to speak, communicate, and relate with Khrushchev prepared them .
 The two presidents relied on the wisdom from their experience and responded in tempered ways to limit the overheating of events . President Barack Obama and President George W. Bush were both presidents .
 Next U.S. president can learn much from the approaches of Eisenhower and Kennedy . Today, the next president will learn from the approach of those two presidents . The next president should be able to learn from Eisenhower's approach .
 Their pragmatism and willingness to talk allowed them to manage crises-riddled years . They demonstrate to today’s leaders the value of diplomacy and provide the lessons needed to overcome today's challenges .
 The coldest days of the Cold War demonstrate that at certain times, especially those replete with crises, threats, and uncertainty, it takes strength to talk. Rejecting the Munich Myth.
 U.S.-Soviet relations between 1959 and 1963 were far more provocative and challenging than today . Today's tensions between the two countries are much less provocative than today's .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy were willing to take risks for peace despite eliciting questions of their wisdom . Fortunately for the United States and the world, the U.S. and world, they were willing for peace .
 I invited Mr Khrushchev, as you know, to come here to discuss some of the obvious reasons for tensions in the world, and particularly between our two countries, because of the outstanding unsettled matters .
 "I did not ask him here for substantive negotiations, because those are impossible without the presence of our associates," he says . "I didn't ask him to ask him for substantive talks, because I did not want him here to talk about it," he adds .
 I thought that, through this visit of his and through these conversations, possibly I think as I have said to you before, some of the ice might be melted . But I thought ... perhaps I think ... some of this might be melting, he said .
 John F Kennedy vowed not to sit with Khrushchev without agreed preconditions . Kennedy vowed during a debate with Richard Nixon that he would not sit with the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy rejected the false binary choice of the Munich Myth . Kennedy ceased that posturing several months into his presidency, when the stakes became clear .
 On the one hand are those who urge upon us what I regard to be the pathway of surrender—appeasing our enemies, compromising our commitments, purchasing peace at any price, disavowing our arms, our friends, our obligations .
 A willingness to resist force, unaccompanied by a willingness to talk, could provoke belligerence, could invite disaster . The U.S. should resist force and talk, but resist force without talk, without talking, invites disaster, says Julian Zelizer .
 The result of those presidencies and engagement with the Soviet Union was a more cautious U.S. relationship with the USSR .
 The Cold War would endure until 1990 but in the years that followed those coldest days, American leaders sobered by crises and educated by experience . The Coldest Days of the Cold War were completed a Limited Test Ban Treaty, worked toward more effective arms control .
 Both sides acknowledged a nuclear war could not be won in Geneva . Test ban negotiations remain .
 Even during the coldest days of the Cold War, Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy and senior American diplomatic officials maintained regular public and private dialogue .
 U-2 Flights United States Ambassador to the USSR Llewellyn Thompson developed with Khrushchev . The close relationship paid dividends for both administrations and helped both countries work through crises .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy heard whispers of appeasement for May 8, 1960 their meetings with Khrushchev . U-2 wreckage captured in U.2 crashes in Soviet Union on May Day .
 U.S.R.R establishes formal diplomatic relations with Cuba when communication was needed most, they chose to meet . Cuba has never had a formal diplomatic relationship with the United States .
 Eisenhower at Camp David and Kennedy in Vienna asked for a few more minutes of time without staff to talk with Khrushchev . Eisenhower takes responsibility for the U-2 and attempt to focus on key priorities . Eisenhower and Kennedy asked for time to talk without staff .
 Eisenhower encouraged the ongoing May 16, 1960 Paris summit opens Geneva negotiations for arms control . Kennedy supported the establishment of a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington Washington .
 Khrushchev promises tial tactics to further relations . Effective diplomacy cannot be labeled strong or weak or rule out potenies .
 November 8, 1960 If for lack of preparation they break up in bitterness, the prospects of A Kennedy political rally, Kennedy elected as 35th . November 5, 1960 United States president peace have been endangered . November 7, 1960 U.S. President Kennedy was elected 35th November 5
 In the heat U.S. breaks off diplomatic of international affairs, tensions and tempers will rise relations with Cuba . Threats will be made.
 Khrushchev regularly threatened the West January 20, 1961 in speech and provocation . January 20 was the date of the first anniversary of the U.S. assassination of the Soviet Union's assassination .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy would respond to Chairman Khrushchev’s bluster with finesse and conviction, but also with reserve and caution . Throughout their coldest years, Presidents Kennedy and Eisenhower would respond with patience and reserve .
 Where necessary, they would improve U.S. military capabilities . April 12, 1961 Soviet cosmonaut was a member of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy would hold their ground, seek continued engagement and keep cool . But Yuri Gagarin becomes the first human in space and Kennedy would take a provocative step forward . Eisenhower would hold his ground, seeking continued engagement .
 As Eisenhower and Kennedy proved, not every crisis is during the Bay of Pigs invasion . The failed invasion was not worth fighting over . Instead, it was a failed invasion of Cuba .
 Sometimes taking no action is more of a profile in courage than rattling of sabers . The U.S. should take no action when it comes to Russia .
 Both sides likely to be successful only if both regard as preferable to the status quo . Kennedy administration likely to succeed if both sides reach agreement that both regard themselves as preferable .
 The only time talks are Khrushchev decides to decide to offer no progress is when they are not held . Finally, credibility matters, especially in a crisis, writes David Gergen .
 The U-2 scuttled the progress made on the test . The world had to wait nearly four years for the Moscow and Washington valuable treaty and the start of effective arms control .
 The Paris summit, with its promise of real disarmament talks, was ruined . It would take years, and additional crises, before real progress was made in achieving limits to nuclear testing . July 15, 1963 Limited Test Ban .
 Kennedy carefully managed his communications with the Soviets to approved, ratified, entered into force avoid miscalculations and further loss of credibility . The Bay of Pigs fiasco would hurt his reputation in the eyes of the Soviets .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy knew a loss of credibility leads to lost progress . Eisenhower and JFK knew loss of trust leads to loss of progress, Kennedy said .
 Many of today’s challenges are more complicated than those of 1959–1963 because of the lack of bipolarity in the international system . Historical comparisons have limits, yet many of today's challenges have limits .
 It is clear, given recent events, that talking itself, without substantive exchange, cannot solve problems . It is also clear that . talking itself can't solve problems, it's also clear given .
 Rising powers such as Russia and China threaten U.S. economic and military preponderance . Assertive, rising powers such a rising power threaten United States economic, military pre-eminence .
 The United States military is deployed and engaged around the world, and U.S. leverage is weakened, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States leverage is consequently weakened"
 The major powers are waging political battles in the developing world, and races for resources and technological innovation fuel that contest . Developing world's biggest challenges are the development of the world's largest economies .
 A lack of understanding between the major players increases the risk of miscalculation as alliances wrestle with differences over strategic direction .
 The years 1959–1963 make a look at the years 1959-1963 valuable . Those similarities, the prevalence of the Munich Myth, and the increasing relevance of U.S. diplomacy with Russia make it valuable .
 The exchanges on this topic had become routine, each side raising the merits of its own position while dismissing the objections of the other side . The exchanges have become routine .
 President Eisenhower on April 8, 1958, would declare, “The position of the United States on this matter of testing is well known.”
 "Open Skies" would allow for technical collection by unarmed observation flights of military and other activities . The first, “Open Skies,’s ‘Open Skies’, would allow .
 An initiative for the international use of outer space for peaceful purposes was presented to the Soviets . Additionally, an initiative was presented for the Soviets to use space in peaceful purposes .
 From this exchange of letters, formal talks on nuclear testing would commence in Geneva . The United States, the Soviet Union, and other nations would meet in Geneva for nuclear testing .
 The diplomatic discussions did not produce enormous results but they were the start of a conversation that would last for four decades . The diplomatic talks did not result in enormous results, but it was a start to a four decades conversation .
 The next summer, in August 1959, President Eisenhower announced, “The President of the United States has invited Mr Nikita Khrushchev…to pay an official visit to the U.S. in September . The next year, the Soviet Union leader was invited to visit the United
 Khrushchev's visit to the West gave Eisenhower hope for progress on disarmament . The trip, a first by a Soviet Premier, had its share of tension, but in the end it was a convivial affair .
 Inter-communist tensions threatened Khrushchev's efforts . Mao considered détente a threat to China’s interests and their shared principles . The two countries were at odds in the 1950s .
 Eisenhower and Khrushchev each appeared willing to take the risk of meeting and beginning negotiations on a nuclear test ban with inspection with inspection .
 Eisenhower also managed to convince Khrushchev to drop his Berlin ultimatum . At Camp David, Eisenhower also convinced him to drop the threat .
 The ultimatum was issued by Khrushchev in late 1958 to get the West to sign a peace treaty and leave Berlin or face a separate Soviet–East German peace agreement . Eisenhower had upset Eisenhower and threatened Khrushvich’s dream of a “Big Four”
 Eisenhower said he would not bargain or hold the summit under the threat . Eisenhower: "I would not negotiate or hold it under threat. I would not ... negotiate"
 Eisenhower was able to use the promise of a summit to entice Khrushchev to drop the ultimatum . The summit was held at Camp David in the fall of the Cold War .
 Eisenhower told Khrushchev he could “become the greatest political figure in history” if he used his power “to secure peace in the world” and to delay aggressive moves on German situation .
 The meetings at Camp David were tense with Khrushchev and Eisenhower frustrated by the lack of progress . The meetings were tense and the two leaders were both frustrated .
 Eisenhower was disappointed the Berlin ultimatum still stood hours before Khrushchev was to leave Camp David . Eisenhower asked for one more walk in the woods to talk privately and directly with the Soviet Union leader .
 Khrushchev had promised to lift the ultimatum and Eisenhower committed to a summit . Eisenhower agreed to the summit . Khrushchevitch and Eisenhower returned from the walk with a victory .
 The Paris summit, scheduled to also include French President Charles de Gaulle and British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan, took on significant importance in the eyes of the world and its key participants .
 Eisenhower saw possible progress on arms reduction as a possible legacy defining event . Eisenhower saw it as a ratification of the progress made at Camp David and as a potential legacy .
 British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan saw the summit as a true step toward reduced tensions . British PM Harold Macmillan saw it as a step toward reducing tensions .
 American pilot on classified reconnaissance mission over Soviet Union would change everything . Negotiations in Geneva continued to work and diplomats in Washington and Moscow prepared for summit .
 U.S. Air Force Captain Francis Gary Powers was flying at 70,000 feet in a U-2 on his mission to photograph Soviet missile sites in Sverdlovsk and Plesetsk . Powers' plane was rocked by an explosion on May 1, 1960 .
 Struggling to eject, Powers did not enact the plane’s self-destruct mechanism . Struggled to eject from the plane .
 Khrushchev, attending a May Day parade in Moscow, congratulated his military for shooting down the U-2 after years of struggling to take down the American planes . He developed a plan to utilize the incident for Soviet gain . The incident was a success for the Soviet military .
 The development of the U-2 and the secrecy surrounding its missions were a remarkable feat . The U.2 was developed in secrecy to protect the U.S.
 The Soviets knew the flights were occurring and had tried to stop them . The Soviets tried to prevent them from taking part in the flights .
 Eisenhower’s decision to continue U-2 reconnaissance flights over the Soviet Union in the lead up to the summit was not made without concern for the impact of an incident involving a U.2 on the summit or U.S. relations .
 Eisenhower knew the stakes, telling aides, “If one of these planes is shot down, this thing is going to be on my head.” Eisenhower told aides: “This thing will be on the head. If one of the planes is hit down, it will be
 Eisenhower administration struggled with a response to the incident, wrestling with assumptions and grasping at the available information . Eisenhower administration struggles with the response to an incident .
 At first, the administration believed the U-2 pilot was dead and much of the evidence destroyed . The National Aeronautics and Space Administration claimed the flight as their own weather mission .
 The Soviets proved the NASA statement was false through the revelation that Powers had indeed survived and confessed . Powers was found alive and confessed to the Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower was forced to make a difficult decision between disavowing any knowledge of the mission and admitting to the U-2 mission and its reconnaissance nature . The mission was a reconnaissance mission for the CIA .
 He arranged a display of the U-2’s wreckage in Gorky Park to stoke the story further . The U.2 wreckage is displayed in the park .
 The U-2 flight had the biggest effect on Khrushchev and U.S.-Soviet relations . The U.2 flight was the first of its kind to take place in the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Khrushchev had extended himself to Eisenhower over the past two years . Eisenhower had expended his political capital on the relationship, the idea of détente, and the promise of Paris .
 He would say, “My visit to the United States…had seemed to herald a promising shift in U.S. policy toward our country.” He would also say that he had seemed to have heralded a “prominent shift in United States policy”
 Earlier U-2 flights allowed Washington to know the limitations of Khrushchev’s claims of missile superiority . It could also have been his realization and strategic concern that the earlier U.2 flights .
 Khrushchev was trying to protect the summit and preserve his domestic political support . The most convincing explanation was his effort to protect his domestic support, he says .
 Despite this situation and the new tension in the relationship, the plan for the summit proceeded . The powers gathered in Paris to discuss the summit .
 Eisenhower and Khrushchev arrived in Paris constrained by domestic exigencies, powerless in their need for apology and straight talk . Unable to overcome the obstacle created by the U-2 wreckage, but still hopeful .
 The summit became a propaganda stand-off, with neither side wanting to offer any additional fodder for the opposing side’s rhetorical complaints .
 The U-2 incident and the Paris collapse affected more than just the leaders and U.S.-Soviet relations . The Paris collapse and the U.2 incident also affected the world's relations with the Soviets .
 The heightened tensions resulting from the situation would have a lasting impact . From Moscow to Washington, D.C. to Havana, the heightened tensions would have been a lasting effect .
 Most directly, the U-2 incident destroyed progress made toward limits on nuclear testing that had brought the leaders to Paris . The U.2 crash destroyed the progress made .
 It would take years before the U.S. and the Soviet Union would enter talks over nuclear testing with the potential for progress that existed before .
 In addition, the U-2 directly contributed to speeding up the arms race . In addition to the U.2, it also contributed to the development of the Russian-built anti-Russian technology .
 Eisenhower kept missions secret because of perception of a missile gap with Soviets . Soviets would not go about investing in creating such an advantage, he says .
 The U-2 incident would alert the Soviets that the U.S. had learned much about their nuclear capabilities, especially their deficiency of ICBMs . The U.2 would alert them that the United States had learned a lot about their capabilities .
 The U-2 incident and the collapse of the Paris summit had the most impact on Khrushchev’s authority and influence . The collapse of Paris summit was the most significant blow to the Soviet Union in the world .
 He may seem to be the supreme, unchallenged boss now, but conditions may change . He is the supreme supreme boss now but conditions could change .
 President Obama looked to Cuba, to Berlin, to the Third World for opportunities to stand up to the West . Thus he looked to Germany, Cuba and Berlin for opportunities .
 Khrushchev saw the event as personal and it forced him to “throw up the sponge,” as the warning in 1959 suggested . Khrushchev saw the incident as personal . The warning was issued in 1959 .
 His son would later admit the U-2 missions were a “betrayal by General Eisenhower, a man who had referred to him as a friend, a friend’s a man with whom he had only recently sat at the same table…a betrayal .
 Khrushchev would admit in 1969, “Things were going well until one thing happened. Things were going to be going well,” he said .
 During the early 1960s, Khrushchev’s position would further weaken his economic reforms, including a failed reduction in the military and other domestic programs . During the same period, the Soviet Union would try to reduce the deficit in its budget .
 Geopolitically, the U-2 crisis would sow the seeds for the next significant crisis in U.S. relations . It would push the Soviet Union closer to Cuba and revolutionary Fidel Castro . The crisis would also push the United States closer to the revolutionary Castro Castro .
 Eisenhower administration's policies toward Cuba and its revolution did little to enamor Castro with the U.S. The Eisenhower administration’s policies toward the Cuban revolution were not strong enough to enrage Castro .
 The decision to recognize and support the regime of Fulgencio Batista in the early 1950s and the later efforts to shun and plot against Castro had certainly set the course for Cuban relations with the United States . The course to Communism and Soviet client status was not yet set on the
 On May 8, 1960, Cuba and the Soviet Union established formal diplomatic relations . Relations had been established with the 1959 Soviet recognition of the Castro’s government .
 The U.S. broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in early 1961 . The move came 17 days before Kennedy would take office . Plans for the Bay of Pigs efforts were well underway .
 On the heels of the reconnaissance plane incident, this Cuban–Soviet relationship quickly became more substantial and more complicated for the U.S. The Cuban military relationship with the Soviet Union became more complicated .
 Khrushchev extolled the Cuban revolution and struggle against the U.S. in Paris . He encouraged Latin American countries to follow Cuba’s lead in Latin America .
 Khrushchev told a group of Cubans during a private interview that the USSR would defend the Cuban revolution . In a June 3, 1960 interview Khrushche disputed the need for the Soviet Union to base .
 On June 9, 1960, Khrushchev told a group of Soviet school teachers of his commitment to protect Cuba with nuclear weapons . The Cuban leader said he was committed to protecting Cuba with nukes .
 As the U-2 and Paris drama ran its course, the presidential campaign was playing out in primaries and conventions . United States Senator John F Kennedy triumphing in the Democratic primary to take on Vice President Richard Nixon in the general election .
 The rhetoric and positioning the candidates used during the time of the U-2 incident would offer clues to their strategies for the fall .
 Kennedy's line on U.S.-Soviet relations became harder and more effective after the crisis . Kennedy initially chastised Eisenhower administration’s response over the U-2 incident .
 He would soon be forced to reconcile his campaign rhetoric with his approach to governing and dealing with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy inheriting a U.S.-Soviet relationship severely damaged and a counterpart in Khrushchev was frustrated with the West . Kennedy inherited a damaged relationship between the two countries .
 Kennedy framed part of his inaugural address and his first State of the Union address as responses to Khrushchev’s remarks . Speaking in “an hour of national peril” as “each day the crises multiply,” Kennedy said in his first address and first State
 He said in his January 30, 1961 State of the Union, “We must never be lulled into believing that either power has yielded its ambitions for world domination.”
 "Aggressive and subversion will not be profitable routes to pursue these ends," he says . "On the contrary, our task is to convince them that aggression is not a profitable route," he adds .
 Kennedy’s early presidential rhetoric was that of a president trying to appear more aggressive than Eisenhower . Kennedy's early rhetoric has been that of an aggressive president, says historian .
 Kennedy followed up his words with action by beginning a swift and massive military buildup . Despite Soviet objections, despite the resolution of the missile gap, the U.S. military buildup continued .
 Kennedy asked whether he should meet with Khrushchev . Kennedy was inspired partly by the feelers coming from the former Soviet leader . Kennedy asked for the chance to meet with him .
 The gathered wise men agreed a face-to-face conversation might be useful . They agreed a meeting would be useful to discuss the situation .
 Thompson believed Kennedy could not fully appreciate what he faced in Khrushchev only through second hand accounts . Thompson believed that Kennedy could never fully appreciate the depth of the crisis in the country .
 In addition to heightened rhetoric and military buildup, Kennedy also focused on Cuba and Laos in the first months of the administration .
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 was the first significant foreign policy setback of the Kennedy administration . CIA-trained and armed Cuban exiles attempted to take over the island, but were outnumbered .
 The failure helped shape Kennedy’s opinion of aggressive action and following of perceived experts and hawks for the remainder of his time as president . The failure was similar in its origin, aggressive nature, and poor contingency planning .
 Kennedy came to see neutralization as the only option . Eventually, however, Kennedy decided neutralization was the only solution .
 Despite having supported different sides, Kennedy and Khrushchev would support the neutralization of the war . The two leaders would support a cease-fire to neutralize the situation .
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion and setback in Laos put Kennedy on the defensive, sent shock waves of concern among our European allies, and offered opportunity to Moscow . Vienna Vienna .
 The summit with Khrushchev was scheduled for Vienna in early June 1961 . The summit was scheduled to take place in Vienna, Austria, in the summer of that year .
 He said, “There are limits to the number of defeats I can defend in one twelve-month period.” He said. “I can defend my record in one year,” he said .
 Yuri Gagarin became the first human to go into space on April 12, 1961 . Less than four years after the launch of Sputnik, he became the world's first man in space .
 Before Kennedy went to Vienna he stopped in Paris for a visit with French President Charles de Gaulle . Kennedy stopped in Vienna for a stop in Paris .
 Khrushchev’s attitude was amplified by his need to appear tough on the “capitalist enemy” to assuage doubts at the Kremlin . Khrushchev's attitude became amplified by the need for him to show toughness to the Kremlin, he says .
 Khrushchev still stung by the incident, but the damage done by the event would cloud the summit . There was little discussion of the U-2 incident in the briefing documents for Vienna .
 Only Ambassador Thompson wrote in a briefing of the possibility Khrushchev might “rake up” the incident or potentially release captured U-2 pilot Powers . Powers was captured in October 1962 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev met for two days to discuss the course of history, the meaning of the word “miscalculation,” and the fundamental differences between communism and capitalism . The two men met for the first time in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev was relentless, wagging his finger, threatening, and snapping at Kennedy . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 On the first, Khrushchev expressed regret over the unhappy development in his relations with Eisenhower . On the second, he expressed regret that the war broke out over the first .
 He called the U-2 flight “the main cause” for the development . He suggested the flight was a successful effort on the part of people who wanted to worsen relations between the two countries .
 Khrushchev discussed the situation in Berlin and blamed the U-2 incident for the lack of progress on the matter . The second day of the talks was the second day in Berlin . He blamed the incident on the incident .
 The Vienna summit broke down over the same Berlin challenge Khrushchev had presented to Eisenhower and the West in 1959 . The Berlin summit was held in 1959 over a similar challenge to Eisenhower .
 The Berlin question was to be discussed in Paris, but the U-2 incident had eliminated past progress, wasted a year, allowed the issue to fester . The Vienna summit and the new relationship between Kennedy and Khrushchev now vexes, in a similar manner, the Vienna summit
 Kennedy: "I can't leave here without giving it one more try. I can't give it another try" Kennedy: U.S.-Soviet relationship on the brink .
 Khrushchev said he “wanted peace and that if the U.S. wanted war, that was its problem’s problem, he said . With a stand-off over the future of Berlin, he wanted peace and said he didn’t want war .
 The potential of the relationship, his impressions of Kennedy, and his ability to appear tough in the face of the charismatic new president helped Khrushchev overcome his hurt feelings and attempt to contain his political challenges .
 He would write years after the summit, “Even though we came to no concrete agreement , I could tell that was interested in finding a peaceful solution to world problems and avoiding conflict with the Soviet Union.”
 The conservative Chicago Tribune had ridiculed Kennedy as “Little Mr Merit Badge” heading into the summit, but said of summit, “If Mr Kennedy went abroad as an innocent, he comes home with some knowledge.”
 After the summit, Kennedy took a harder line that put the hard-line anti-Soviet wing of his advisors and political party in the ascendancy . Kennedy took the harder line, both rhetorically and in the budget, after the summit .
 In a speech on July 25, Kennedy said, “We do not want to fight—but we have fought before.” In the past, Kennedy has said he wants to avoid fighting .
 Khrushchev chose to seal the border to West Berlin and erect the Berlin Wall in August 1961 . Western allies balked at a unilateral peace treaty and chose to advocate for maintaining the existing situation .
 U.S. Jupiter medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles sat on bases in Turkey and Italy . Then Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric admitted the missile gap did not exist .
 The U-2 program had given the U.S. detailed information about the location and capabilities of the Soviet ICBM program . That spelled out the United States strategic advantage and finally resolved the missile gap and called the Soviet bluff . Khrushchev had pushed for and extended political capital on
 Despite their ICBM deficit, the Soviets still possessed a large stock of mediumand intermediate-range missiles . He needed a way to mollify the military, calm the political waters at home and demonstrate power abroad .
 The two most powerful nations of the world had squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button . The two nations had been locked in the sights of the U.S.
 Both sides showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong enough, even the most pressing dispute can be solved by compromise . But both sides showed they showed that a compromise can be reached .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev again pushed their nations to the negotiating table against popular opinion . Kennedy pushed his nations to a negotiating table with popular and political opinion .
 As it had been in 1960 with Eisenhower pushing for a treaty, the two countries stood on the edge of real progress in slowing the arms race . In 1960, Eisenhower pushed for an arms race treaty .
 A moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, says President Obama .
 It was not just personal motives loosening the ‘knot of war’ and driving the test ban cause. We are ready for this. It is not just individuals, it's a good idea to loosen the “knot’t” of war, says
 Kennedy wanted a test ban because it would limit the defense spending burden which would help offset the effect of unfavorable U.S. balance of payments on the dollar . It would limit proliferation of nuclear weapons by stopping the testing that could lead to less expensive and easier to produce nuclear weapons . Kennedy
 Khrushchev desired a limit because the Soviet Union faced such a disparity in strategic ballistic nuclear missiles, especially after the removal of the Cuban base weapons . The test ban might prevent or slow the possession of nuclear weapons by China, an increasingly difficult inter-family competitor for Khrushche .
 The one major area of these negotiations where the end is in sight, yet where a fresh start is badly needed, is in a treaty to outlaw nuclear tests . Our interests converge…not only in defending the frontiers of freedom, but in pursuing the paths of peace .
 The conclusion of such a treaty, so near and yet so far, would check the spiraling arms race in one of its most dangerous areas . Such a treaty would stop the spiral of the arms race .
 It would place the nuclear powers in a position to deal with one of the greatest hazards which man faces in 1963, the further spread of nuclear arms .
 On June 20, the Americans and Soviets established a direct communications link between the two governments . The link was a long sought after development . The two governments established the link on June 20 .
 Former Ambassador to the USSR Harriman and British Lord Hailsham represented the Western allies at the talks . The sides had experienced “the breath of death” during the past year . Kennedy pushed for a ban on tests in atmosphere, outer space, and underwater .
 It outlawed atmospheric but not underground testing of nuclear weapons . It also outlawed atmospheric tests of underground or atmospheric tests .
 On September 24, the United States Senate approved the treaty 80 to 19 . The treaty was approved by the Senate on September 24 .
 It may have taken a brutal summit and crises to change the two leaders . But when the evolution occurred, the tone and reality had changed as well, it had changed .
 60 percent of Americans believed the Soviet Union would drop a hydrogen bomb on the U.S. In March 1963, 60 percent believed the United States would drop the bomb . 60 percent thought the Soviet Russia would bomb the United Kingdom .
 Without the Vienna summit, it is possible neither party would have seen the opportunities that existed in the Missile Crisis and the test ban .
 Their inclinations to step toward the negotiating table, while somewhat contrary to their default tendencies as politicians, became the primary method for dealing with their Soviet adversary and crises of those years . They became the main method of dealing with Soviet adversary .
 Even Khrushchev would demonstrate with the majority of his actions over those years and his knot analogy that he saw more value in talking than bombing . Khrushvic would demonstrate that he was more likely to talk than bomb .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy’s efforts helped the U.S. get beyond the standoffs and stop the nuclear threats . Kennedy: ‘I Eisenhower and JFK’�s . efforts helped to stop the United States getting beyond the . standoffs .
 They should also help our current discourse to evolve beyond the Myth of Munich . They should help us evolve from the myth of Munich to be more realistic .
 For too long, the prospect of being called an appeaser has limited diplomatic engagement . For too many, it has been called 'an appeaser' for too long .
 Both Eisenhower and Kennedy heard the whispers but followed their instincts . Kennedy followed his instincts and ordered the White House to protect the nation .
 World survived the coldest days of the Cold War and developed the blueprint for thaw . Leaders on both sides never feared to negotiate, and leaders never feared it .
 The lessons provided by the events of those years include the need for engagement, the ability to work through provocation and bluster, the willingness to risk failure, and the maintenance of credibility .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy’s decisions to engage led to improvements in the U.S.-Soviet relationship . Eisenhower and JFK's decisions led to better relations with the Soviet Union .
 Engagement increased the potential for transparency and decreased the chances for miscalculation between two adversaries . Engagement decreased the chance of miscalculations between adversaries, the author says .
 Kennedy’s communications with Khrushchev allowed him to air his concern about miscalculation . The two leaders were able to avoid errors during times of crisis .
 Moscow and Washington have a direct line between Russia and Washington . This inclination eventually led to the installation of the line between the two countries .
 Diplomacy was a powerful force multiplier for advancing U.S. interests . Diplomacy, when integrated with other policy tools, also gave both presidents a strong force multiplier . Both presidents were presidents of the United States .
 Eisenhower’s efforts to speak with Khrushchev were paired with his domestic investment programs and use of the U-2 and other surveillance tools . The U.2 and U.S. surveillance tools were among the tools Eisenhower used to use .
 Kennedy’s tough summit with Khrushchev occurred three months after he authorized the Peace Corps by Executive Order . Kennedy was increasing defense spending at the time of the summit .
 Diplomacy was just one tool in their presidential repertoires, but for Eisenhower and Kennedy it presented and preserved useful options . Diplomacy is one of the most important tools in American history .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy heard whispered allegations of “appeasement” and reminders of Munich . They dealt with the Soviet Union as they dealt with it in the 1960s .
 The possibility of being labeled a “Chamberlain’s or an “appeaser” deterred neither man . Neither man was labeled an ‘Appeaser or a ‘chamberlain,’ but they were both men .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy were willing to risk their reputations, their legacies, and their popularity for one more walk, “one more try” with Khrushchev in the hopes it could stave off disaster .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy were worried more about national interests than the Munich Myth . In those moments, Kennedy and Eisenhower were more concerned about national security than Munich Myth.
 As the U.S. confronts the Russia over Georgia, our leaders should take the same approach . The United States should take a similar approach to dealing with Russia .
 The History of the 6 U.S. Presidents John F Kennedy, “UniverCIA , 159. JFK, JFK, LBJ, JFK and LBJ . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Little, Brown September 2008). necticut: Easton Press, 1987), 511.11. and Company, 1967), 143. And Company, 143.
 Eisenhower, . The Foreign Policy of John F Kennedy (New Khrushchev and the U-2 Affair , 61. Eisenhower,  Eisenhower, ed ed . Eisenhower, n. J. F Kennedy .
 We believe that Americans are bound together by a common commitment to these values . We aspire to ensure that our national policies reflect these values, the White House says . We hope that Americans will continue to support these values.