 He could put a naval blockade around the islandquarantine it and not allow any more Russian ships to enter Cuba . He could also put a blockade around Cuba .
 The U.S. had nuclear missiles in several countries close to the Soviet Union . The United States also had nuclear missile bases in several other countries .
 It was therefore only right that the Soviet Union should be allowed to place missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union was only right to allow missiles to be placed in Cuba, he says .
 The missiles could then be put out of action and the Soviet Union could no longer use Cuba as a military base . The missiles were then put into action .
 Carry out conventional air-strikes against missiles and other military targets in Cuba . Use conventional air strikes against missile and other targets .
 In return for the Soviet Union dismantling her missiles in Cuba, the U.S. would withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy . The United States would withdraw its nuclear missiles in Turkey, Italy and Turkey . In return, the United States withdrew its missiles from Cuba .
 The two sides established a direct communications link that became known as the Hot Line . Use the United States Navy to stop military equipment reaching Cuba from the Soviet Union . The U.S. Navy stopped military equipment from Cuba from entering Cuba .
 The 1,113 prisoners captured during the Bay of Pigs invasion were exchanged for $60 million in food, drugs, medicine and cash . Castro exchanged the prisoners for food and medicine . Castro also exchanged prisoners for cash and food during the invasion .
 The Soviet Union became determined to have a nuclear capability that was equal to the U.S. It was determined that it would be equal to that of the United States .
 China accused the Soviet Union of being a 'paper-tiger' and claimed to be the true leader of the Communist movement .
 The United States became convinced that the Soviet Union would not go to war over another communist country . The U.S. was convinced that it would not war with another communist nation .