 Truman replaced Roosevelt as United States President after Roosevelt's death . Stalin the only remaining leader present at Yalta felt he could control the terms of this conference . Truman was a strong anticommunist and didn't allow this . Atlee Britain's new labour prime minister .
 Events on the 25 June 1950 the North Koreans attacked the south . The North Koreans quickly pushed the South Koreans back into a small corner of south Korea .
 Defeat looked inevitable until The USA influeanced the UN to send hundreds of thousands of troops to protect the south . Defeat looked almost inevitable until the USA influedanced UN troops to help protect them .
 By November 1950 they had managed to push the communists back the the the Yalu river on the border of China however Truman ordered the troops not to invade China fearing an all out nuclear war might occur with the USSR if they did . The Korean War continued... -January 1951, The
 Khrushchev announced he had the pilot and plane with the pictures and asked for a full United States apology . Eisenhower didn't give one . The USA tried to cover it up however they didn't know that the pilot had admitted spying .
 Khrushchev described the United States as someone impossible to deal with . This led to a breakdown of talks at the Paris summit and the cold war getting colder .
 The Berlin Wall August 1961 on the night of the 13 August barbed wire mesh armed with machine gunners was erected around west berlin . It gradually grew into a huge wall keeping East Berliners out of West Berlin . Gary Powers was sentenced to 10 years in prison but was swapped after
 This led to a neighboring country to the USA being allied to their greatest rival, this scared Kennedy Kennedy . The U.S. became allied with the neighboring country, this led to Kennedy's assassination .
 Batista supporters of Batista landed on the bay of pigs . Bay Of Pigs 1961 .
 Launch a non-nuclear air-strike on cuba and destroy the missiles and Castro 6 . Castro 6. Launch a . non-military air strike on Cuba .
 This did not end the Cuban Missile crisis . there were still missiles on Cuba. there was still missile missiles on the island .
 He would remove missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and called off the naval blockade . Kennedy would remove the missiles if he called off a naval blockade, he said .
 He would only remove the Cuban missiles if Kennedy removed his from Turkey, he said . Kennedy would remove the missiles if he removed them from Turkey . Kennedy said he would remove missiles from Turkey in exchange for removing Cuban missiles .
 Kennedy agreed to the first letter however he said that if Khrushchev didn't reply by the 28th he would invade Cuba . Kennedy agreed however he agreed to first letter .
 Czech people were encouraged not to use violence in the wake of Hungary 1956 . Peaceful resistance was encouraged in the form of peaceful demonstrations, sit-ins, and peaceful protests .
 Underground radio and TV were kept going to inform the outside of events . However there was some light-weight resistance mainly in the form of home-made petrol bombs .
 Dubcek was forced to resign after a series of protests in the spring . Gustav Husak was replaced by the same man who reversed all the reforms .
 Brezhnev Doctrine declared that threat to one socialist country was a threat to all of them . He indicated that force would be used to keep the satellite states under soviet control if needed .
 The USA was suffering economically from the war in vietnam and was suffering from inflation early 1970 . The U.S. was suffering economic problems early 1970s .
 The USSR was suffering because they were running out of money due to the low standard of living and poor industrial efficiancy . The USSR suffered from low standards of living due to low industrial efficiency .
 Soviet Union and USA worried about the conflict in the middle east . Oil supplies from that area were vital for both countries . The suez canal was important for sea routes .
 President Nixon was keen to establish better working relations between Ussr and also China . China was now regarded as another major superpower . President Nixon wanted to establish relations with China .
 SALT 1 Strategic Arms Limitation Talks was an agreement which limited the number of ICBM's and ABM' on both sides . Both Nixon and Brezhnev were keen to improve relations so that they could increase trade .
 It was a success because it was a step to limiting the number of weapons . However, it didn't deal with the problem of all of the weapons hat already existed and were stockpiled .
 The soviet troops invaded Afghanistan in 1979 . They quickly took over the airport and the presidents palace . The airport was quickly taken over by the Soviets .
 Brezhnev addressed the world saying that the invasion was justified and that they were invited by the government . Reactions to the soviet invasion were largely negative .
 Jimmy Carter was furious describing the soviet invasion as a threat to world peace . United States president Jimmy Carter described the invasion of Vietnam as a 'threat of world peace' U.S. President Jimmy Carter called the invasion 'a threat of war'
 China said that they would support the islamic guerilla group, the mujaheddin to try and regain control of the country . Carter also reacted by boycotting the moscow olympic games, stopping trade with the soviet union to starve them economically and sending
 The mujaheddin were well equipped thanks to China and the USA so they took control of the country and used guerilla warfare tactics to fight the Soviet troops . The 125,000 soviet troops could not defeat the rebels and suffered increasing casualties . The massive attack on the
 Mikhail Gorbachev started talks with the USA in 1987 which ended 1n 1988 at geneva with Reagen . In 1988 the soviet troops started to leave and by February 1989 Over 3 million afghans had fled to Pakistan or Iran and 1 million civilians died .
 Fighting continued between rival rebel groups even after the soviets had left . Those Afghans left suffered major food shortages as the fighting had destroyed so much of the farmland .
 Reagan increased the USA's spending on weapons from $178 billion to $367 billion . The Soviet Union had lost 20,000 soldiers and the economy was greatly damaged as the war had cost them billions of dollars per year .
 U.S. scientists started work of SDI which later became known as 'Star Wars' SDI was a satellite anti-missile system . Aim was to prevent any long range soviet missiles fro reaching the USA by making a huge shield in space .
 Lech Walesa created the solidarity movement after the shipyard workers at Gdansk went on strike . The movement was started off by the Polish politician who created the movement .
 Solidarity soon had 9 million members . Unrest grew into nationwide strikes and Solidarity became a national network . Solidarity now has 9million members .
 The Polish government feared an invasion from soviet troops as had happened in Hungary 1956 and Czechoslovakia 1968 . But it didn't come, partly because the union had just invaded Afghanistan . It was partly due to the invasion of Afghanistan in Afghanistan .
 The soviet union became concerned for one of the key members of the warsaw pact and ordered training maneuvers to be performed on the border of Poland . 1981 the new leader Jaruzelski imposed martial law . Political opponents were either imprisoned or forced to hide .
 USA provided secret support for those involved in Solidarity . However support for Solidarity continued and the USA continued to provide support .
 Walesa was released from prison in 1982 and was awarded an nobel prize 1983 . Walesa became one of the world's leading figures in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Perestroika Means Restructuring that is, changing some economic policies to allow more competition and incentives to produce goods . Russia's economic policies are changing some of the world's top economic policies .
 Gorbachev believed that they could only survived if they changed from the policies put down by Stalin and modernized . Gorbama believed that the Soviet Union could only survive if they were modernized and changed from Stalin policies .
 Glasnost Means Openness, -in the case, restoring faith in government and ending corruption . GlasnOST means "restoring faith in the government"
 Gorbachev believed that people should not be punished for simply disagreeing with government policies . There should be a more open debate, he said . People should be allowed to disagree with the government's policies .
 The soviet union agreed to leave Afghanistan and not to test any nuclear weapons . The union also agreed to not test nuclear weapons in Afghanistan . It was the first time the union had left Afghanistan .
 December 1987 Both leaders agree to start dismantling all medium and short range nuclear weapons . This was a major step in the end of the cold war . December 1987 .
 People were allowed to buy and sell for profit for the first time in 60 years . These reforms angered hardline communists 33 of 38 .
 The communist countries of Eastern Europe had become more and more with the control from Moscow during the 1980's. particularly using more and . more demonstrations and the declining economic problems. The communist . countries of eastern Europe had . become more . and more . with more . demonstrations and more demonstrations .
 March 1989, Gorbachev told the communist leaders of Eastern Europe that the Red Arm would no longer be able to defend them . The Red Arm was no longer able to protect them from the Soviet Union . The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe was one of the most dramatic events in the
 June 1989 free elections were held after the increasing pressure from the people in Demonstrations, this was the first time since 1939 . Poland June 1989 saw the first free elections since 1939 in Poland .
 Solidarity won nearly all the seats and Lech Walesa became the new prime minister . Solidarity became the first Polish party to win a majority of the seats in Poland .
 By the Autumn of 1989 thousands of people were fleeing East Germany through Austria . This led to the collapse of the rest of the countries in Eastern Europe .
 Gorbachev told the unpopular East German leader Erich Honecker, to allow reforms . East Germany was ruled out of the West by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 He responded by telling his troops to fire on demonstrators, but they refused . He responded to his troops' refusal to fire, and the protesters refused .
 Thousands of East Germans marched to the Berlin Wall to pull it down in November 1989 . Even the guards helped in pulling it down .
 Collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe continued . The symbolic barrier that divided East and West was gone . Collapse was the result of the collapse of Communism .
 Thousands demonstrated in Prague, the Czech capital city, on 24 November 1989 . Thousands of people demonstrated in Czechoslovakia .
 Alexander Dubcek and the playwright Havel re-appeared and inspired the demonstrations to continue . However, the demonstrations continued to be carried out in the wake of the fall .
 Imre Pozsgay accepted the need for change and led the moves for reform in Hungary . The communist government led the move for change in Hungary in the 1950s .
 In November 1989 the communist party was renamed the socialist party and allowed free elections in 1990 . Other political parties were allowed, and in November 1989 it was renamed .
 In December 1989 there was a short and bloody revolution in Romania . The revolution took place in December 1989 in the country's capital .
 The hated communist dictator Ceausescu and his wife were executed and a new government was set up in his place . The hated dictator was executed along with his wife and wife . The new government took over from the former dictator's regime .
 In November 1989 the communist leader, Todor Zhikov, since 1954, resigned under pressure and free elections were held the next year in April 1990 The Baltic States declared themselves independent of the soviet union and held there own free elections in which non-communist governments were set
 February 1990, 200,000 people demonstrate in Moscow against communist and on may-day ceremony Gorbachev was booed . February 20, 1990, Soviet Union collapsed in a landslide .
 People within the soviet union disliked Gorbachev, some felt he was doing too much to reform communism . Some felt that the wasn't doing enough to reform the Soviet Union . Others felt that he was not doing enough .
 Yeltsin led demonstrations against the coup which gained him much popularity as he was seen as the man to save Russia from sliding back into communist control . The Russian Prime Minister was seen to be the man who saved Russia from falling back into communism .
 Yeltsin went on the end the communist party and disbanded the soviet union in december 1991, the communist flag was lowered for the last time over the Kremlin . The communist party was disbanded in 1991 .
 There's nothing here on Vietnam. Thanks so much-they're a great help:) There's a graet on Vietnam .
 Learnt more from this than a whole year with her! :) Oluwafisayo Alasi .
 Tonye PeppleReport: "I love you ... no homo this is amazing thanks so much"