 At 9m. on an October morning almost 50 years ago, national security advisor McGeorge Bundy entered President John F Kennedy’s White House bedroom to deliver some bad news . Bundy entered the room to deliver the bad news to the president .
 Photographs taken two days earlier by a U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had revealed unmistakable evidence that the Soviet Union had secretly placed mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.2 aircraft had taken photographs of the missiles .
 At the time, I was a junior officer in the United States Navy attached to Patrol Squadron 31, an antisubmarine warfare training squadron based at North Island Naval Air Station .
 Despite my modest rank, my job made me custodian of our top secret documents, including our deployment orders in the event of war . My job was to be the squadron’s air intelligence officer .
 Sometime following mid-October, I received an unexpected new set of orders, after I learned that the round-the-world flight I was scheduled to conavigate for an admiral had been scrapped . The new orders came after a round the world flight was canceled .
 The cause was reportedly rising tensions in Berlin . Within days, all leave was canceled .
 On October 22, 1962, just hours before Kennedy’s televised speech announcing a naval ‘quarantine’ of Cuba, he was ordered to remove the war plans from his safe and deliver them to senior staff .
 "In the event of war, we were to deploy to Baja, California. My recollection is that in the . event of . war, I was in Baja," he said . "I remember being in the air in the shape of Baja"
 Junior officers having more bravado than sense, we joked that the beaches of Baja would be a delightful place to die . We joked that Baja was a place of fun to die.
 I did not know until I learned about the events I describe below how close to death we all were . I did know until . learned . how close I was to death . I described the events below as how close we were .
 There are hundreds of studies of those terrifying 13 October days during which the pressure of domestic and international politics on both sides of the iron curtain nearly ignited a global conflagration .
 In the end, nuclear war was averted by the rising panic that engulfed both leaders but that Khrushchev acted on first . In the aftermath of the war, the world was plunged into a state of fear .
 The Soviet premier accepted Kennedy’s earlier pledge not to invade Cuba as a quid pro quo for the removal of the Soviet missiles . In a surprise announcement over radio Moscow, on Sunday morning, October 28, President Kennedy accepted the pledge . Kennedy's earlier pledge was made as a
 World War III was not going to be started by either of Khrushchev or Castro, writes John Avlon . In fact, it was even closer than either of them ever realized, and it was not started by Castro .
 Kennedy's and Khrushchev’s shared aversion to armed conflict was essential, but the indispensable ingredient was luck, very good luck . Kennedy's aversion to war was essential but it was also a hidden historical variable, writes Peter Bergen .
 On October 27, 1962, almost six days have passed since Kennedy announced his decision to “quarantine” Cuba . Kennedy announced the decision to quarantine Cuba .
 This was only the initial step, he said, to force the Soviet Union to remove the nuclear missiles it had secretly shipped to the island over the past several months . The Soviet Union has secretly shipped the missiles to island over several months, he added .
 It has become increasingly apparent to Khrushchev, Kennedy, and Castro that the military activities of each passing day has exponentially increased the danger of a hostile incident escalating out of control .
 Tensions have been heightened by the buildup of U.S. forces in the United States and Europe . Along with potential clashes on the quarantine line, tension has also been increased by the well-publicized buildup of United States forces .
 The three contending leaders are acutely aware that at any moment events could slip from their control . The three leaders are aware and worried that any moment could slip .
 Anti-aircraft batteries have been ordered to shoot down U.S. aircraft that overfly the island . Several low flying USAF reconnaissance jets have had close calls .
 Earlier on that Saturday, a Soviet commander, who Castro badgered into action, fired a surface-to-air missile at a USAF U2 . The U2 was the first U2 to be fired by the Soviet commander .
 The missile had been fired without Moscow’s authorization, but neither Kennedy nor any of his advisors know that . Neither he nor his advisors knew that . The missile was fired without the permission of Moscow .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff are united in urging the president to bomb the offending SAM site . Joint chiefs of Staff fear act could escalate into a global war .
 Castro has become grimly fatalistic. Certain now that he can do little to prevent an assault, Castro is fatalistic . Castro is certain now he can .
 Determined to confront the inevitable head on regardless of the consequences, he has dictated a letter to Khrushchev urging him to launch Soviet intercontinental missiles against the U.S. If an assault occurs, the letter will be sent to the Soviet leader .
 Castro has abandoned any hope of a peaceful resolution . Castro has lived so intensely at the center of the crisis that he has abandoned hope of peace .
 Khrushchev will remain in his Kremlin office throughout the night . He is desperate to avoid Armageddon, or anything approaching it . He will stay in his office to avoid anything approaching Armageddon .
 He recklessly gambled that nuclear missiles could be installed undetected in Cuba . He has recklessly betled that they could be detected undetected .
 He has lost that bet and is now frantically seeking to escape the consequences of the dangerous standoff he created . But he has lost his bet and now frantically trying to escape that situation .
 He wants the crisis to be resolved peacefully, but he has no intention of giving up the missiles without getting something in return . He wants to give up missiles without giving up something in exchange for peace .
 Castro’s call for a first strike is a warning, a realization that he might not be able to control Cuban actions . Yet, Castro's call for the first strike may be a warning . Castro is not alone, but he may not be in control of Cuban actions.
 Khrushchev is close to exhaustion, nearly overcome by the contradictory emotions that have roiled him for days . He is almost overcome by his contradictory emotions, nearly overwhelmed by his emotions .
 Cuba is 9,000 miles from Havana, but only 32 minutes from an intercontinental minuteman missile launched from Wyoming . The U.S. is less than a half a mile from Havana .
 President Obama is furious about the blockade of Cuba, which he considers an illegal, outrageous act of war . Yet he remains furious about Cuba's blockade, calling it an 'outrageous act'
 Kennedy calls it a “quarantine,” but Khrushchev is not appeased by the euphemism . Kennedy calls the quarantine a ‘quarantine’ but not a quarantine . Kennedy called it a "quarantine" but not “a quarantine”
 The folly of degenerate imperialism… act of aggression that pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war,” he angrily writes to Kennedy on October 24 .
 Khrushchev appears determined to dare the Americans to sink a Soviet vessel . Khrushchchev appears to be determined to defy the Americans .
 Three days later, tensions and circumstances have changed his tone . But now, three days after the incident, he says he's back on the track .
 President Kennedy wonders if he is being too cautious, too aggressive, too flexible, too rigid, or simply too worried . He is talking to his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, wondering if he's being cautious, aggressive or too flexible .
 He is infuriated with his military chiefs for their cavalier attitude toward war . He is losing patience with his advisors, who are still offering contradictory recommendations .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev are enemies, ideological and military adversaries . They have blundered into a dangerous confrontation that neither wanted nor anticipated . Kennedy and his Soviet-Khrhrchev allies are enemies .
 Each is aware that an accident or even a misinterpretation can instantly set off a nuclear exchange . The U.S. is aware of the risks .
 Nothing they can achieve is worth the consequences of a nuclear war . Yet the circumstances of their political and international obligations compel them to press their goals against each other .
 On this Saturday evening, the fate of the world is not in the hands of any head of state . On this weekend evening, President Obama will not be in power to decide whether to step down .
 Their arrival at the quarantine line launched the United States Navy’s ASW forces into action and turned the area into a veritable war zone . Their arrival two days earlier launched the U.S. Navy's ASW efforts .
 All power generation must be transferred from their three diesel engines to batteries that require periodic recharging . When submerged, all power is transferred to the batteries .
 For days, it has been impossible for B-59 to rise to recharging depth . Yet, for days, the plane has been unable to recharge depth .
 ASW ships and aircraft discovered its location and are harassing it with relatively low explosive practice depth charges and the unauthorized use of hand grenades . It is believed to be the largest submarine in the world and is located in the Philippines .
 B-59’s crew is dealing with more than terrifying external explosions . The crew of the plane is also dealing with the threat of a nuclear bomb . The plane was shot down by a U.S. nuclear missile in 2009 .
 Foxtrot submarines have no air conditioning, and the engine heat and body odor have turned the air rancid . They are designed to operate in the North Atlantic, and are designed for the winter months .
 The carbon dioxide level is dangerous, and the desalinization equipment has malfunctioned, leaving fresh water in short supply . Fresh water is still being pumped into the city's water supply .
 Captain Savitskii begins to suspect that he is not merely being harassed but is actually under attack . He is attacked by depth charges and hand grenades as he tries to escape .
 B-59 was the first submarine submarine to fly over the Soviet Union . Ketov, one of the other submarine captains, later wrote about the experience . The mission was a success for the U.S. Navy in the early 1950s .
 One of the 22 torpedoes aboard B-59 is armed with a 15-kiloton nuclear warhead . No one in the U.S. government knows that one of the torpedoes on the ship has a nuclear bomb .
 The torpedo carries an explosive force equivalent to that of the atomic bomb that destroyed Hiroshima . The range of the torpedo is 19 kilometers and carries a range of 19 kilometers . The torpedo is also capable of carrying a force of up to 100 kilometers .
 If fired, it could easily sink several ships, which could trigger a nuclear response . The act is guaranteed to trigger a response to a nuclear attack .
 At this point the nightmarish conditions within B-59 and the terrifying explosions around it, are driving Savitskii to the breaking point . At this time it is not clear what is happening at this time of year .
 In a rising fury he orders his special weapons officer to arm and load the nuclear torpedo . He orders the weapon to be loaded with a torpedo .
 "I want to dwell here to dwell on the role that chance plays in history, as in each of our lives," says President Obama . "Chancell plays a role in history," says Obama .
 "Little in our existence is foreordained, and history is not a story composed of inevitable events," says the author . "History is not an inevitable event," he says. "It is a story that is not about inevitable events."
 The destinies of nations, just as the lives of individuals, are moved inexorably forward through crossroads after crossroads by decisions and chance, by chance, with the influence of each in constant flux . The destiney of nations is a constant flux, with each in
 Luck, extraordinary good luck or plain dumb luck, took command of events aboard B-59 in minutes after Savitskii’s order .
 As the torpedo was about to be fired, Superman miraculously appears and saves the day . Superman appeared and saved the day by saving a torpedo .
 At the last moment, the torpedo was prevented from being fired by the unlikely intervention of a very level-headed naval officer . The officer, merely by chance, had been assigned to travel to Cuba on B-59 .
 Brigade Chief of Staff Vasilii Arkhipov prevented World War III . Several versions of how he prevented the war have come to light . Brigade chief of Staff: "Vasilii Arhipov is a hero of the day"
 While surfacing, his boat “came under machine-gun fire from Tracker aircraft,” he was hit by machine gun fire from the Tracker aircraft .
 Fire rounds landed either to the sides of the submarine’s hull or near the bow . The fire rounds were fired either to either sides or to side of the hull .
 Having been a member of an ASW squadron flight crew, I have no trouble believing Ketov’s account . Although firing live ammunition at a submarine was strictly prohibited, having been a . member of a . flight crew . Ketov's account is that he was fired at a
 It is possible that the crew of the Tracker had not gotten the word banning the initiation of hostile fire .
 The Tracker crew demonstrated clearly to that sub crew just who had won . Perhaps the adrenalin mix of adrenalin, testosterone, and frustration from having chased that submarine around the Caribbean for two days .
 Even when they do their rational best, they are not likely to succeed if they run out of luck . Even if they try their best they will not be able to succeed, they won't succeed if not .
 As long as nuclear weapons arsenals exist, human survival appears to be resting on a foundation no more solid than luck . Human survival is resting on the foundation of luck .