 During the Cold War, conflict between the world’s two superpowers— the United States and the Soviet Union—grew stronger .
 A proxy war occurs when two powers in conflict use substitutes instead of fighting each other directly . proxy war is a form of war where two powers use substitutes to fight each other instead of each other .
 The superpowers used military and economic aid to win the support of other nations . C. C. U.S. used military, economic aid in order to win other nations' support .
 In addition to NATO in Europe, the United States also built alliances in other parts of the world . The U.S. built alliances around the world, including in the Middle East .
 Central Treaty Organization was meant to prevent Soviet expansion into the Middle East . The organization was formed from Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Pakistan and the United States .
 In August 1945, the Soviet Union and the U.S. agreed to divide Korea into two zones at the 38th parallel . The United States and Soviet Union agreed to do so in August 1945 .
 As American-Soviet relations grew worse in Korea, two separate governments emerged in Korea . The governments were Communist in the north and anti-Communist in the south .
 North Korean troops invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950 . Tension between the two governments increased and North Korea invaded South Korean in 1950 .
 President Truman saw this as Communist aggression and expansion . Truman gained the approval of the United Nations and sent troops to repel the invaders . The U.N. backed the U.S. and Truman sent troops .
 UN forces marched across the 38th parallel with the aim of unifying Korea in October . In October, UN forces crossed the border to unify North Korea .
 The Chinese sent hundreds of thousands of troops into North Korea and pushed UN forces back across the 38th parallel . Greatly alarmed, the Chinese pushed UN troops across the border . UN forces were forced to withdraw from the Korean peninsula .
 The 38th parallel remained the boundary line between North Korea and South Korea . North Korea remained the border line between the two countries .
 To many Americans, the policy of containing communism had succeeded in Asia . The policy was to contain communism in Asia, and to many Americans .
 Having a socialist regime so close to the U.S. considered to be a threat to the United States . Having a . socialist regime . so close was considered a threat . to the . United States. It was considered an economic threat .
 President Kennedy feared that if he moved openly against Castro, then the Soviets might retaliate by moving against Berlin . The Soviets might move against Berlin, he feared . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1961 .
 The invasion was a disaster, one hundred and fourteen died; the rest were captured by Castro’s troops . One hundred and 14 died . The rest of the dead were captured .
 In 1962 Khrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, which were meant to counteract United States nuclear weapons placed in Turkey . In 1962 the missiles were placed in Cuba .
 The United States was not willing to allow nuclear weapons within such close striking distance of its mainland . The U.S. did not want such a close strike distance from its mainland.
 In October, Kennedy found out that Soviet ships carrying missiles were heading to Cuba . Kennedy was in Cuba when he found out Soviet ships were carrying missiles .
 Khrushchev agreed to turn back the fleet and remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba . Kennedy pledged to turn the fleet back if he didn't invade Cuba if he agreed not to .
 The Cuban missile crisis seemed to bring the world frighteningly close to nuclear war . The Cuban crisis was the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1959 .
 A hotline communications system between Moscow and Washington, D.C., was installed in 1963 . The hotline was set up in 1963, with a hotline between Washington and Moscow installed in 1964 .
 By 1963, the U.S. had been drawn into a new struggle the Vietnam War . I The Vietnam War was the first time the United States had been involved in the war .
 After World War II, most states in Southeast Asia gained independence from their colonial rulers . Most states in the region gained independence after the war . After the war, most Southeast Asian nations gained independence .
 France refused to let go of Indochina, leading to a long war in Vietnam . The French government refused to allow Vietnam to go to Vietnam .
 Refusing to accept the new government, France seized the southern part of the country . France refused to accept a new government and took control of the south .
 For years, France fought Ho Chi Minh’s Vietminh for control of Vietnam without success . France fought for years, but failed to win control of the country .
 In 1954, after a huge defeat France agreed to sign the Geneva Peace Accords . The Geneva peace accord was signed in 1954 after the war .
 Both sides agreed to hold elections in two years to create a single government . Both sides have agreed to form a government within two years . C
 Vietnam soon became part of the Cold War . Instead, the conflict continued, and Vietnam became a Cold War zone .
 In March 1965, President Johnson sent troops to South Vietnam to keep the Communist regime of North Vietnam from gaining control of South Vietnam . D. D. Johnson was the first president to send troops to Vietnam .
 U.S. policy makers saw the conflict in terms of a domino theory concerning the spread of communism . United States policy makers said the conflict was based on domino theories .
 North Vietnam responded to the American troops by sending more forces into the south . The U.S. sent more troops to the south of Vietnam in response to the U.N. invasion .
 Despite the massive superiority in equipment and firepower of the American forces, the U.S. failed to defeat the North Vietnamese forces .
 The growing war in Vietnam soon produced an antiwar movement in the United States, especially among college students of draft age . Antiwar movement was formed in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 The mounting destruction of the conflict, seen on television, also turned public opinion against the war .
 Richard M Nixon won the election with his pledge to stop the war and bring the U.S. people together . Nixon's pledge to bring the American people together was fulfilled by his pledge .
 In 1973, President Nixon reached an agreement with North Vietnam in the Paris Peace Accords that allowed the U.S. to withdraw its forces from Vietnam . The Paris peace agreement was reached in 1973 .
 Within two years after the American withdrawal, Communist armies from the North had forcibly reunited Vietnam . The North and the South Vietnam were reunited .