 The Museum’s Collection provides audio, visual, documentary resources, and artifacts related to Cuba, the Cuban missile crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion . Cuba is the focus of the Museum's collection .
 Artifacts include campaign ephemera, newspaper clippings, letters and photographs . Artifacts and documents include campaign artifacts and documents .
 Eileen Albert visited the Capitol Rotunda on the weekend of the assassination to pay her respects to President Kennedy . Albert was a home economics teacher in 1963 . Albert is the subject of the Oral History Collection .
 At that time, her parents were participating in ""Operation Peter Pan,"" caring for a twelve-year-old Cuban girl for one year until her mother could settle in Miami . Her parents were part of Operation Peter Pan when she was 12 .
 Esteban Caras was a member of Assault Brigade 2506 . Caras served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force .
 Ruben Esquivel was a native Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power . He is currently a member of the Dallas County Historical Foundation's board of directors . Esquvel is a native of Cuba .
 Carlos Fonts was a Cuban native living in exile in exile when he joined the Bay of Pigs invasion force . Fonts is a longtime Dallas businessman .
 Hector Garcia is a native Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power . Garcia became an active community leader in Dallas after fleeing Cuba .
 Rene Gonzalez served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force . Gonzalez was a member of Assault Brigade 2506 . Gonzalez served in the invasion force during the war .
 Robert MacNeil covered the Cuban missile crisis from inside Cuba . MacNeil was a White House correspondent for NBC in 1963 .
 On November 22, 1963, he was preparing for a high school play, which was delayed one week because of the assassination . He was preparing to perform for a school play .
 George Perrault was part of the blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis . A longtime U.S. Navy sailor, he was a member of the Cuban Navy .
 In 1963, he was part of the Ceremonial Guard for President Kennedy's casket at the White House and United States Capitol Rotunda .
 Delia Reyes is a Cuban native now living in Dallas . She fled her homeland when Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba . Reyes is now a Dallas resident .
 Felix Rodriguez served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force . A member of Assault Brigade 2506, Rodriguez served in the invasion force in Cuba .
 Maury Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency . Seitz later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, his plane carried a JFK decoy during a top-secret flight . His plane carried the decoy on a top secret flight to Cuba .
 Dennis Vincent is an actor and co-founder of the Dallas Children's Theater . Vincent visited Havana twice in 2000 and provided impressions of modern-day Cuba under Fidel Castro .
 Maury Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency . Seitz later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines .
 The collection includes briefing papers, letters, telegrams, and memoranda of conversations prepared by U.S. government officials . Compiled using strict editorial standards, the collection includes briefings papers and letters .
 Also available are transcripts and summary reports of meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . Not renditions of ExCom tapes are available .
 Items are organized chronologically by links in groups of 25 . The sum provides a dayby-day account of the evolving crisis, U.S. policymaking, and diplomacy involved in implementing that policy .
 The volume contains a glossary of abbreviations used in the documents . It also contains a list of key figures in the crisis, and sources for documents . The volume also includes a list .
 The compilation is a major resource for studying the U.S. side of the crisis . The compilation includes a study of the United States and Syria .
 50 years ago today, a brigade of around 1,500 CIA-trained soldiers stormed the beach in Cuba's Bay of Pigs . 50 years later, the Cuban government was overthrown by the U.S. military .
 It was the opening phase of a secret mission to overthrow Fidel Castro . The mission was the first phase of the mission to oust the Castro family .
 The lessons learned could apply to U.S. foreign policy today . Of course, things didn't go as planned, and the lessons learned today .
 Students will put themselves into the role of President Kennedy during this crucial period . Students will examine government documents and photographs from the Kennedy administration .
 JFK Presidential Library & Museum developed many wonderful educational resources and lesson plans divided up by grade level . Curricular resources are available at the JFK Presidential Museum .
 Resources and lesson plans on Cuba are available for middle school and high school level students . Students can also learn about the island nation of Cuba .