 Events in Korea 1950-53 5 Korean War Background 5.1 5.2 5.3 Japanese ruled Korea from 1910 1945 .
 After WWII Japan had lost and left Korea, with the Before 1950 USA was not Before 1950 USSR was not Russian army in the North very interested in Korea . Russia was not Russia in Korea, and USA army in South very interested .
 V USA policy of NATO was formed and NATO policy was formed in 1949 . Stalin Country was divided along 38th Containment: stop was worried, plus USA was parallel. communism helping Japan .
 Stalin thought USA was being ‘aggressive’ In the North communists ruled with Kim Il Sung as leader . Stalin thought U.S. was being 'aggressive'
 In the South elections were USA ideas in NSC 68 held & anti-communist elections . When Kim Il Sung leader of which said USA needed Syngman Rhee was leader. When Kim . Il Sung was leader, he was leader .
 North Korea told Stalin he more arms & it should ‘roll back’ communism. wanted to invade the South, Stalin thought it a good idea USA believed in Domino as it would cause the USA Theory. North Korea believed in the Domino Theory. wanted more arms. wanted
 The Republic of Korea's 260,000 were Americans . Out of The Chinese admitted to Chinese troops . 'People's easily defeated the 300,000 UN troops, losing 390,000 men dead'
 Up to a million Chinese modern weapons supplied captured most of South . In danger of being cut off, and half a million North by Russia, and . fanatical Korea, the NKPA had to retreat .
 The Americans drove drove the Chinese back, The USA was shocked them back and but 54,000 American . Then, on 31 December, and alarmed. recaptured South Korea . half a million more Chinese .
 They drove the Americans 38 parallel in March resolution supporting On 7 October 1950 back (using 'human wave 1951) Back to Mail Online home . Back to the page you came from .
 He advanced as North Korea, and He threatened to invade The USA sent troops to far as the Chinese advanced into South China . He advanced into North China, and threatened to invasion .
 The Americans threatened to use the atomic bomb if China did not stop fighting . The U.S. threatened the use of the bomb when China refused to stop fighting in China .
 The Chinese & Koreans agreed to a truce, which was signed on 27 July 1953 . The truce was signed by the Korean and Chinese governments .
 On 25 June 1950, the North Koreans attacked. th MacArthur reached the 38 parallel in March 1951. Match the phase with the statement Phase: Statement 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 .
 500,000 more Chinese troops entered the war and attacked the Americans . They captured most of South Korea . The Chinese invaded most of the Korean Peninsula .
 The Americans sent troops to Korea as part of the UN force to reinforce the South Korean Army at Pusan .
 They had modern weapons supplied by Russia, and a fanatical hatred of the U.S. Americans . They were armed with Soviet-made weapons and fanatical anti-American hatred .
 Eisenhower exiles Batista including sugar supported Cuban plantations & casinos . President Eisenhower exiled Batista . Ex-Cuban president Eisenhower ex-dictator included sugar supported plantations .
 JFK continued with stopped & 1,200 exiles peasants peasants & end corruption . The plan, with the exiles captured by invading Cuba with the Castro's forces USA was opposed to Castro . USA was opposing Castro .
 USA spy planes destroy the missile launch sites avoid a possible observe Soviet personnel . But no guarantee that all the sites nuclear war with & weapons in Cuba would be hit & risk the Soviets striking the USSR back .
 No guarantee that Soviet in Cuba ships would stop & not necessarily get USSR ships seen in the missiles removed from Cuba . But no guarantee that the Soviet in. ships stopped would stop .
 At the same time U.S. armed forces were put on red alert & the opposed to Castro . At the time United States . forces were . put on . red alert . The United States. opposed Castro . Castro .
 USSR warned any missile launch would be met with full retaliation . U.S. was friends with communists & was a threat to United States business interests . USSR warned that any launch of a missile would result in retaliation .
 JFK was advised that the attack the other as retaliation missiles could be ready to from the other would mean be fired before the end of both countries would be destroyed many October times over . Neither superpower would be able to attack each other in retaliation .
 It said it was merely helping Cuba defend itself & the USA was taking the world to war . The U.S. says it is merely helping the Cuban government defend itself .
 JFK sends secret message to Khrushchev agreeing to remove Turkey missiles . USA agree to first letter demands then JFK sends a secret message . JFK sent secret message of removing missiles from Turkey .
 JFK made JFK look weak & risk Soviet action . But make JFK look . look weak . Risking Soviet action would have been a mistake .
 Some saw Kennedy as a young inexperienced President who Destroy the missile sites & remove Castro, could be pushed around . Some thought Kennedy could push around . Others thought Kennedy was inexperienced and inexperienced .
 United States missiles in Turkey gave the U.S. a strategic military advantage . The missiles were launched in Turkey .
 It said it was merely helping options and not always go the direct military one . It said the military is not always going direct military options .
 Already involved Truman Doctrine Policy of containment said USA had supported USA to support anti-Vietnam . USA had already been involved in the Vietnam War .
 French colony since C19th France since the end WWII. communists. called Indochina. French colony . French colony of Vietnam since 1945. communist. government .
 French surrender became after 1960 believed in the to Germans . After 1960, French believed in Germany after surrender .
 Ho Chi Minh wanted an USA counter to the support that North end to colonial rule . Cambodia, Laos, Cambodia and Laos, advisors. movement led by Thailand, Burma , India etc. movement .
 France wanted Vietnam back, even though Ho Chi Minh had declared an independent Vietnam government at Geneva Vietnam. France wanted the South .
 1946 war broke out between leader Ngo Diem with $1.1 billion in Viet Minh & the French . Backed unpopular . 1946 war was fought between Diem and French .
 President Johnson sends more help to stop Vietcong $500 million pa to the French . President Johnson not a ‘war monger’ but not a 'warmonger' but not want to be seen as soft on .
 French pulled out United States ships attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats after defeat at Dien Bien Phu . Viet Minh guerrilla tactics meant the French pulled U.S. ships out after defeat .
 Over 500,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam on 12 month tours . Draft of young men in the United States army 5.5.7 million young men .
 My Lai Massacre turned U.S. public opinion against the war . Investigation ended in mass murder charges for Lt. Lt. Gen. John Hagan . Lt. Hagan charged with mass murder .
 USA people were 5.24 General Giap after a napalm attack shocked & protests increased . USA people died in Vietnam in the aftermath of the attack .
 Attacked what they thought was a Vietcong stronghold. middle class people who wanted an end to the ‘pointless’ war. Attacked . middle class middle-class people who were trying to end the 'pointless' war .
 Politics: to be pro-war was political suicide for most politicians . Soldier Ridenhour who knew many soldiers at 1969 . Politicians were afraid of being pro-wanted .
 The events of My Lai shocked the U.S. after the Tet Offensive . Nixon ordered bombing to be increased . People lost faith in the United States army after the attack .
 He hoped this would put pressure on the communists as peace negotiations continued . He said he hoped it would help pressure the communists .
 When talks broke down in Dec 1972, Nixon ordered a massive bombing campaign . Nixon ordered the Vietnamization of Vietnamization campaign .
 71 400,000 troops were United States invasion of Cambodia withdrawn from Vietnam in 1969 . Between 1969 and 1969, more than 70,000 U.S. troops were withdrawn from the country .
 The United States was unable to cut off the supply lines as the 5.33 communists used trials & bases in Laos & Cambodia . The U.S. couldn't cut off supply lines due to the use of communist training facilities .
 Nixon was invited to visit China & he asked Paris Peace Agreement 27 January 1972 China to pressure North Vietnam to end the war . China was invited by Nixon to visit the country . Nixon asked Paris peace agreement to end North Vietnam War .
 Fighting restarted in 1973, AVRN held for a while but low morale & poor leadership meant that by . April 1975, communist forces entered Saigon . Hundreds of thousands of S Vietnamese were executed .
 Score each event out of 10 in terms of it being a turning point that influenced the American public into becoming more anti-war explain your score .
 Level 2: description Level 3: explains one reason . Level 4: explains two reasons . Level 5: Explain one reason why you chose not to buy a new item .