 In October 1962, for the first time since the invention of the atomic bomb, two great powers, each armed with that ultimate weapon, came down to the wire in a famous confrontation . The battle between the two nations was the first in October 1962 .
 This “eyeball to eyeball” meeting pivoted around the installation by the Soviets of medium-range missile bases in Cuba . The Soviets installed the bases .
 This crisis was not merely about missiles, but about how to avoid war in the I H-bomb era . The crisis is not merely . about missiles . But it was about how . to avoid a war in I H bomb era .
 Leaders and peoples who '3 lived through that period profited by it . Presumably, the leaders and peoples . lived through it .
 In this objective and fact-filled book Elie Abel shows how a first-rate reporter can make a contribution to history . Abel shows that a good reporter can contribute to history. Abel's book is an objective and facts-filled guidebook .
 He has given us a day-by-day account of a few “golden days” of 1962, when our top leaders breathed the minds of U.S. policy makers that we could not tolerate this as a permanent threat . Adlai Stevenson and others pointed out
 The book outlines well the basic alternatives, including invasion of Cuba, and the judgments which led to the ‘track’ chosen, the “track” chosen . It also outlines the establishment of a limited naval blockade of Soviet ships carrying in more the October air .
 Abel does not have the stylistic dash of Arthur Schlesinger but he matches that historian and Mr Sorensen for thoroughness . Abel adds objectivity that necessarily eludes a one-time insider .
 Mr Abel was close to these events, but he writes as a reporter, from the outside .
 One factor in all such crises is speed — the speed of political events and missiles traveling thousands of miles per hour . One factor is speed, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Pictures taken on Ur2 flights over Cuba had unmistakable evidence that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba . A few days later our intelligence sources, from pictures taken over Cuba, had unmistaken evidence .
 Russia had sent by surface ships a supply of missile-launching equipment, missiles, and technicians . Russia had also sent missile launch equipment, missile-launch equipment and technicians to Russia .
 These missiles were capable of carrying atomic warheads, and presumably would be supplied with them . These missiles would presumably be supplied by the Soviets .
 90 miles away from U.S. shores the Soviet Union was preparing weapons that could kill millions of Americans in a matter of minutes . The Soviet Union either directly or through its small ally, Castro’s Cuba, was preparing .
 Khrushchev is reported to have told an American during the crisis that it was difficult for the Russian Premier to deal with an adversary who was younger than his son . In another passage, he is reported having said it was hard for the Premier to cope with an opponent younger than Khrush
 When it was finished Mr Kennedy gave a small silver calendar to all who had lived through the harrowing ordeal .
 The confrontation covered less than two weeks, October 16 through 28 . The days were etched on the silyer and on the hearts of those who recognized it for what it was .
 Backyard bear tainty and completeness of a man who has had all the major facts in hand and who has interviewed the major participants . The Hundred Days of Lyndon Johnson .
 He writes with conviction and adds some colorful human details; we see, for example, Mrs. Mrs. Obama .
 Evelyn Lincoln start out with a hair brush to smooth the President's hair a few seconds before he is to make his crisis speech on television . Evelyn begins with a brush just seconds before the President is set to speak on TV .
 Robert McNamara was seeking to make sure that the Navy understood its mission in the blockade was not to shoot, but to convey a message . And one shudders at the temper displayed — and somewhat underplayed in Mr Abel's account — when Secretary of Defense McNamara made sure that
 The Missile Crisis is a hairraising story in which Mr Abel points up how both sides misread intelligence reports and above all misread each other's intentions . The missile crisis is the result of a failed missile strike .
 Of prime importance, of course, is that each side was misunderstanding the other, says CNN.com.com .
 Abel makes this clear, perhaps clearer than any other account has done . Mr Abel makes it clear that Mr Abel does not want to be involved in the UK .
 The Missile Crisis is a book for everyone who wants to understand the problems of statecraft in our times . Abel’s book gets a good reading by new persons in the State Department and the Pentagon, he writes .
 The men leading the U.S. in | 1962 had been tried before and j^had learned from the Bay of |/Pigs in 1961, from living through history .
 This book adds I point to the concept that men 1 must learn from reading I such histories; we cannot keep pushing our luck, our bluff, and lour bombs in flaps like the {Cuban missile crisis . This book points to the fact that men now must learn . from