 To quickly find your search term on this page, press Ctrl+F or ⌘-F and use the find bar . Use the find button to search for your search terms in the search bar .
 Belgium's La Coubre delivers arms to Cuba, explodes in Havana harbor . March 4—Belgium's La. Coubre delivered arms to Havana, exploded in Havana's harbor. March 4, Cuba .
 President Eisenhower slashes U.S. sugar imports from Cuba . July 8: President Eisenhower slashed sugar imports to cut sugar imports .
 Soviet Union agrees to buy all Cuban sugar formerly purchased by U.S. July 9 . Khrushchev vows to protect Cuba from United States action . Soviet Union agreed to buy sugar formerly bought by United States .
 Castro nationalizes around $1 billion in American investments . Subsequently, Castro nationalized around $ 1 billion in U.S. investments . Castro also nationalizes $1billion in American investment .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower announced partial U.S. trade embargo on Cuba October 19, 1953 . President Eisenhower made the announcement in a speech at the White House on Cuba .
 John F Kennedy defeats Richard Nixon in presidential election . November 8—John F Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon . Kennedy defeated Nixon in 1968 .
 April 4—Kennedy gives final approval to details of Bay of Pigs invasion . April 4: Kennedy gave final approval of details of the invasion . March 4: The invasion was the first invasion of Cuba in Cuba .
 JFK tells reporters United States military will not take part in attack on Cuba . JFK: U.S. military won't attack Cuba, will not participate in attack .
 Kennedy rules out any U.S. military role in refugee landing at Bay of Pigs . April 12—Kennedy ruled out any United States military role at the site of the landing . March 12, 1962, was the first time the United States had a military presence in the region .
 Cuban refugees fail to wipe out Castro's air force . April 14—Flying B-26 bombers, refugees failed to kill Castro's Air Force. April 14 . April 15: The Cuban refugees were killed in Cuba .
 Khrushchev tells Presidium he is prepared to take tough action to push Western allies out of West Berlin . May 26—Khrushchev told Presidium that he was prepared to push West Berlin out .
 While browbeating JFK, Soviet leader threatens allied access to West Berlin . Soviet leader also threatens allied West Berlin access to the West .
 Kennedy speaks to American people about Berlin Crisis, talks about calling up additional troops, encourages Americans to prepare home fallout shelters . July 25—Kennedy speaks to U.S. people about the Berlin Crisis .
 August 13—East German, Soviet troops build Berlin Wall, stopping flood of East Germans into West Berlin . August 13: East Berlin, West Berlin divided between West Berlin and East Germany . Soviet troops built Berlin Wall to stop flow of East German refugees to West Berlin from entering Berlin .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric releases evidence U.S. has significant lead in nuclear arms race . October 21: Defense Secretary releases evidence United States has lead in arms race with Russia .
 October 27—U.S., Soviet tanks square off at Checkpoint Charlie in Berlin . October 27: U.S. and Soviet tanks clash in Berlin, Germany . Oct. 27: Soviet tanks, tanks clash over Berlin .
 Soviet Union tests most powerful nuclear weapon ever created—a 50-megaton device . October 30, Soviet Union tested most powerful nuke ever created . Soviet Union testbed 50 megaton device, the most powerful weapon ever made .
 November 24—Inspector General's report blames CIA for misjudging Bay of Pigs issues . November 24: Inspector general's report says CIA misjudged Bay of Pigeon . November 25: Report says CIA was wrong to misjudge its role in Bay of
 Organization of American States expels Cuba from the U.S. January 21—Meeting in Uruguay, OAS expels Cuban citizens . January 21: Organization of America expels Cubans from the United States . January 22: Meeting in Uruguay to discuss expulsion of Cuba .
 Late April–May—Khrushchev plans to put nuclear missiles in Cuba as counterweight to United States missiles in European nations, including Soviet Union's neighbor, Turkey .
 U.S. intelligence agencies gather first reports of Soviet missiles in Cuba, wrongly assume weapons are conventional, not nuclear . August . August— United States intelligence agencies gathered first reports that Soviet missiles were in Cuba . August 31, 1962, Soviet missile strikes in Cuba were thought to be conventional
 Study shows study shows Castro cannot be toppled by Cuban forces alone . August 20—Maxwell Taylor tells JFK JFK intensive study shows Cuban forces cannot topple Castro alone . The study was part of an effort to topple Castro .
 Kennedy asks Pentagon to investigate removing Jupiter missiles from Turkey . August 23—Kennedy asked Pentagon to look at removing Jupiter missile from Turkey. August 23--Kennedy: "I want to see the missiles removed"
 Sen. Smathers, Homer Capehart, Strom Thurmond jointly call for action to halt Soviet buildup in Cuba . September 2—Senators George Smather, Homer . Capehart and Strom . Thurmond: "We will not tolerate any more of this kind of behavior
 JFK issues statement threatening grave consequences if Soviet Union puts offensive weapons in Cuba . September 4—JFK issues statement on Cuba . October 4: JFK issued statement on Soviet Union putting offensive weapons into Cuba .
 Khrushchev hosts Stewart Udall at Petsunda retreat, warns U.S. cannot dominate Soviet Union . September 6—Khrushchev hosts Udall, warns United States cannot dominate the Soviet Union. September 6 .
 Kennedy asks Congress for authorization to call up 15,000 reservists . September 7—Kennedy asks Congress to authorize the call-up of reservists. September 7--Kennedy: "I'm not going to back down" September 7: Kennedy asked Congress to approve the call up
 TASS calls for end to U.S. provocation over Soviet deployments in Cuba . September 12—Tass calls for an end to the United States provocation . TASS called for the end of U.K. provocation .
 In televised news conference, Kennedy says he does not believe Soviet personnel in Cuba represent threat . Kennedy repeats warning about offensive weapons .
 September 17—Khrushchev gives troops traveling on freighters permission to fire anti-aircraft guns . McGeorge Bundy tells senators only 2,700 Soviet ""technicians"" in Cuba . September 17: Khushchev gave troops traveling aboard freighters a gun permit for anti-
 U.S. Senate passes resolution authorizing use of force against Cuban aggression . September 20— United States Senate votes to authorize force against Cuba . September 21— U.N. military action against Cuba. September 20: United States will respond to Cuban aggression.
 U.S. reconnaissance spots crates holding nearly obsolete, unassembled IL-28 bombers on Soviet ships bound for Cuba . September 28 .
 Cubans will not bow to U.S. intimidation, Cuban newspapers report . October 1—Cuban newspapers report Cubans won't bow to United States intimidation. October 1-1-2-3: Cubans refuse to bow to the United States .
 CIA Director John McCone believes nuclear missiles may be in Cuba . McCone criticizes handling of Cuba by McNamara, Rusk . Secretary of State Dean Rusk also criticizes McNamara .
 Congress passes joint resolution authorizing use of military force if offensive weapons in Cuba become threat to U.S. Congress also OKs use of use of force to Cuba . Cuba has been accused of using offensive weapons against the United States in Cuba .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball confirms Soviet shipment of surface-to-air missiles to Cuba . October 8—In House testimony undersecretary says Soviet shipment to Cuba was Soviet .
 October 14—A U-2 flight over Cuba captures incriminating evidence on film . October 14: A U.2 plane over Cuba captured incriminating footage of the U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Gallup Poll shows most Americans oppose military action against Cuba . Gallup Poll: Most Americans oppose U.S. military action on Cuba .
 October 15—Photo analysts examine film, recognize signs of medium-range missile launch sites under construction . October 15: Photo analysts identify signs of missile launch site under construction in the U.S. October 15; October 16: Analysts examine film .
 JFK learns about missiles in Cuba, assembles key advisers in Ex-Committate . JFK learned about missiles from Cuba during trip to Cuba in 1961 . JFK learns of Cuban missile program in Cuba .
 Ex Comm. considers surgical airstrike to destroy missiles; air attack on missiles, other Cuban targets . Air attacks tied to invasion; naval blockade of Cuba . Ex. Comm. considered surgical strike on missiles to destroy them .
 Military leaders bolster air defenses in southeastern U.S. October 17 . October 17—Military leaders bolster Air Force presence in southeastern United States . October 18: Military leaders boost air defense capabilities in southeast United States.
 Soviet commander in Cuba, Issa Pliyev, becomes aware of increased U.S. overflights, suspects United States knows about missiles . Soviet commander: "I believe the United States is trying to cover up what happened"
 Reconnaissance update reveals existence of launch sites for intermediate-range nuclear missiles . October 18—Reconnaissance update: Launch sites for intercontinental ballistic missiles are located in North Korea .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend air strikes on missiles, other Cuban sites . Joint Chiefs say air strikes will be directed at Cuban missile sites, other sites .
 JFK meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, who dishonestly offers assurances Soviet arms in Cuba are purely defensive . JFK met with Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko in Cuba .
 Ex-Committe establishes separate working groups to explore details of air strike or blockade . October 19—Ex Comm. establishes separate . working groups establish separate working . groups to look at details of the air strike, blockade or air strike .
 Air Force General Curtis LeMay compares possible blockade to British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's appeasement in 1938 Munich meeting with Adolf Hitler . Air Force general compares blockade to Chamberlain's meeting with Hitler in Munich with Hitler .
 Most Ex Comm members support naval blockade; JFK affirms that decision . JFK's decision to blockade the Strait of Black Sea . JFK: "Most Ex Comm. members support blockade; most Ex Comms support blockade" Most Ex-Comms support naval blockage; JFK reaffirms that
 Commander of Tactical Air Command tells JFK destruction of all missiles unlikely in air strike . October 21—Commander of Tactical . Air Command says destruction of missiles unlikely to be possible .
 JFK briefs former presidents and current leaders of Congress, who urge stronger action . JFK briefs ex-presidents and current members of Congress on the need for stronger action against climate change .
 United States military raises alert level to Defense Condition, or DEFCON, 3 . U.S. military has been on alert level since January .
 Adlai Stevenson calls Cuba "accomplice" in Communist drive for world domination . Stevenson calls it a "commissionary role in Cuba's struggle to achieve world domination" Stevenson: Cuba is a "complicated" Communist country .
 Cuban ambassador Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui describes quarantine as ""act of war,"" while Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin denies missiles in Cuba .
 Most large Soviet ships headed toward Cuba slow, stop, or reverse course . October 24—When quarantine takes effect, most large Soviet ship heads to Cuba slow or stop .
 SAC raises alert status to DEFCON 2, just one step away from all-out war . SAC: "SAC is on the brink of war. SAC is not on the verge of war."
 October 25—Khrushchev welcomes Acting UN Secretary General U Thant's proposal for temporary halt in arms shipments to Cuba, simultaneous suspension of United States quarantine line . October 25: Khrushchev welcomes temporary halt to arms shipment to Cuba and suspension of U.S. quarantine line
 Only ship stopped by quarantine line is Lebanese freighter, Marucla, which carries no weapons . October 26—Only ship to be stopped by quarantined line is Lebanon freighter . October 27—Marucla was the only ship stopped .
 Castro appeals to Khrushchev in letter apparently endorsing nuclear attack on U.S. Fearing imminent United States invasion, Castro appeals . Castro appeals in letter purportedly endorsing attack on United States . Castro was president of Soviet Union in 1960s and '60s .
 Khrushchev letter places new demand on United States—removal of missiles from Turkey . U.S. must remove missiles from the region, remove them from Turkey, say U.N. officials . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 U.S. plane mistakenly strays into Soviet air space, raising fears . United States plane mistakenly stumbles into Soviet airspace . Plane crashes into Russian air space in Soviet airspace, sparking fears .
 JFK decides to offer Khrushchev public no-invasion pledge, private promise to remove missiles from Turkey, Italy . JFK also offered to remove missile bases from Turkey and Italy . Kennedy: "No. 1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9,
 Khrushchev pressures JFK to spell out details of his promise to remove missiles from Turkey . JFK refuses to put anything on paper . JFK refused to put out details on what he had promised .
 Castro refuses any inspection of missile removal . U Thant travels to Havana to work out UN inspection procedures for missile sites . Castro refuses to inspect missile removal sites .
 October 31—President Kennedy orders renewal of low-level reconnaissance flights to monitor missile removal . October 31-October 31-November 30: President Kennedy orders renewing of low level reconnaissance flights . President Kennedy ordered renewal of re-surveillance of missile removal from Cuba .
 November 5—First ship leaves Cuba carrying missiles back to Soviet Union . November 5: First ship left Cuba with missiles carrying missiles from Soviet Union. November 6: "First ship with missiles left Cuba carrying Soviet Union missiles back"
 Khrushchev agrees to weeks-old U.S. request that IL-28 bombers be withdrawn as well as missiles . November 20—Khrushchev agreed to weeks old United States request to withdraw bombers and missiles .
 President Kennedy sign limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with Soviet Union, United Kingdom . October 7—President Kennedy signed limited nuclear test ban Treaty with USSR, United States .
 Oswald lived in Soviet Union for three years and has history of crusading on Cuba's behalf . Police quickly arrest Lee Harvey Oswald, who lived in the Soviet Union . Oswald had been crusading for Cuba's cause since his arrest .
 As conspiracy theories emerge about JFK's assassination, much speculation focuses on pro-Castro Cubans . Much of the conspiracy theories focus on pro and anti Castro Cubans in Cuba .
 Perceived defeat in missile crisis is one chink in armor that once protected his position . Heavily criticized by Obama administration for not responding to missile crisis .