 The first was the industrialized capitalist with the free world on one side and Soviet nations, including the U.S. and its allies . The free world was one of the two sides, with the United States and allies .
 The second was the client states on the other, including competition for influence in such places as Egypt, Egypt, Communist nations led by the Soviet Union .
 The Third World consisted of the Congo, Vietnam, and Chile . developing nations, often newly independent, who were not aligned with either 10.9 or 10.7 .
 The Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan established the pattern for America’s policy of supplying economic and military aid to prevent the spread of Communism . The Third World nations were located in Latin America, Asia, and Africa .
 Vietnam War, Cuba, and Africa were economically poor and politically unstable . They Vietnam War (and the Vietnam War), Cuba War), and Africa (were economically poor) was economically poor .
 Hungary, Hungary and Czechoslovakia suffered from ethnic conflicts and lack of tech . They also suffered from lack of technology, ethnic conflicts, lack of nology and education .
 Each needed a political and economic system around the 1970s and 1980s as people in Soviet which to build its society . Each country needed political, economic systems around the 70s and 80s and 70s .
 Soviet-style communism and U.S.-style free-market satellites sought freedom from Soviet control . The two sides sought freedom in the wake of the Cold War . Both sides wanted to end Soviet-era communism and free-markets .
 Students evaluate the consequences of Cold War strategies . The United States, the Soviet Union, and, in some cases, past events and decisions .
 China used a variety of techniques to gain influence in the Third World . China, used a number of techniques in order to gain control of the world .
 They backed wars of revolution, liberation, or counterrevoluhistorical causes and effects, including the limitations on determining cause and effect. tion .
 Use a chart to list main assistance from nonaligned nations . Use the chart to show how important ideas have been .
 They were important players in the Cold War competition between the United States, the Soviet Union, and later, China . They became important players .
 Not all Third World countries wished to play a role in the Cold War . But not all countries wanted to take part in the confrontation .
 Indonesia, a populous island nation in Southeast Asia, also struggled to stay uninvolved . Cuba and Indonesia are among the most populous island nations in the region .
 In 1955, it hosted many leaders from Asia and Nicaragug a Africa at the Bandung Conference . The conference was held in Bandung .
 Nonaligned nations met to form what they called a “third Iran force” of independent countries . Independent countries, or nonaligned nations, met in Tehran to form the group . They met in a bid to form a ‘third force’
 In 1996, one of these groups, ment in Vietnam considered the Soviet invasion a threat to Middle Eastern oil called the Taliban, seized power . In what ways rebels, called mujahideen, or holy warriors, fought on the Soviet withdrawal in 1989 .
 President Jimmy Carter warned the Soviets established an Islamic government against any attempt to gain control of the Persian Gulf . Jimmy Carter said the Soviets should not try to establish a government in the region .
 For either Cuba, Iran Nicaragua, or Iran, write an annotated time line of events discussed in this section . Use this time line to create a timeline for the events discussed here .