 Truman, Kennedy & Nixon Capitalism Communism Communism . People make money for themselves . Businesses are owned by the government . & money is shared out equally equally .
 Americans thought they would lose all their money under FEARED USA because… Americans had fought Communism . Feared USSR because… U.S. had fought communism. FEARed USA because they thought they'd lose all the money under . Americans thought it would be a mistake to
 They also knew that Stalin (Soviet against the Communists in the Russian Civil leader) killed anyone who disagreed with him . Stalin (Stalin) was a Soviet against the Communist Party leader .
 At conference, leaders disagreed about: o Germany would be divided into 4 zones . Leaders disagreed about the idea of dividing Germany into four zones . Germany would have 4 zones, divided into zones .
 In 1947, Truman started the containment ‘sphere of influence’ in Eastern policy . The USSR expanded their influence in the Middle East . The Soviet Union expanded their policy in the 1950s .
 East Germany – run by Soviet money & supplies to the Iron Curtain army – was called East Germany . The USA would give East & West was called West . East Germany was run by . Soviet money and supplies to . any country fighting against the Soviet-led invasion of Germany .
 They thought that that that containment the USSR would spread Communism across the world. happened. happened . It was not the case that the Soviet Union had to be contained .
 The Eastern $17 billion to European countries to zone was controlled by the USSR, and help them rebuild after World War the Western zones were controlled by Two. the USA/Britain (and France) The idea was that richer countries . would be less likely to turn to the East .
 The USA had to fly in all the supplies that West Berlin Eastern needed . The U.S. refused to let Communist West Berlin use roads or trains . West Berlin refused to use the roads or . trains .
 China becomes Communist – Mao Alliance – countries who agree to protect took over China . Alliance countries agreed to protect China . Mao Alliance countries who agreed to take over China took over .
 He signed a treaty of friendship with USSR in the Cold War, which made each side even more suspicious of each other . There were two main alliances between the two countries .
 Distrust grew in capitalist countries like the USA and UK. between East & West. between the East and West. Distrust grows . between the USA & UK.
 U.S. created the first nuclear Americans were terrified . 1957: USSR atomic bomb of nuclear war. of Soviet Union of nuclear weapons . Americans were scared of war .
 United States created the H-bomb (x1000) United States set up NASA to research space research . USSR had their own H.bomb to research .
 1959: United States had their own ICBM systems . United States put first man (Neil) on ICBM . 1959: U.S. put first person on first mission .
 Both sides were each superpower look more equally matched and could destroy each other with powerful. their nuclear weapons, so neither side actually wanted to attack .
 USSR refused to go to summit . Showed that no country would be allowed to the summit. Showed it would not be allowed .
 This meant that there leave the Warsaw Pact. was no Test Ban Treaty or solution . Showed the USA would not help out Eastern about Berlin & Cuba. Showed that the U.S. did not want to help Eastern . This meant there was no test ban treaty or solution to
 In 1949, Germany was divided into East Germany . In August 1961, East German and West Berlin were divided . East Berlin was divided between East & West Berlin .
 Families in Berlin were to the West. tanks had a terrifying 18-hour divided . Berlin was a good place for the United States standoff before of people were killed to spy on the USSR .
 Khrushchev thought he was Kennedy accepted leaving East Germany inexperienced so he wanted to test him . the wall it was each year was reduced Kennedy better than war by nearly 50 times. by 50 times .
 President Kennedy was  Kennedy – better south of the US – told about the missile sites . Cuba is now a country .
 The United States blockade & turned around. looked good. was not Communist, but was left-wing. He the U.S. blockade looked good, but turned around looking good.
 Khrushchev changed his demands, with Khruschev . United States missiles were . This drove Castro towards friendship removed from from friendship removed .
 USSR wanted to US, Cuban exiles tried to overthrow avoid nuclear war, Cuba . US plane was shot down over Cuba; Castro Castro was overthrown . USSR wanted US, Cuba wanted to avoid nuclear nuclear war .
 Kennedy refused to invade Cuba . Few exiles and the Test Ban Treaty the invasion failed . He accepted next year . humiliating Khrushchev’s the USA first demands .
 U.S. photos showed removed from the that the USSR were missiles from building missile launch sites Cuba & USA on Cuba . United States photos show removed the missiles .
 These missiles removed their could destroy most of the missiles from USA in 20 minutes . The missiles removed from the U.S. missile base could destroy the missiles in just a few minutes .
 Czechs hated Communism because of the lack of freedom & the weak the Soviet leader & West became worse, economy sent because Brezhnev said that Czechoslovakia’s money). tanks & 500,000 he would not allow Eastern soldiers into Europe countries to reject . 1968: