 Euro-Cuba News is an email magazine that has been published from London since November 1999 . It is the first email magazine to be published in the UK .
 Cuba's international relations and on solidarity actions with Cuba from around the world . It aims to provide up to the minute coverage of news from Cuba . Cuba's relations with the world is at odds with Cuba .
 This service is free and welcomes input from its readers including comment, articles and news .
 Officials from the US, Cuba, and former Soviet Union gather in Havana to discuss events in 1962 . The world teetered on the brink of nuclear war .
 At a similar conference in Cuba 10 years ago, former U.S. Secty. of Defense Robt. Robert E. Johnson was in Cuba at the time .
 McNamera indicated that while tens of thousands of United States troops were on full alert and on the verge of being sent to implement the invasion recommendations by top US military leaders .
 This year, we now learn that four Soviet submarines near Cuba were also nuclear armed . A United States destroyer was meanwhile dropping ""warning"" depth charges against one of them - which was on the verge of launching its weapon in defense .
 Per United States military doctrine at the time, either of these incidents would have resulted in a nuclear attack on the USSR, and presumably a similar Soviet attack in return . Per U.S. military doctrine, any such an attack would have led to a similar attack .
 Important documentation has been newly released, including as available from the sources below . Important documentation is newly released .
 The coverage of these events in the U.S. frequently fails to include much recognition of the attacks and threats directed against Cuba during this period, such as under Operation Mongoose .
 Radem Cruz Soto joined neighbors streaming out of their oneand two-story concrete homes in this farming community . The transports carried no insignias; the pink-faced young men wore ordinary clothes .
 A force of exiles organized, armed and trained by the United States had landed at Playa Giron, a stretch of beach at the mouth of the Bay of Pigs . The attack was a disaster, but U.S.-backed insurgents continued to hold the Sierra del Escambr
 Unannounced delivery of the Soviet R-12 and R-14 medium-range ballistic missiles is a relief . Cruz Soto: "Long-awaited help finally had arrived" Cubans braced for a larger invasion by the United States .
 Salvador Massip Soto was a member of the Cuban Air Force in October 1962 . "A war would have been horrible,'' he says of the conflict .
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev days after the agreement . "Many eyes of Cuban and Soviet men who had been willing to give their lives with sublime dignity filled with tears," Castro wrote .
 Museo de la Revolucion in Old Havana lies the battered turbine of the U-2 piloted by Maj. Maj. Gen. Carlos Vidal . Maj. Vidal: 'We're waiting for an invasion'
 The Crisis of October didn't begin in October, says Elio Pena Martinez, the museum's resident expert on the era . The crisis of October began in the 1930s, says Martinez .
 Massip Soto was operations chief for a helicopter squadron at the Baracoa Air Base near Havana . "We were awaiting an invasion,'' he says of the Cuban government .
 The Marines would land here, between Mariel and Santa Fe and here, in the Santa Cruz area, he says . "The Marines would ... land here," he says, tapping stretches of coastline .
 Operation Mongoose was authorized by Kennedy in November 1961 . It combined diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions and military threats with industrial sabotage and support for insurgents .
 Missile bases 90 miles from Florida could even the strategic balance . Khrushchev proposed sending nuclear missiles to the island . The bases are 90 miles away .
 In San Cristobal, police cleared the Avenida Maceo in advance of the caravan . Police: 'Our inevitable weapons are our inevitable weapons' The caravan is expected to arrive in the next few days .
 Cuba is a sovereign, independent country, and has a right to own the weapons that it deems necessary . The U.S. has felt it has the right to make agreements with dozens of countries, and send them the weapons as that they see fit, he says .
 Massip Soto: "It was a secret that everyone knew. Everyone except the Americans. Everyone knew" Soto says. "Everyone except Americans"
 Rafael Saumell Muoz remembers images of Castro and Kennedy flickering across the family television screen . 'There was no panic' says Muoz .
 "Obviously we were very aware of retaliation the Americans were ready to take against Cubans,'' Saumell Muoz says .
 As Earth edged toward global thermonuclear war, the U.S. and the Soviet Union opened negotiations . 'Humiliation and surrender' was a surrender to the Soviets .
 There is no paper, no document that says only the great powers have a right to have nuclear weapons,'' the museum guide says .
 Cuban vice president Jose Ramon Fernandez greeted former U.S. secretary of defense Robert McNamara . JFK speechwriter and counsel Theodore Sorensen, JFK aide and Pulitzer-Prize-winning historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Gen. Gen. Robert Gen. Michael Schles
 William Y Smith, JFK aide Richard Goodwin, CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, and other U.S. veterans and scholars. William Y. Smith . William Y . Smith , JFK . Goodwin, Richard Goodwin . Richard Goodwin were JFK aides and CIA analysts .
 Also attending the conference are several members of the Kennedy family spanning three generations . The Kennedy family is honored observers as honored observers .
 Earlier this week, a distinguished delegation of Russian veterans arrived in Havana from Moscow . The delegation includes former deputy foreign minister Georgy Kornienko, missile deployment planner Gen. Gen. Jan. Vladimir Putin .
 Anatoly Gribkov, former defense minister Dmitry Yazov, and KGB officer Nikolai Leonov. Anatoly. Leonov . Anatoly . Gribkkov, ex-defense minister, and ex-KGB officer, Nikolai .
 At the center of discussions will be thousands of pages of newly declassified documents from the Cuban government itself, from the CIA, the Pentagon and the White House . The documents will provide for the first time the Cuban and multi-national perspectives on a crisis previously seen only in superpower terms .
 Archive director Thomas Blanton said, ""The conference room will echo with words that resonate today, such as 'intelligence failure,' 'pre-emptive strike,' and 'weapons of mass destruction," he said .
 Conferees will visit the last surviving structure from the Soviet deployment in 1962 . A nuclear warhead bunker at the San Cristobal missile site west of Havana will be the site .
 On this day in 1962, a high-altitude U-2 spy plane took the first photographs of the Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba at San Cristobal . The U.2 took the photos of the missiles at San .
 The conference will meet at the Palacio de Convenciones in Havana, Cuba .
 The conference room itself is closed to the press, except for the opening ceremony at 10m. on October 11 . Organizers will hold daily press briefings each afternoon summarizing the discussion and releasing key documents addressed that day .
 For 11 years was policy adviser, legal counsel and speechwriter to Senator and President Kennedy . He was also a speechwriter for Sen. and Sen. Kennedy .
 Later chief of staff, SHAPE ; Deputy Commander United States EUCOM; four star general . Four star general. Later Chief of Staff, ShAPE; Deputy Commander U.S EUCOM .
 Later United States Ambassador to Bulgaria and Senior Fellow at Brookings Institution . Later U.S. ambassador to Bulgaria .
 A career anti-submarine warfare and sonar specialist, he retired in 1980 .
 After the Bay of Pigs, he was assistant to the State Department's assistant secretary for Latin America, Adolf Berle; later, director for Cuban affairs in the State Dept. Later, he became director of Cuban affairs .
 Georgy Markovich Kornienko was Soviet attaché at the USSR Embassy in Washington in 1962 . He was one of the most prominent Soviet diplomats in the world . He served as a Soviet diplomat at the embassy in Washington .
 Later head of the U.S. Desk of the Foreign Ministry . First Deputy Foreign Minister under Gromyko . Head of the United States Desk of Foreign Ministry of the Soviet Union .
 Currently at the Institute of Military History and General Secretary for the Russian Commission of . Military History . General Secretary of the . Russian Commission .
 Senior Research Fellow, Institute of Latin America, Academy of Sciences of the Russian Federation and editor of journal on Latin America .
 Robert McNamara, Defense Secretary under President John F Kennedy, arrived in New York City . McNamara was assassinated in 1968, assassinated by President Kennedy .
 McNamara said he was stunned at a similar gathering in Havana a decade ago when he learned how many Soviet missiles had been kept in Cuba . McNamara spoke on the eve of a three-day conference involving key American, Cuban and Russian actors in the crisis .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorenson are also attending . Kennedy aides are attending the Kennedy memorial service .
 Dino Brugioni analyzed the now famous American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Also there is ex-CIA analyst Dino Bruggioni, who analyzed the photos .
 Castro, then a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years, is expected to participate in the historic episode . Castro was then a leader in Cuba for three years before he was assassinated .
 The crisis erupted in mid-October 1962 when Kennedy learned that in Cuba there were Soviet nuclear warheads capable of reaching American shores just 90 miles to the north . Kennedy learned in October 1962 that Soviet warheads could reach U.S. shores .
 It was defused two weeks later when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from the island . The island was later defused by the Soviet government .
 In honor of the late American president, several Kennedy family members are attending the conference . The conference is being held in honor of Kennedy .
 Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother who was attorney general and a key player in the crisis, died in March 1968 . He was assassinated in June 1968 at the age of 65 .
 Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the island . The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles from Cuba .
 President Kennedy, his brother, had carefully avoided a pre-emptive assault against Cuba, instead imposing a naval quarantine after the Soviet Union prepared sites there for nuclear missiles . Mr Bush: 'We no longer live in a world'
 The Cuban missile crisis was one of the most harrowing episodes of the cold war . It was a harrowing episode of the Cold War era .
 In October 1962, American spy planes confirmed that the Soviets were constructing sites for missiles able to reach the U.S. The Soviets denied the presence of missiles in Cuba . The Soviets deny the existence of the missiles .
 Nikita S Krushchev of the Soviet Union backed down, ordering the missile sites dismantled, but only after securing a secret pledge from Mr Kennedy that he would not invade Cuba .