 It took over 13 years for the Air Force to respond to the National Security Archive’s FOIA request for this document . Even then, it took another five years to complete its response, early in 2008, to the Archive's appeal .
 This document gives a full and fine-grained account of SAC’s complex role in the crisis, beginning with intelligence operations . It also gives a detailed account of the complex role SAC played in .
 SAC’s 408080 Wing flew over 90 U-2 missions over Cuba during October 1962 . The missions included photographic intelligence flights and more secretive electronic intelligence missions .
 SAC U-2s began flying near Cuba months before the October crisis . Some details of the ELINT operations remain classified, but details remain classified .
 Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 was shot down by Soviet surface-to-air missiles on October 27 1962 . Major Anderson was killed in the shoot-down by the Soviet Union .
 The U-2 flight that strayed into Soviet territory had significant implications for the crisis . This history does not cover that episode .
 SAC aircraft helped support the blockade of Cuba by searching for Soviet ships in the Atlantic . Besides the U-2 flights this history shows how U.S. aircraft helped .
 Within hours of President Kennedy’s October 22 speech, SAC forces were on a DEFCON 2 posture, the highest level of U.S. force readiness short of a decision to go to war . The highest level is the highest of United States force readiness .
 65 nuclear-armed bombers were in the air at any given moment at any time . Most of the bombers were on ground alert, most were on air alert .
 At the time of the missile crisis, the ICBM force mainly comprised liquid-fueled Atlas and Titan missiles . At the times of the 1980s, the missile force was mainly liquid fuel fueled by Atlas and Titans missiles .
 The solid-fueled Minutemen ICBMs were in the earliest stages of deployment . Contractors had to remain at Minuteman sites to prevent any degradation of the alert . Only a handful of the ICBM were available .