 Israel and U.S. have a long history of close intelligence cooperation . Israel and the United States have long been close allies in intelligence operations .
 Israel’s wars against Arab armies afforded invaluable insights into Soviet military doctrine and weapons systems . Israel's wars against the Soviet‐armed and trained Arab armies provided invaluable insights .
 The intelligence cooperation between Washington and Jerusalem is one of the cornerstones of the strategic alliance between the two states . Israel and the U.S. have a strong relationship in the Middle East .
 Given the extensive U.S. military aid to Israel, it has been widely argued that the alliance unilaterally favors Israel . Washington and the American public have backed Israel in the international arena .
 Israel has provided a bulwark that protects U.S. and Western interests in the Middle East . Israel has taken the brunt of Islam’s Manichean confrontation with Western civilization .
 To be sure, Israeli‐American intelligence cooperation has encountered some bumps along the road . Israel and the U.S. have been working closely together for years .
 Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin did not inform the Reagan administration of Israel’s plans to destroy the Iraqi nuclear reactor in 1981, even though the two intelligence communities had signed a memorandum on this issue .
 The US, along with Britain, kept Israel in the dark about secret contacts with Muammar Qaddafi in 2003, which led to the dismantling of Libya’s mass destruction weapons program . Conversely, the U.S. and Britain kept Israel out of the knowledge of Qaddafi
 In May 2017 Trump reportedly shared with Russian foreign minister Lavrov about sensitive intelligence obtained by Israel about ISIS’ terrorist plans .
 Washington and Jerusalem have maintained a strong intelligence relationship since the 1950s . U.S. and Israel have maintained strong intelligence ties since then .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, the Middle East served as a combat testing ground for Soviet military doctrine and advanced weaponry . The experience amassed by Israel in its wars against the Egyptian, Syrian, and Iraqi armies ‐ trained by Soviet advisers and equipped with Soviet weapons – provided the United
 In 1966, an Iraqi pilot defected to Israel in a MiG‐21 fighting aircraft . Within this framework, Iraq's ambassador to Israel defected from the country .
 Ariel Sharon’s division seized a complete Egyptian SA‐6 surface‐to‐ air . air .missile battery . Ariel Sharon's division seized the Egyptian SA .6 surface-to-air missile battery .
 A large number of T‐62 tanks, some of them intact, were captured on the Syrian front during the 1973 war . Some of the tanks were captured during the war .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on Cuba, leading Khrushchev to back down and to withdraw the missiles in return for the withdrawal of U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey . Viewing the move as casus belli, President John Kennedy imposed the blockade .
 At the time of this crisis, the Soviets had already gone far in developing nuclear‐equipped intercontinental ballistic missiles . The Soviets were developing nuclear-armed intercontinental missiles .
 The launchers and missiles were deployed on the ground and hidden in forests, but by the mid‐1960s they had already been placed in underground siloes .
 It had a flight range of 10,500‐13,000 kilometers depending on the weight of the warhead . The warhead could be used to carry out a nuclear missile .
 In domains of a clearly technological nature such as the Soviet nuclear threat, it was easy to err through over‐ or underestimation . Thus, particularly in domains such as technology such as nuclear threats, it would be easy to underestimate or overestimate .
 The thick cloak of secrecy surrounding the Soviet Union was its Achilles Heel . Yet, the thick cloak was still the biggest stumbling block of Soviet Union .
 It was the need to ensure secrecy in all areas of life that caused an ‘information explosion” by requiring to maintain huge databases in an endless quantity of cardboard files crammed with documents . The more they multiplied the more difficult access to them became .
 The personal files of not a few members of the Soviet defense establishment with a high security classification were lost over the years . Most likely, they were lost at some point after their retirement .
 There were still some difficulties in locating them and gaining access to them . Indeed, they became free agents, but there were still difficulties locating them .
 Israeli intelligence community provided valuable, original information on Soviet strategic missile array as it existed at the end of the 1960s .
 Israel provided a detailed and quite accurate picture of the structure and dispersal of at least some of the Soviet army’s strategic missile brigades . Based on the information that Israel provided, one could construct a detailed picture .
 The missiles were aimed at the Kora testing ground in the northern Kamchatka peninsula . The Kora test ground is more than 8,000 kilometers east of Baikonur and about 5,500 km east of Plesetsk .
 The information contained detailed technical data on the R‐16 intercontinental missile and its operation . At the same time, it appears that the main importance of the information was technical .
 The data also included highly original information on the thermonuclear warheads of this missile . The data was also highly original .
 Some of the intelligence information could be verified with aerial photographs . The information could also be verified by aerial photos .
 It also included details, as well as rumors, that were verified only later . But it also included rumors that were later verified later .
 A rumor about the fatal disaster that occurred in Baikonur field on October 24, 1960, in which Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, the first commander of the Soviet strategic missile force, was killed along with a hundred members of his staff .
 The occasion was the first test launch of an R‐16 missile to mark the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution . The launch of the missile was timed to celebrate the revolution .
 Marshal Nedelin was killed in a plane crash shortly after the incident . A short time later, the Soviet authorities reported him dead .
 Italian news agency gave a brief report on the disaster shortly afterwards .
 Full details of the incident with its full details remained a secret in Russia . Nevertheless, the incident remained a top secret .
 It was only in 1989, almost 30 years later, that the Russian weekly Ogonek revealed the circumstances of the tragic death of Nedelin and his crew . Nedelin's crew were killed by the Soviet Union-run ship .
 The accident occurred when a short circuit in the engine of the missile’s prototype caused an explosion as it was being positioned and fueled on the launching pad . A short circuit caused the explosion, which was caused by a missile short circuit .
 The marshal rushed to the launching pad to learn what had happened with his entourage in tow, and then the explosion transpired . The explosion occurred after the marshal discovered the problem that prevented the launching of the missile was discovered .
 The planner of the missile, Mikhail Yangel, was saved by being in a bunker far from the launching pad to smoke a cigarette . The missile was launched by a Russian rocket launcher in Russia in 2007 .
 Khrushchev appointed Leonid Brezhnev, who would succeed him as Soviet leader, to head the commission that investigated the disaster . The commission was headed by the Soviet leader who would go on to become the next president .
 The Mayak facility was for recycling irradiated nuclear fuel and extracting plutonium for nuclear weapons . It operated in the “closed city” of Chelyabinsk‐40 on the eastern slopes of the southern Ural Mountains .
 The cooling system of one of the tanks, which contained 70 to 80 tons of liquid nuclear waste at a high radioactivity level, malfunctioned and was not immediately repaired . The disaster ensued when the cooling system malfunctioned .
 Tsar Bomba — “king of the bombs” — exploded of a 50 megaton hydrogen bomb, the largest explosion yield ever . Another anecdote that was reported and already known in the West was the Tsar .
 Explosion caused ships in the harbor to crash into each other . Explosion was eight kilometers in diameter . Explosion wave reached Arkhangelsk, about 2,000 kilometers southwest of the explosion site .
 The CIA expressed its gratitude to the Israeli intelligence community, noting that the received information was  unique and enabled the agency to adjust its intelligence overestimation on the issue .
 The information obtained from Israel indicated that the Soviet strategic missile technology was of inferior quality than the CIA had believed . According to a senior CIA official, the information indicated that .
 The U.S. intelligence community feared the Soviets had already developed a technological capability to equip their intercontinental missiles with MIRV warheads . The official said the United States intelligence community had feared, because of the information gaps faced, that by the 1970s the Soviets already had developed a
 This technology enables the missile, when reaching the target, to strike a number of objectives simultaneously . This technology can be used to strike multiple targets simultaneously .
 If a MIRV warhead includes decoy devices in addition to nuclear bombs, it is more immune to interception . Furthermore, if a warhead has decoy bombs in it, it will be more likely to be hit by the decoy .
 Israeli information made a particularly important contribution to the U.S. defensive capability against a Soviet nuclear strike . The Israeli information was important to the United States in the 1980s .
 The current nuclear threat to the United States comes from North Korea . The U.S. intelligence community has difficulty collecting and assessing intelligence, experts say .
 Kim Jong‐Un’s main hallmark is his unpredictability . Unlike the Soviet leadership during the Cold War, he acted in a rational and calculating manner . Kim Jong-Un's unpredictability is his main hallmark, unlike Soviet leadership .
 Raphael Ofek is an expert in the field of nuclear physics and technology . Ofek served as a senior analyst in the Israeli intelligence community .