 On October 14, 1962, a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane's photographs confirmed that Soviet missile sites were being constructed in Cuba . The U.K. confirmed that the missile sites had been built in Cuba in 1962 .
 President John F Kennedy immediately formed a fifteen-man executive committee to advise him on policy options . The committee was formed to advise Kennedy on what he could do .
 Nikita Khrushchev huddled with his advisors at the Kremlin in Moscow . For the next two weeks the world stood on the brink of nuclear war while EXCOM convened daily meetings .
 The missile crisis ended on October 28 when Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba . The crisis ended in a public radio address, a public address, on October 31, 1958 .
 Khrushchev's decision to place missiles in Cuba was made in 1962 . Several theories have been given to explain the decision to do so .
 The Soviet leader perceived Kennedy to be weak and indecisive, given his failed leadership during the April 1961 U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion and the manner in which he handled the affair in its aftermath .
 Kennedy's behavior convinced Khrushchev of his hesitancy . Two months later, during their Vienna summit conference in June 1961, the two leaders agreed to meet again .
 Khrushchev placed the missiles in Cuba for the purpose of counterbalancing the 15 U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey that were aimed at Soviet cities . The missiles were placed in Cuba against the recommendation from his military advisors .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba would negate the leverage the U.S. gained when it placed missiles in western Europe . The United States gained the leverage it gained in placing missiles in eastern Europe .
 Fidel Castro was deeply disappointed to learn that Khrushchev did not intend to use the missiles for the defense of Cuba against an American invasion . Despite his year-long public clamor to defend the island against a U.S. attack, Castro was disappointed .
 Kennedy's reaction is most often placed within the historical context of the Monroe Doctrine and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams’ Cuban policy . Adams' Cuban policy is often placed in historical context .
 Adams declared the western hemisphere off limits to foreign encroachments . Adams declared that U.S. security was threatened should Cuba fall into a third party's hands, other than Spain .
 The 1823 statements remained policy guidelines and were re-enforced by a September 1960 congressional resolution that authorized the president to direct military intervention in Cuba to rid it of communism .
 Kennedy's image had been further badgered by Soviet aggressiveness in eastern Europe and its construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 .
 Kennedy's response to the building of the wall was unnoticed by public policy analysts at the time . The airlift of troops into Berlin as a symbolic warning for the Soviets .
 Some analysts suggested that Khrushchev should have at least paused in Cuba in response to Kennedy's action . Domestic pundits quickly drew a relationship between Kennedy's response to missiles in Cuba and the forthcoming November 1962 congressional elections .
 The White House heard the rumors about the White House in the summer of 2011 . The administration heard the chatter, which made its way into Washington's congressional circles .
 Kennedy administration officials publicly dismissed the reports’ validity . Recalling the failed intelligence by the same communities prior to the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy administration .
 Between May and October 1962, the Soviets dispatched to Cuba 47,000 troops, including five missile regiments, twenty-four launching pads, forty-two rockets and forty MiG-21 jet fighter planes . In reality, the Soviet Union sent to Cuba 46 nuclear warheads, including thirty
 The Russians shipped Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads . Subsequently the Russians shipped intermediate range ballistic Missiles . The missiles can carry nuclear warheads, according to the Russians .
 Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, consistently denied the missile presence in his conversations with the president's brother and attorney general, Robert F. Kennedy . The first U.S. suspicion came from an August U-2 flight, but it was denied .
 On September 11 Khrushchev reassured Kennedy that no offensive missiles were shipped to Cuba . Kennedy was assured that no weapons would be sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union . The U.S. did not send any offensive missiles into Cuba .
 The Soviet cover story was blown with the October 14 U-2 flight that showed the construction of SS-4 sites in San Cristobal in western Cuba . Cecil W Stoughton, Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Resolution of the Crisis .
 EXCOM reviewed the options and determined a course of action . For the next five days EXCOM reviews the options . EXCOM decided to take action .
 Given the congressional resolution authorizing U.S. military action against Cuba and the forthcoming congressional elections, doing nothing was not an option . Doing nothing would not be an option, says President Obama .
 Secret diplomacy would provide the Soviets sufficient time to complete the missiles’ installation and present the U.S. with a fait accompli . Secret diplomacy provided the Soviets with time to install the missiles' installation .
 Kennedy dismissed joint chiefs of staff recommendation for land invasion of island . Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis Lemay's call for an airstrike to eliminate missile sites . Kennedy dismissed the joint chiefs' recommendation for a land invasion .
 President worried that the Soviets might retaliate in Turkey or Berlin, where the U.S. could not act quickly . Each crisis had potential to spiral into a wider confrontation .
 International law considered it an act of war, which Kennedy wanted to avoid at all costs . That left a naval blockade as the most reasonable option, but international law considered a blockade . A naval blockade was considered the most realistic option .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk struck a compromise with his proposal for a “defensive quarantine” against the shipment to Cuba of offensive missiles only . Rusk's proposal for the quarantine is a compromise that would be limited to offensive missiles .
 Kennedy accepted the State Department's legal consul's advice that a quarantine was legal within the parameters of international law . Kennedy accepted State Dept. legal advice that it was legal to quarantine .
 It met U.S. security needs in the circum-Caribbean region, weakened Castro, and gave Premier Khrushchev a way to back out . As such it met United States security needs and weakened Castro .
 The Monroe Doctrine and Adams’ policy statements were alive and well in 1962 . The Monroe doctrine and Adams policies were alive in 1962, Adams said in 1962.
 Kennedy accepted the National Security Council's plan of action on October 17 . Kennedy accepts the plan for national security in the U.S.
 Emissaries were dispatched to inform western European allies, appeals for support were prepared for the United Nations and Organization of American States . Khrushchev would be asked to withdraw his missiles, and a United States naval flotilla would be placed in the Atlantic Ocean five hundred miles north of
 At 5m. on October 18, Kennedy spoke with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, who reassured him that there were no offensive weapons in Cuba . At 5 m. on Oct. 18, he spoke to Soviet foreign minister Andrei .
 The next day reconnaissance flights discovered four more operational sites . Reconnaissance flights found four more sites .
 U.S. ground and air forces were put on full alert . B-52s of the Strategic Air Command were ready to attack on a moment's notice .
 He notified Khrushchev and sent special emissaries to the western European governments to do the same . He also sent emissary to the Soviet Union .
 At 5.m. he informed congressional leaders and called them to the White House . At 5m. (5m. ET) he informed Congress leaders that he had been informed by the president .
 At 7.m. he delivered a seventeen-minute national television address revealing the presence of missiles and demanding their removal . At 7:30pm he delivered the . 17 minutes of national television .
 He also announced that he was creating a “quarantine’ to prevent any more missiles from entering Cuba . The Cuban president also announced he was going to create a "quarantine" of Cuba .
 Kennedy declared that any Soviet ships entering Cuban waters would be stopped and searched . If they tried to run the blockade, he would order U.S. ships to fire on them .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson exposed Soviet missiles before UN Security Council . Stevenson exposed the Soviet missiles on October 23 . Stevenson was the first ambassador to the UN to expose the missiles .
 On October 27 and 28 a deal was worked out whereby the Soviet missiles would be removed from Cuba under UN supervision . The Soviet Union would not reintroduce offensive military material to Cuba in return for U.S. promises to secretly withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey, and it would not invade
 Castro was infuriated by the U.S.-Soviet deal in which he played no part, making him little more than a pawn between the Cold War superpowers . Castro was angered by the deal, which he says made him a pawn .
 Castro refused to permit UN inspectors on to the island to oversee the withdrawal of Soviet missiles . Given the embarrassment, in November 1962 he refused to allow UN inspectors to visit .
 The United States relied on its own air and sea reconnaissance to verify the withdrawal . The U.S. relied on their own air, sea reconnaissance .
 Castro isolated himself from the Soviets until the near collapse of the Cuban economy in 1970 . Castro henceforth isolated himself with the Soviet Union until the 1970s .
 Kennedy was lauded at home and Latin America for his bold action during the missile crisis . He was lauded for his actions during the crisis in Latin America .
 Most of the European allies also applauded the president, but with some hesitancy . Most of Europe's allies also applaud the president's actions .
 If war erupted between the superpowers, it would be fought on the ground in Europe, not the hurling of missiles . The U.S. and the Soviet Union are the world's two superpowers .
 Castro refused to permit UN supervision of the missile withdrawal . In 1970, the Soviets commenced construction of a submarine base at Cienfuegos . A subsequent consequence of Castro's refusal to allow UN supervision came in 1970 when the Soviets began construction of the base .
 Henry Kissinger was quick to point out that because of Castro's action, the U.S. was free to take military action in Cuba . The position prompted the Soviets to halt construction in Cuba, which was halted .
 New documents reveal how close the world came to nuclear war . Release of new documents and revelations made at conferences in Washington, D.C., Moscow, and Havana in the early 1990s .
 In October 1962, the Pentagon estimated that 180,000 troops, with a 10 percent casualty rate, would be needed for a successful Cuban invasion . The Pentagon estimated 180,00 troops would need to be ready for the invasion .
 While the Pentagon had germ warfare plans for pre-invasion use, there is no evidence that the discussion reached the highest levels of policymakers . The Pentagon had no plans to use germ warfare .
 U.S. intelligence did not know that the Soviets placed 42,000 combat troops in Cuba . If the United States invasion took place, Soviet army commanders in Cuba claimed they would have used the short-range tactical nuclear warheads at their disposal .
 One positive result of the whole incident was the establishment of the “hotline” or “red telephone,” which afforded U.S. and Soviet leaders with direct communications to avoid a future nuclear crisis .