 In order to gain a perspective of currents events during the decade in which TIROS was launched, look up, define in your own words, and date the following events . Sino-Soviet Split: The gradual disintegration of diplomatic ties between the People’s Republic of China
 May 1, 1960, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union . The plane was the U.2's first U.S. spy plane to be shot down in Soviet airspace .
 The Soviets were able to recover the pilot and his mostly-intact plane . While American leader’s created a cover story, the Soviets recovered the plane .
 They were able to develop several of the photographs taken during the mission . They were also able to take several photographs .
 This event happened right before an East-West summit was to take place . It served to further deteriorate Soviet-American relations . The event happened before a summit was scheduled for the next day .
 The United States was motivated by the fear that the Soviets would have a beach-head landing in Guatemala if Cold War events escalated . The U.S. feared a beachhead landing would be possible in Guatemala .
 This was an invasion of Cuba planned by America and executed by armed Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro . This was planned by the U.S. and executed in Cuba to overthrow Castro, says CNN.com .
 This was a two-week confrontation among the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba during the Cold War . The U.S. and Cuba were involved in a two week Cold War confrontation in Cuba .
 During this time, tensions ran high as both countries were positioned to strike each other with missiles and nuclear war seemed imminent . During the time of the Cold War, tensions between the U.S. and Russia were high .
 The confrontation began when a U.2 reconnaissance plane found Soviet missiles placed in Cuba . This after America had placed missiles in Turkey, this after America placed missiles .
 It ended with an agreement for both countries to dismantle their missiles . Both countries agreed to dismantle missiles after the incident .
 The Geman Democratic Republic places a wall down the middle of Berlin to prevent people from escaping to the West . The wall was erected by the Gemen Democratic Republic to stop people fleeing to the west .
 Talks of armament control led to another series of talks called SALT II . Treaty froze the number of ballistic missile launchers of the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev wrote to each other about a cooperative weather satellite system . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union during the Cold War . Khrushchchev and Kennedy were involved in a joint effort to develop a weather satellite program .
 Perhaps we could render no greater service to mankind through our space programs than by the joint establishment of an early operational weather satellite system . Perhaps, perhaps, the U.S. and the world's space programs could serve the world better .
 Such a system would be designed to provide global weather data for prompt use by any nation . Such a global weather system would provide global data to anyone in need .
 The United States and the Soviet Union each launch a satellite to photograph cloud cover and provide other agreed meteorological services for all nations .
 The two satellites would be placed in near-polar orbits in planes approximately perpendicular to each other . The satellites would provide regular coverage of all areas of the world .
 It is difficult to overestimate the benefit which could be brought to mankind by organizing a world weather observation service with the aid of artificial earth satellites . The world weather service could be organized with the help of satellites .
 Precise and timely weather forecast will help man cope with natural calamities and open up new prospects for improving the well-being of mankind . Precise weather forecast is another important step along the way to man's conquering of nature, says the author .