 During this same period, other countries developed nuclear weapons, though none engaged in warhead production on nearly the same scale as the two superpowers .
 The first nuclear weapon was created by the United States of America during the Second World War . It was developed to be used against the Axis powers . The end of the Cold War and the end of nuclear disarmament are now the focus of our focus .
 Scientists of the Soviet Union were aware of the potential of nuclear weapons and had also been conducting research in the field . The Soviet Union was not informed officially of the Manhattan Project until Stalin was briefed at the Potsdam Conference on July 24, 1945 .
 President Truman was surprised at how calmly Stalin reacted to the news of the weapons . Truman thought Stalin had not understood what he had been told .
 A ring of spies operating within the Manhattan Project, had kept Stalin well informed of American progress . The project was the brainchild of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets provided detailed designs of the implosion bomb and the hydrogen bomb . They provided the Soviets with detailed designs . The Soviets also provided the designs of implosion bombs and the .
 Fuchs' arrest in 1950 led to the arrests of many other suspected Russian spies, including Harry Gold, David Greenglass, and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg . The latter two were tried and executed for espionage in 1951 .
 In August 1945, on Truman's orders, two atomic bombs were dropped on Japanese cities . Two atomic bombs dropped on Japan in August 1945 .
 The first bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, and the second dropped on Nagasaki by the B-29 bombers named Enola Gay and Bockscar respectively . The first and second bombs were dropped by the Enola gay and Bockcar bombers . Both were dropped in 1945 .
 Shortly after the end of the Second World War in 1945, the United Nations was founded . The U.N. was founded in 1945 .
 During the United Nation's first General Assembly in London in January 1946, they discussed the future of nuclear weapons . The United Nations Atomic Energy Commission was created in 1946 .
 The goal of this assembly was to eliminate the use of all Nuclear weapons . The goal was to . eliminate the . use of nuclear weapons .
 The United States presented their solution, which was called the Baruch Plan . The U.S. proposed their solution to the problem, which is known as Baruch .
 This plan proposed that there should be an international authority that controls all dangerous atomic activities . This plan was proposed by the U.N. to control nuclear weapons .
 In the years immediately after the Second World War, the United States had a monopoly on specific knowledge of and raw materials for nuclear weaponry . The U.S. had a . monopoly on . specific knowledge . of and . raw materials .
 Six months after the UN General Assembly, the United States conducted its first post-war nuclear tests . Operation Crossroads was the U.S. attempt to draw concessions from the Soviet Union, but this proved ineffective .
 Operation tested the effect of nuclear explosions on ships . The purpose of this operation was to test the effect on the effects of nuclear blasts on ships.
 One plutonium implosion-type bomb was detonated over the fleet, while the other one was detonated underwater . One of the two bombs was detonated in a controlled underwater detonation .
 In secrecy, the Soviet government was working on building its own atomic weapons . The Soviet government worked on the project in secrecy to build its own weapons .
 During the war, Soviet efforts had been limited by a lack of uranium, but new supplies discovered in Eastern Europe provided a steady supply . The Soviets developed a domestic source of uranium .
 The first Soviet bomb was detonated on August 29, 1949 . American experts had predicted that the Soviet Union would not have nuclear weapons until the mid-1950s .
 The bomb, named ""First Lightning"" by the West, was more or less a copy of ""Fat Man"", one of the bombs the U.S. had dropped on Japan in 1945 .
 Both governments spent massive amounts to increase the quality and quantity of their nuclear arsenals . Both governments spend massive amounts on increasing their nuclear arsenal .
 Both nations quickly began the development of thermonuclear weapons, which can achieve vastly greater explosive yields . Both countries quickly began to develop the weapons .
 The United States detonated the first hydrogen bomb on November 1, 1952, on Enewetak, an atoll in the Pacific Ocean . The U.S. detonated the bomb in 1952 .
 Code-named Ivy Mike, the project was led by Edward Teller, a Hungarian-American nuclear physicist . The project was code-named "Ivy Mike" and led by Teller .
 The Soviets exploded a deployable thermonuclear device in August 1953, although it was not a true multi-stage hydrogen bomb . The Soviets surprised the world by exploding the device .
 It was small enough to be dropped from an airplane, making it ready for use . However, it was too small to be used in any way .
 The United States conducted the Castle Bravo test on March 1, 1954, which tested another hydrogen bomb on Bikini Atoll . The development of these two Soviet bombs was greatly aided by the Russian spies Harry Gold and Klaus Fuchs .
 Scientists significantly underestimated the size of the bomb, thinking it would yield 5 megatons . The bomb was thought to be the largest in the history of the U.S.
 It was the highest yield ever achieved by an American nuclear device . However, it yielded 14. megatons, the highest ever achieved .
 The Soviet Union detonated its first ""true"" hydrogen bomb on November 22, 1955, which had a yield of 1. megatons . One person was killed, a crew member on a Japanese fishing boat which was 90 miles from the explosion .
 On October 30, 1961, the Soviets detonated a hydrogen bomb with a yield of approximately 58 megatons . Both sides in the Cold War had nuclear capability, with an arms race developing .
 Strategic bombers were the primary delivery method at the beginning of the Cold War . They were used as a primary delivery vehicle .
 Missiles had long been regarded the ideal platform for nuclear weapons . Missiles were thought to be a more effective delivery system than bombers . They could be more effective than bombers, according to experts .
 On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, into an orbit around the Earth . The launch demonstrated that Soviet ICBMs were capable of reaching any point on the planet .
 The U.S. launched its first satellite, Explorer 1, on January 31, 1958 . Explorer 1 was launched in 1958, and Explorer 1 launched in 1961 .
 By the mid-1960s, the ""triad" of nuclear weapon delivery was established . Each side deployed bombers, ICBMs, and SLBMs to ensure that even if a defense was found against one delivery method, other methods would be available .
 Some in the United States during the early 1960s pointed out that although all of the individual components of nuclear missiles had been tested separately , it was infeasible to test them all combined .
 Critics said it was not really known how a warhead would react to the gravity forces and temperature differences encountered in the upper atmosphere and outer space . Kennedy was unwilling to run a test of an ICBM with a live warhead . Critics charged that it wasn't really known what a war
 The closest event to an actual test was 1962's Operation Frigate Bird . The submarine USS Ethan Allen launched a Polaris A2 missile over 1,000 miles to the nuclear test site at Christmas Island .
 It was challenged by, among others, Curtis LeMay, who put missile accuracy into doubt to encourage the development of new bombers . The accuracy of missile accuracy was put into doubt in the 1950s .
 Critics point out that it was a single test which could be an anomaly . Other critics pointed out that the test was a lower-altitude SLBM and therefore was subject to different conditions than an ICBM .
 By the mid-1960s both the United States and the Soviet Union had enough nuclear power to obliterate their opponent . Mutual assured destruction .
 Both sides developed a capability to launch a devastating attack even after sustaining a full assault from the other side . Called a second strike, the second strike is known as a 'second strike' by the U.S.
 Both Soviet and American experts hoped to use nuclear weapons for extracting concessions from each other, or from other powers such as China . The risk connected with using these weapons was so grave that they refrained from what John Foster Dulles referred to as brinkmanship .
 Both Truman and Eisenhower opposed the idea of using nuclear weapons during the Korean War . Both sides were unaware of the capacity of the enemy's arsenal of nuclear weapons .
 The Americans suffered from a lack of confidence, and in the 1950s they believed in a non-existing bomber gap . The U.S. believed in an un-existing gap, and the Americans believed in it .
 Aerial photography later revealed that the Soviets had been playing a sort of Potemkin village game with their bombers in their military parades . The Soviets were flying them in large circles, making it appear they had more than they truly did .
 The 1960 American presidential election saw accusations of a spurious missile gap between the Soviets and the Americans . The 1960 U.S. presidential election was dominated by accusations of an alleged gap in missile technology .
 The Soviet government exaggerated the power of Soviet weapons to the leadership and Soviet first secretary Nikita Khrushchev . On the other side, the Soviet government exaggerated the power, the government said .
 Three other nations, the United Kingdom, the People's Republic of China, and France developed nuclear weapons during the early cold war years . The United States and the Soviet Union were the only two nations to develop nuclear weapons .
 The United Kingdom detonated an atomic bomb in Operation Hurricane on October 3, 1952, which had a yield of 25 kilotons . In 1952, the United Kingdom became the third nation to test a nuclear weapon .
 Despite major contributions to the Manhattan Project by both Canadian and British governments, the United States Congress passed the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . The act prohibited multi-national cooperation on nuclear projects .
 Atomic Energy Act fueled resentment from British scientists and Winston Churchill . They believed that there were agreements regarding post-war sharing of nuclear technology, and led to Britain developing nuclear weapons .
 Britain did not begin planning the development of its nuclear weapon until January 1947 . Britain began planning to develop the weapon in 1947 .
 Because of Britain's small size, they decided to test their bomb on the Montebello Islands, off the coast of Australia .
 Following this successful test, Britain decided to develop and test a hydrogen bomb . Following the test, Churchill decided to lead the country to test the first atomic bomb .
 The first successful hydrogen bomb test occurred on November 8, 1957, which had a yield of 1. megatons . First successful test was conducted in 1957 .
 An amendment to the Atomic Energy Act in 1958 allowed nuclear cooperation once again . British and U.S. nuclear programs resumed .
 During the Cold War, British nuclear deterrence came from submarines and nuclear-armed aircraft . During the 1950s, the UK used submarines and aircraft armed with nuclear weapons .
 The Resolution-class ballistic missile submarines armed with the American-built Polaris missile provided the sea deterrent . Aircraft such as the Avro Vulcan, SEPECAT Jaguar, Panavia Tornado and several other Royal Air Force strike aircraft carried WE.177 gravity bomb .
 France began making plans for a nuclear-weapons program shortly after the Second World War . The program did not begin until the late 1950s, but began in the 1950s .
 France conducted its first thermonuclear test above Fangatuafa Atoll . Eight years later, France carried out the first test in the area . France conducted the first nuclear test in 1953 .
 This bomb significantly contaminated the atoll with radiation for six years, making it off-limits to humans . The atoll atoll was contaminated by the bomb, which contaminated it with radiation . It is now off limits to humans.
 During the Cold War, the French nuclear deterrent was centered around the Force de frappe, a nuclear triad . Dassault Mirage IV bombers carried such nuclear weapons as the AN-22 gravity bomb and the ASMP stand-off attack missile . Pluton and Hades ballistic missiles, Pl
 In the late 1950s, China began developing nuclear weapons with substantial Soviet assistance in exchange for uranium ore . In the mid-60s, the Chinese government began to develop nuclear weapons . In exchange, the Soviet Union helped develop uranium ore for nuclear weapons in China .
 The Sino-Soviet ideological split in the late 1950s developed problems between China and the Soviet Union . However, the ideological split developed problems .
 This caused the Soviets to cease helping China develop nuclear weapons . The Soviets stopped working with China to help develop nuclear arms .
 China continued developing nuclear weapons without Soviet support in the 1960s . It made remarkable progress in the 60s and '60s .
 Owing to Soviet/Chinese tensions, the Chinese might have used nuclear weapons against either the United States or the Soviet Union in the event of a nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet. Union . The Chinese may have used nukes against either of the two countries in
 The communist Soviet Union supported and praised Castro and his resistance . Castro's government was recognized by the Soviet Union on January 10 . The revolutionary government was officially recognized on January 11 .
 When the U.S. began boycotting Cuban sugar, the Soviet Union began purchasing large quantities to support the Cuban economy in return for fuel . The Soviet Union placed nuclear ballistic missiles on Cuban soil .
 These missiles would be capable of reaching the U.S. very quickly, experts say . These missiles could be able to reach the United States very quickly .
 On October 14, 1962, an American spy plane discovered these missile sites under construction in Cuba . President Kennedy immediately called a series of meetings for a small group of senior officials .
 The group is split between a militaristic solution and a diplomatic one . The group was split between military and diplomatic solutions .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade around Cuba and all military forces to DEFCON 3 . President Kennedy also ordered a blockade of Cuba and ordered a military embargo .
 Kennedy eventually ordered United States military forces to DEFCON 2 . Kennedy ordered the U.S. military to be on high alert at the height of tensions .
 The theory of mutually assured destruction suggests that entry into nuclear war is unlikely . While the U.S. military had been ordered to DEFCON 2, the theory suggests that it is unlikely a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev announced that the Soviet Union would withdraw all missiles from Cuba on October 28, 1962 . The decision was made after much discussion between U.S and Soviet officials .
 The U.S. withdrew all their nuclear missiles from Turkey in secret . The presence of the missiles had threatened the Soviets . Shortly afterwards, the United States withdrew all its nuclear missiles .
 Information that the United States had withdrawn their Jupiter Missiles from Turkey remained confidential for decades . The result of the negotiations between the two nations appeared to be a major U.S. victory .
 The Cold War entered its 30th year with no direct conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The superpowers entered a period of reduced conflict, in which the two powers engaged in trade and exchanges with each other .
 This period included negotiation of a number of arms control agreements . It began with the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in the 1950s, but with significant new treaties negotiated in the 1970s .
 START I was reversed with START I, reversed . Both states continued to hold massive numbers of nuclear weapons . The growth in number of warheads was limited .
 In 1958, both the United States and Soviet Union agreed to suspend nuclear testing . The U.S. and the Soviet Union suspended nuclear testing in 1958 .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty was signed on October 10, 1963 . It was felt by American and Soviet leaders that something had to be done to ease tensions between the two countries .
 This was an agreement between the U.S., the Soviet Union, and the UK . It significantly restricted nuclear testing . This was the result of the agreement, signed in 1973, between the three countries .
 All atmospheric, underwater, and outer space nuclear testing was agreed to be halted . But underground testing was still allowed underground .
 This was primarily due to the economic impact that nuclear testing and production had on both U.S. and Soviet economies . This was due to both the United States and the Soviet Union's economic impact .
 The SALT I Treaty was signed in May 1972 . It produced an agreement on two significant documents . The treaty was signed on behalf of the U.S.
 These were the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and the Interim Agreement on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 The ABM treaty limited each country to two ABM sites, while the Interim Agreement froze each country's number of intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles at current levels .
 This treaty significantly reduced nuclear-related costs as well as the risk of nuclear war . It also significantly reduced the risks of a nuclear war with the US .
 SALT I failed to address how many nuclear warheads could be placed on a single missile . However, it did not address the size of nuclear warheads placed on the missile .
 A new technology, known as multiple-independently targetable re-entry vehicle, allowed single missiles to hold and launch multiple nuclear missiles at targets while in mid-air . The technology was developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Over the next 10 years, the Soviet Union and United States added 12,000 nuclear warheads to their already built arsenals . Over the same decade, the U.S. and U.K. added more than a million nuclear warheads .
 Both the Soviet Union and United States replaced older warheads and missiles with newer, more powerful and effective ones . The Soviets and U.S. replaced older weapons with newer ones .
 In light of the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, the United States Senate never ratified the SALT II treaty . The U.S. Senate never ratified the treaty .
 START was negotiated between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, to reduce the number and capabilities of limitation of strategic offensive arms . The START ended the treaty negotiations as well as the era of détente .
 START I, START II, START III, and New START treaties were eventually succeeded by the START II and START I treaties . START I was the first treaty to begin with the START I and START II . START II was succeeded by START III .
 Reagan proposed a space-based anti-ballistic missile system in the 1980s . The Strategic Defense Initiative was also being researched in the Soviet Union .
 SDI would require technology that had not yet been developed, or even researched, to use . SDI technology was not yet developed or researched, but could be used in the future .
 It would need sensors on the ground, in the air, and in space with radar, optical, and infrared technology to detect incoming missiles . It would also need sensors to detect missiles from the ground .
 Reagan initiated negotiations with Mikhail Gorbachev, ultimately resulting in the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty on reducing nuclear stockpiles . Simultaneously, however, Reagan initiated talks with the Soviet-Russian leader .
 The scope of the SDI project was reduced from defense against a massive attack to a system for defending against limited attacks . Owing to high costs and complex technology for its time, the scope was reduced to defense against small attacks .
 Mikhail Gorbachev assumed control of the Soviet Union after the deaths of several former Soviet leaders, and announced a new era of ""perestroika"" and ""glasnost,"" meaning restructuring and openness respectively . Gorbavachev and Reagan signed the INF Treaty in 1987 .
 Gorbachev proposed a 50% reduction of nuclear weapons for both the U.S. and Soviet Union at the meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland .
 The Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty was signed on December 8, 1987, in Washington . It eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons . Many of its constituent republics began to declare their independence .
 With the wave of revolutions sweeping across Eastern-Europe, the Soviet Union was unable to impose its will on its satellite states . The Soviet Union's sphere of influence slowly diminished .
 By December 16, 1991, all of the republics had declared independence from the Union . The republics declared independence .
 The Soviet Union was declared non-existent the following day . Mikhail Gorbachev resigned as the country's president on December 25 . The Soviet leader resigned as president and the Soviet Union ended in a state of state .
 The examples and perspective of this article may not include all significant viewpoints . Post–Cold War was the Cold War. Post-Cold War .
 U.S. and Russia cut down on nuclear weapons spending with end of Cold War . Cold War and Cold War II led to Cold War-era tensions in the world .
 Fewer new systems were developed and both arsenals were reduced . Although both countries maintain significant stocks of nuclear missiles, both countries still have significant stocks .
 Large inventories of nuclear weapons and facilities remained after the Cold War ended . In the United States, stockpile stewardship programs have taken over the role .
 Some are being recycled, dismantled, or recovered as valuable substances . Some of the items are being used as valuable ones .
 Large amounts of money and resources – which would have been spent on developing nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union – were instead used for repairing the environmental damage produced by the nuclear arms race . Almost all former production sites are now major cleanup sites .
 In the United States, the plutonium production facility at Hanford, Washington, and the plutonium pit fabrication facility at Rocky Flats, Colorado, are among the most polluted sites .
 In 1995, United States policy and strategy regarding nuclear proliferation was outlined in the document ""Essentials of Post–Cold War Deterrence" The document was produced by the Policy Subcommittee of the Strategic Advisory Group of the United States Strategic Command .
 On 13 December 2001, George W Bush gave Russia notice of the United States' withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty .
 This led to the eventual creation of the American Missile Defense Agency . The agency was created by President George W. Bush in 1964 .
 U.S. President Barack Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed the New START Treaty in 2010 . The treaty called for a fifty percent reduction of strategic nuclear missile launchers and a curtailment of deployed nuclear warheads . Russian President Vladimir Putin responded to the withdrawal of the treaty .
 The United States Senate ratified the treaty in December 2010 by a three-quarter majority . The treaty was ratified by the U.S. Senate in 2010 .
 President Donald Trump tweeted in December 2016 that the U.S. must strengthen and expand its nuclear capability . The tweet challenged the world to re-engage in a race for nuclear dominance .
 Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey Ryabkov warned about the risk of nuclear war in 2019 . In 2019, he warned that negative dynamics had been noticeable over the previous year . The Russian deputy foreign minister said negative dynamics were noticeable .
 He urged the nuclear states to build channels on forestalling potential incidents, in order to lower the risks . The nuclear states must also build channels to forestall potential incidents .
 In South Asia, India and Pakistan have engaged in a technological nuclear arms race since the 1970s . The two countries have also engaged in an arms race in the past .
 The nuclear competition started in 1974 with India detonating a device, codenamed Smiling Buddha, at the Pokhran region in Rajasthan .
 According to independent sources, it was actually part of an accelerated covert nuclear program of India . This test generated great concern and doubts in Pakistan, with fear it would be at the mercy of its long-time arch-rival .
 Pakistan had its own covert atomic bomb projects in 1972 which ran for many years since the first Indian weapon was detonated . The first Indian atomic bomb was detonated in 1972 .
 After the 1974 test, the pace of Pakistan's atomic bomb program significantly accelerated . Pakistan successfully built its own atomic weapons after successfully testing its own nuclear weapons .
 In the last few decades of the 20th century, India and Pakistan began to develop nuclear-capable rockets and nuclear military technologies . Pakistan and India have been developing nuclear weapons and military technology .
 In 1998, India – under Atal Bihari Vajpayee's government – test detonated five more nuclear weapons . Finally, in 1998, the country tested five more nukes .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif ordered a test, detonating six nuclear weapons in retaliation and to act as a deterrent . Domestic pressure within Pakistan began to build after the test .
 The United States, Russia, and other nations have all attempted to develop anti-ballistic missiles . From the beginning of the Cold War, the U.S. and Russia have all tried to develop missile defenses .
 The United States developed the LIM-49 Nike Zeus in the 1950s in order to destroy incoming ICBMs . The U.S. developed the missile system in the '50s .
 Russia has also developed ABM missiles, in the form of the A-35 anti-ballistic missile system and the later A-135 anti-air missile system .
 Chinese state media has also announced that China has tested anti-ballistic missiles, though specific information is not public . State media also has also said that the country has tested missile tests .
 In November 2006, India successfully tested its Prithvi Air Defense anti-ballistic missile, followed by testing of the Advanced Air Defense missile in December 2007 . India – with an initiative called the Indian Ballistic Missile Defence Programme – successfully tested the Prithv Air Defense .
 Nuclear disarmament is one of four different norms in the aid of getting rid of nuclear weapons . It's one of the four ways to get rid of the nuclear weapons.
 This norm can include arms control, arms reduction to elimination, prohibition, and stigmatization . This has been a hard norm to implement. Arms control is a key part of the norm .
 Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons Treaty gives the representation of self-empowerment . Most of the conditions, the weight, strategy, timing, conditionality, and compliance have been contested .
 This treaty did not involve the states or their allies that had nuclear weapons . It was signed by states and allies that did not have nuclear arms .
 Debates over reducing and getting rid of nuclear weapons all together has been on going since the Cold War ended . Debates have been going on since then since then for decades .
 In 2010, there was a debate over the New Strategic Arms Reduction treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 Nonnuclear states are fighting to get states that do have nuclear weapons to abide by the treaty . The United States and Russia agreed to destroy nuclear weapons they contained .
 Mikhail Gorbachev removed nuclear warheads from air defense missiles and nuclear artillery munitions . Mikhail Gorbiachev was President of the Soviet Union in the 1980s . Gorbiagachev removed warheads from missiles and artillery munitions from missiles .
 Nuclear Weapons: History: Pre Cold War: Manhattan Project"". nuclear files. nuclearfiles.org.com . Nuclear weapons: History . Pre-Cold War: The Manhattan Project .
 Potsdam Note Archived 2007-11-16 at the Wayback Machine . Aiuto, Russell. Aiuto: Decision Truman Tells Stalin, July 24, 1945"".
 There was race-but to the extent that there was an arms competition, it was almost entirely on the Soviets side, first to catch up and then to surpass the Americans." --Herman Kahn Thinking about the Unthinkable, Horizon Press.
 India's Nuclear Weapons Program Smiling Buddha: 1974"". Nuclearweaponarchive.org.com: "Smiling Buddha"
 "Presidency in the Nuclear Age" was held at a forum at the JFK Library, Boston, October 12, 2009 .