 In the summer of 1962, the Soviets began moving nuclear missiles and nuclear-capable bombers to bases in Cuba . Within easy striking distance of targets within the continental United States, the Soviet Union moved the missiles to Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy made the decision to blockade the island of Cuba . U2 reconnaissance flights discovered the missile sites in October .
 The United States Navy was called into action, and rapidly deployed ships and aircraft throughout the Caribbean and Atlantic, to cut off Soviet shipping . The U.S. Navy deployed ships, aircraft and ships throughout the Atlantic and Caribbean .
 A wide range of possibilities were on on the table, including armed conflict on the seas, a U.S. invasion of Cuba, or even a nuclear war . A wide-ranging range of possible scenarios were on . the table .
 At the height of the crisis, a series of communications were exchanged between Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy . At the time, the crisis was at its peak .
 The Soviets backed down, and the offensive nuclear weapons were removed from Cuba . The Soviet Union backed down and the weapons were withdrawn .
 The United States Navy demonstrated the need for seapower in a time of crisis . The Naval Historical Foundation has been working with the National Museum of the Navy to develop a set of three portable display panels .
 The nearly seven foot tall panels incorporate a chronology of the event, as well as U.S. Navy, CIA, and White House photography to tell the story .
 Following special events, the panels will be on display in the Navy Museum . A special thanks to the USS Blandy Association, whose generous donation made this new mobile exhibit possible .
 Everyone associated with USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr DD850 is honored that you have her photo in the display .
 "We strive to present a physical experience for visitors regarding visit. Thank you for helping to publicize this history as we strive to preserve KENNEDY," says CNN.com .
 NHF Co-Sponsoring 237th Navy Birthday Celebration . Naval Historical Foundation Pingback: USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr. Navy birthday celebration .