 "I do not wish to impose my truth, nor do I wish you to impose yours on me," says David Cameron . "I don't want to impose myself on others," says Cameron .
 Latin America is imploding with pro-Castro regimes pushing a revolutionary agenda that runs counter to improved human rights in the region . The Obama Administration and the Implosion of Latin America .
 At the same time these regimes are networking with international and transnational bad actors . At the time, these regimes have also been networking with bad actors, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Cuban intelligence agents and the military are projecting power across the region and the Russians are back . Cuba is projecting power in the region, and it's not surprising that Russia is back .
 The Obama administration removed Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terror in 2015 . Cuba is still a state sponsor of terror, but the Obama administration continues to ignore its actions .
 This is a dangerous situation to the U.S. mainland when one considers that the United States does not have control of its borders . The United States is not in control of the borders, according to CNN.com .
 Four uniformed Cuban Coast Guardsmen arrived in Key West from Cuba from Cuba with AK-47s and Chinese handgun .
 Cuban police men arrived in South Florida in 2016 still wearing their uniforms . Fidel Castro overthrew the Fulgencio Batista regime on January 1, 1959 following an arms embargo .
 On January 7, 1959, the United States recognized the new Cuban government ushered in by the Castro brothers . The U.S. had actively pressured Batista to leave since 1958 .
 The United States thought that it could have normal relations with the Cuban revolutionary government which was also a reason for recognition within the span of a week . The U.S. recognized the Cuban government within a week of the revolution .
 It had taken the United States 17 days to recognize the government of Fulgencio Batista following his March 10, 1952 coup . In comparison it had taken 17 days before the U.S. recognized the government .
 The U.S. had not been consulted ahead of time about Batista's coup . This led to the delay in recognition of the coup .
 Castro regime expropriates properties belonging to the International Telephone and Telegraph Company . Castro regime took over its affiliate, the Cuban Telephone Company .
 On May 17, 1959, the government expropriated farm lands over 1,000 acres and banned land ownership by foreigners . The government banned foreigners from owning land in the country .
 On February 6, 1960 talks begin publicly between the U.S.R and Fidel Castro . Talks begin between the two sides in 1960 .
 Soviet Union agreed to buy five million tons of sugar over five years . Soviet Union bought sugar from Soviet Union in return for five years of Soviet Union's promise to buy sugar .
 Castro regime passed a nationalization law authorizing nationalization of U.S.-owned property through expropriation . On July 6, 1960, Castro's regime passed the law . The law was passed by Castro regime in 1960 .
 The Castro regime began in 1959 sent armed expeditions to Panama, Haiti, Nicaragua, Venezuela and the Dominican Republic to overthrow their governments . These policies combined with the Castro regime engaging the Soviet Union led the Eisenhower administration towards an embargo on Cuba .
 The regime's destabilization policy led two thirds of the 21 states of Latin America voting to expel Cuba from the Organization of American States on February 14, 1963 . Cuba was expelled from the OAS in 1963 .
 A cache of three tons of weapons was found on a Venezuelan beach in November 1963 that was to be used to disrupt the democratic elections there . The weapons were intended to disrupt elections in Venezuela .
 The policy of containment and sanctions was also supported by much of Latin America . The efforts of Castro regime to violently overthrow their governments led to hemispheric unity for a policy of isolating the dictatorship .
 The 'low point' in relations with the Castro regime was during the Kennedy Administration with the Bay of Pigs and the Cuban missile crisis . The assassination of John Kennedy in November of 1963 was the "low point" in relations .
 The Johnson Administration ended active measures to overthrow the Castro regime and pursued a policy of containment . The policy was pursued by the U.S. government .
 Castro pressed the Soviets hard for a nuclear strike against the U.S. in the early 1980s . In the 1980s Castro again pressed the Soviet Union hard for an attack on the United States .
 The efforts of the U.S. to normalize relations with the Castro regime may have been in reaction to understanding this threat . The efforts were accelerated and intensified during the Carter administration, perhaps in response to the threat .
 These overtures contributed to weakening the hemispheric consensus to isolate Castroism . However, these overtures may have weakened the consensus against Castroism in Cuba .
 Castro regime helped overthrow Somoza regime in Nicaragua installing Marxist-Leninist regime there . Castro regime also entered strange alliance with military junta in Argentina that at the time was ""disappearing"" 30,000 leftists .
 Carter had ended a policy of supporting the Somoza regime . Carter had cooled relations with the military regimes in Argentina and Chile . He had ended the policy of backing the Somozoz regime .
 Reagan's returns to policy of containment rejecting Carter's normalization policy . Carter's policy of détente was rejected by the Reagan administration . Reagan's return to containment rejected by Carter's return .
 Ronald Reagan entered the White House in 1981 and re-imposed the travel ban, toughened economic sanctions . In 1982, Reagan placed the Castro regime on the list of state sponsors of terrorism, and started Radio Marti to break through the communist monopoly .
 This policy reversed Castroism's gains in Grenada and Central America . Castroism was reversed by this policy, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 The collapse of the Soviet empire between 1989 and 1991 put the Castro regime into a crisis . Castro's regime was plunged into crisis after the collapse of Soviet empire in 1989 .
 Communist parties from around the world gathered in Brazil at the Sao Paulo Forum and planned their comeback . The remaining communist parties gathered to discuss their comeback in Brazil .
 President Clinton authorized the U.S. military to have permanent contacts and joint exercises with the Castro regime's military in 1994 . The Clinton administration stopped calling Cubans refugees declaring them migrants .
 A 1995 agreement with the Castro regime empowered them to control who would arrive in the United States by registering Cubans for a lottery and up to 20,000 ""immigrants"" would be eligible to enter the U.S. annually . At the same time a 1995 agreement .
 South Florida is filled with regime oppressors and who knows how many spies . This is a large part of what has led to South Florida being filled with oppressors .
 Bill Clinton shook hands with Fidel Castro in 2000 and opened cash and carry trade with the dictatorship loosening sanctions . This normalization effort peaked in 2000 when Bill Clinton met with Castro . Castro's dictatorship loosened sanctions .
 This was done in spite of tightened sanction in 1996 following the Brothers to the Rescue shoot down . This was despite tightened sanction following the shoot-down of the plane .
 During the George W Bush Administration the cash and carry trade continued as did the joint military exercises . This new period of engagement coincided with the rise of Hugo Chavez and reversals of the democratic gains made in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Bush administration responded by tightening sanctions limiting travel by Cuban exiles to Cuba and remittances . Even though in 2003 in the aftermath of the Black Cuban spring in which 75 dissidents were jailed following show trials .
 In 2006 the Sandinistas return to power in Nicaragua with the old dictator Daniel Ortega now winning a democratic election with 38% of the vote . The Sandinista won the election in 2006 .
 Under the Bush Administration, the U.S. became the fifth leading trade partner with the Castro regime in 2008 . Despite all of this, under the Bush administration, the United States was the fifth largest trade partner .
 Obama administration's Cuba policy of engagement and detente with the Castro regime in the past has served to empower other anti-democratic actors in the region with the aide of the Cuban intelligence service and military . Obama's back to the future retread of Carter era Cuba policies is a retread
 Latin American democrats in the region, despite some positive signs, should remain vigilant . Latin American democracy should be vigilant, says Juan Guillaillailla .
 The Cuban dictatorship is not limited to Latin America and has also pursued an ambitious foreign policy in Africa . In the case of Ethiopia, it contributed to famine and mass murder, as relations improved with the Carter administration in the 1970s .
 With or without sanctions Castro regime's hostility will continue with or without the Embargo . The confrontation with the U.S. will continue as long as the government of the United States is a democracy . Castro regime will continue its hostility with or not sanctions .
 Cuba and its allies in Venezuela, Ecuador, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Bolivia, Bolivia and elsewhere say the U.S. is an imperial power . Furthermore, the propaganda of the regime in Cuba is that the United States is imperial power.
 This can already be seen in the arrests of Western businessmen and the confiscation of their assets with preferences to companies from ideologically friendly countries such as communist China, Vietnam, Venezuela, Brazil, etc. This is already being seen in China .
 The purchase of 50 new T-72B1 battle tanks at a cost of 80 million dollars in 2016 could be to send a message to the domestic opposition but also points to a more aggressive foreign policy . A deteriorating situation that can spark conflict in Central America .
 In 2011 the Sandinistas stole the elections with violence and appear to be on track to repeat in 2016 . In 2011, they stole the election with violence .
 Advances that are made in Latin America in the coming years, if there are any, will be in spite of not because of U.S. foreign policy . Advances will be made in the region in spite, not due to foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 Castro regime backed Hugo Chavez's rise to power in Venezuela and engineered a succession in Havana that brought Nicolas Maduro to power and seeks to maintain him there at all costs . This ignores that it is the Castro regime that backed Chavez's . rise in Venezuela .
 What passes for U.S. foreign policy in Latin America would be better described as wishful thinking divorced from reality . Today's foreign policy is more wishful than reality, says Julian Zelizer .