 The fortieth-anniversary conference in Havana in October 2002 brought Fidel Castro together with scholars as well as surviving Kennedy and Khrushchev advisers to add more insight into how close the world came to annihilation .
 Two officers of a Soviet submarine, out of touch with Moscow and besieged by U.S. depth charges, had actually begun the process of launching a nuclear attack . The cooler head of a third Soviet officer halted the launching . The assembled learned, for instance, that two officers .
 One man vetoed two others and thus stopped a thermonuclear war; it really did come that close . One man vetoes two others, thus stopping the war .
 A more complex aspect of the crisis that is becoming increasingly evident is that the role of Cuba deserves a certain amount of emphasis, says Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. who advised Kennedy .
 Castro himself has been making that case since a similar 1992 conference, not only by releasing new evidence but also by personally taking part in the discussions . Castro has released new evidence since the conference in 1992 .
 Castro's bitterness at Khrushchev's betrayal has come out now with the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Castro was bitter at what he perceived to be the betrayal of the late Soviet Union leader .
 Castro no longer needs to conceal the fact that Cuban and Soviet leaders grew estranged . The feeling of defeat that resulted from the agreement to dismantle Cuba's missiles in 1962 settled on Moscow and Havana and Havana .
 It is portrayed as a neutral exotic backdrop in the U.S.-Soviet confrontation . Or, in United States eyes, as a reckless host for the missiles; or still, in Soviet eyes, an annoying junior partner . It's portrayed as an exotic exotic backdrop .
 Historians such as Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali in One Hell of a Gamble have begun the process of internationalizing the perspectives on the crisis .
 Sad and Luminous Days is a timely effort to further internationalize the history of the Missile Crisis by adding to what we know of the Cuban perspective . The film will be released on October 1, 2015 .
 Blight and Brenner have been working towards this moment for over a decade . Brenner and Blight have been together for more than a decade to create this project .
 They have already written widely about the crisis in Cuba . They have interviewed several Cubans who participated in the crisis .
 National Security Archive has been at forefront of bringing to light new documents from all three participating countries . They have also been at the forefront of the . forefront, along with the National Security . Archive .
 Cubans, eager to redeem their active role in the crisis, released the original Spanish version of the speech but provided a competent English translation, reproduced faithfully and fully by Blight and Brenner as chapter 2 .
 The immediate purpose of the meeting that occasioned the speech was to accuse Anibal Escalante and other pro-Soviet Cubans of treason against the Revolution . The speech was delivered at the end of the speech . The Cuban Revolution was overthrown in 1953 .
 Castro recalls the tearing asunder of Cuban-Soviet relations during the Missile Crisis . The bulk of the speech, however, has Castro recalling the Cuban-Russian relations .
 Castro detailed how Cuba had originally accepted the missiles only reluctantly . Cuba feared it would become even more of a U.S. target for aggression . Castro: Cuba had agreed to accept the missiles, fearing it would be even more a target for the United States .
 Castro then appeared to see no reason to sneak the missiles in, as if Cuba had not the sovereign right to harbor any weapons it wanted . Castro then said Cuba had the right to have any weapons that they wanted .
 He cleared up the rumor that he called for a Soviet preemptive nuclear attack . He also cleared up a rumor, based on his October 26, 1962 letter to Khrushchev, that he had called for an attack .
 Castro quoted from his own letter to the Soviet leader, which merely called for nuclear retaliation in case of a U.S. attack, conventional or nuclear . Castro quoted himself from his letter to Soviet leader in which he called for retaliation . Castro: "It is not a nuclear retaliation"
 Most galling was the settlement of the crisis on 28 October, when the Soviets agreed to pull their missiles out of Cuba and to have the removal inspected internationally . The Soviets agreed that the removal of the missiles would be inspected internationally, but Castro was not happy with that .
 In exchange the United States promised not to invade Cuba and secretly added that it would remove missiles from Turkey . In exchange, the U.S. agreed to remove missiles of its own from Turkey and remove them from Cuba .
 Castro was furious that he was not consulted--or even informed--about the removal of the missiles . Castro was angry that he had not been informed about the missile removal .
 He hated the idea of American eyes peering over Cuban sites . Khrushchev's explanation that there had been no time for such a consultation was denied .
 Khrushchev bowed to United States pressure, again without consulting Castro, to remove IL-28 bombers from Cuba while U-2 overflights continued . In November 1962, in response to U.S. pressure, the Soviet Union removed IL-29 bombers .
 Moscow pulled out not only its missiles and planes but the great bulk of its forces, Castro felt unprotected and betrayed . Castro felt exposed and betrayed by Moscow's pull out of Cuba .
 There may not be any new strategically-sensitive information in the speech, but the emotions expressed matter greatly to Blight and Brenner .
 The importance of the 1968 speech, therefore, is not so much in any evidentiary ""smoking guns"" but in demonstrating how the Missile Crisis was a psychological trauma for Cubans . The importance is not to be evidentiary "smoking guns"
 The expression ""sad and luminous days"" comes from Ernesto Ché Guevara's 1965 ""Farewell Letter"" to Castro . The expression was used in the 1965 "farewell letter" to Castro Castro .
 Cubans first feared the arrival of the missiles would provoke a U.S. invasion, but at the end of the crisis, they feared their dismantling would have the same effect . Cubans fear dismantling of the missile missiles would have same effect as the invasion .
 United States policymakers typically view the event through the lens of only ""thirteen days,"" focused on the tense White House deliberations between the time of the discovery of ground-to-ground missiles and the late-October quid pro quo .
 Second, the Soviet ""Caribbean Crisis"" lasted thirteen months, not days, and it encompassed the larger threats to invade the island, begun in 1961 and repudiated only after October 1962 .
 The Soviets focused on the confrontation between the superpowers and left Cuban agency largely out of it . Like the U.S. officials, the Soviets also focused on confrontation .
 The Cuban perspective fills out the remainder of chapter 1 but of the book itself . The book is available now on Amazon .
 Cubans took a month to qualify the crisis, the authors argue, because the island had been living through several attacks from exiles in the past years . The authors argue that Cubans expected further attacks after October 1962 .
 The ""October Crisis,"" therefore, was merely the most important clash in a long series of traumas for Cubans . The October Crisis was the most significant clash in the long history of Cuban life .
 The crisis had consequences on Cuba's relations with the Soviet Union and the rest of the world at least until 1968 . The crisis was the Cuban response to the Soviet-led invasion of Cuba .
 Cuba supported insurgencies in Latin America and Africa in order to aggravate U.S. fears of widespread revolutionary threat and, thus, take pressure off Cuba . Largely against the will of Moscow, for instance, Cuba supported insurgency in Africa and Latin America .
 By 1967, wanting to turn the screw on a Fidel Castro who was galvanizing Latin American revolutionaries, through the martyrdom of the now-dead Guevara, the Soviets refused to raise fuel deliveries to Cuba, which partly explains the timing .
 Castro's political realism reasserted itself seven months after the speech . He gave public approval to the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, a divisive event among the world's socialist parties .
 The Cuban-Soviet relationship started to look very similar to the old CubanUnited States relationship . Perhaps the most fascinating and novel conclusion of the book is that the relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union began to look similar .
 Castro and other Cuban leaders harbored perhaps as much resentment against the Soviet Union as they did against the U.S. Castro said in a 1968 speech that he harbored resentment against Soviet Union .
 Cuban leaders felt that the Kremlin was paternalistic and unilateral towards Cubans . Cuban leaders considered themselves equal to other socialist peoples . They refused to accede to United States demands during the October Crisis .
 The irony hung heavy in Cuba when, in 1962, the Soviet Union had begun to act like the imperialist nation from which Cuba had just wrenched its independence . In 1962, Cuba had wrenched independence from the USSR .
 For a Cuban leadership hoping to regain some dignity in Latin America and on the world stage, full independence from both superpowers, it seemed, had never been an option .
 For all its venerable intentions, however, applying the concept of ""empathy"" has its limits . For example, applying "empathy" has its own limits .
 In the end, empathy--realistic or otherwise--appears to mean little more than openness to multiple cultural perspectives . Empathy is a goal that many scholars have achieved without needing to belabor the point or force a term .
 Historians may find Blight and Brenner's treatment of Cuban nationalism short on background . Moreover, historians may find it short of background .
 The authors place the October Crisis within the immediate context of economic embargo and sabotage . But they say little about the historical experiences that created Cuba's attitudes toward nationality, isolation, security, machismo, and anti-Americanism .
 Blight and Brenner use surrounding events to explain the speech and use the speech itself to argue that Cuba's bitter aftertaste from ""October"" influenced its behavior in the rest of the Cold War .
 Mario Lloyd, ""Soviets Close to Using A-Bomb in 1962 Crisis, Forum is Told,"" Boston Globe, 13 October 2002, A20.com .