 The Soviets also sent three fully-armed combat regiments to Cuba to fight alongside their Cuban allies . The Soviet Union also sent 3 fully-army combat units to the island .
 The uniformed military, including Taylor and Gen. Maxwell Taylor, were at the center of the campaign .
 Air Force chiefs were unanimously in favor of air strikes followed up by an invasion . Curtis LeMay, the legendary Air Force chief, was also on the side of the issue .
 He talked about using tactical nuclear weapons against an American invading force, and wiping out Guant&#225;namo . But he also took steps to avoid a confrontation .
 Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of Soviet missiles over Radio Moscow at 9m. That part of the deal remained secret for many years .
 Early histories of the missile crisis drew heavily on accounts by Kennedy aides who praised the president for his brilliant crisis management . Khrushchev had independently concluded that he was losing control over events, and needed to act quickly .
 As more evidence became available from American, Russian and Cuban sources, scholars and participants developed a more nuanced view . Mr Schlesinger wrote that Kennedy &#8220;dazzled the world . through a . combination of toughness and restraint, of will, nerve, and wisdom,
 A series of shifts in Russian statements about using nuclear weapons has led some analysts to believe that the Kremlin sees a nuclear exchange as a viable strategy .
 If he invades, President Vladimir V Putin is inviting a new global struggle with the West . Instead of inflaming him, the administration tried not to inflame him .
 Presidential speechwriter Theodore Sorensen and presidential speechwriter Maxwell Taylor .
 Khrushchev announced withdrawal of Soviet missiles over Radio Moscow at 9m. That part of the deal remained secret for many years .
 History of missile crisis drew heavily on accounts by Kennedy aides who praised the president for his brilliant crisis management . Khrushchev had independently concluded that he was losing control over events, and needed to act quickly .
 As more evidence became available from American, Russian and Cuban sources, scholars and participants developed a more nuanced view . Mr Schlesinger wrote that Kennedy .
 The crisis peaked on Oct. 11, when a series of startling events, including the shooting down of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba, suggested that neither Khrushchev nor Kennedy fully controlled their own military machines . The crisis was centered around the shooting of a spy plane by
 The October 1962 confrontation was the “most dangerous moment in human history’s history,” historian Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. described the confrontation as “the most dangerous moment” in history . The president sent nuclear-tipped missiles to Cuba in the summer
 Kennedy administration officials argued afterward that the Soviet leader acted for global strategic reasons . Kennedy administration said afterward that Kennedy administration .
 Prior to the missile crisis, the U.S. had around 3,500 nuclear warheads capable of reaching the Soviet Union, a 10-1 advantage over the Soviets . The United States now has around 10,000 nuclear warheads .
 Khrushchev built missile bases in Cuba capable of lobbing 60 nuclear warheads into the United States . The bases would have left him far short of achieving first strike capability . In memoirs he claimed he was motivated by the desire to defend the Cuban revolution .
 Kennedy administration supported an abortive invasion of Cuba by right-wing exiles at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Kennedy administration had launched a campaign of sabotage against the Castro regime known as Operation Mongoose .
 It will be a terrible blow to Marxism-Leninism, he said . He also had personal reasons for wanting to get even with Kennedy, whom he regarded as an inexperienced leader .
 The United States had stationed medium-range Jupiter missiles in Turkey, across the Black Sea from Khrushchev’s summer retreat in Sochi . The U.S. had stationed the missiles across the Turkish border .
 Khrushchev intended to keep the missile deployment secret until early November, when he would travel to Havana and present the Americans with a military fait accompli . The belated discovery of the Soviet missile deployment by an American U-2 on Oct. 31, threw Khrushchchev
 The president had earlier insisted that the United States could not accept the deployment of Soviet “offensive” weapons in Cuba . The U.S. had earlier said that the Cuban government should not accept that weapons were deployed .
 Kennedy knew that the Soviet missiles were not yet operational . He now had to find a way to get Khrushchev to back down, even at risk of nuclear war .
 President Barack Obama has a few days to consider his options . He has been in touch with a group of his closest advisers . Obama has been criticized for his handling of the White House .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm, included his brother Robert McNamara . McNamara's brother Robert was also on the ExComm . ExComm included Defense Secretary Robert N. McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk .
 The Soviet forces on Cuba were equipped with 98 tactical nuclear weapons . The weapons could have been used to wipe out an American invading force or the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo .
 The use of these weapons on Cuba could quickly have escalated to an all-out nuclear war . At first, Kennedy also favored air strikes against the missile sites .
 He then embraced a plan originally suggested by McNamara for a naval blockade around Cuba . It was a way of demonstrating American resolve while allowing time for negotiations with Khrushchev .
 Khrushchev initially adopted a bellicose position when he heard about the U.S. action . The president went on television at 7m. on Oct. to announce the blockade .
 The Soviets sent up MIG fighters to try to shoot the intruder down; the Alaska Air Defense Command scrambled nuclear-armed F-102 interceptors . The Soviets tried to shoot down the intruder, but Alaska Air Force Command responded by scrambling nuclear-army interceptors.
 In the Caribbean, a frazzled Soviet submarine commander considered firing his nuclear torpedo against United States destroyers attempting to bring him to the surface . In the meantime, Soviet troops brought nuclear-tipped cruise missiles to the periphery of the Guantánamo naval base .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to consider a nuclear first strike against the United States . Kennedy sent his brother Robert to meet with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. to offer a noninvasion pledge .
 Kennedy promised to withdraw United States Jupiters from Turkey within five months of a withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy made the promise without the knowledge of most members of the ExComm .