 Havana, Matanzas, Mariel, Nuevitas Bay, Santiago de Cuba, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, is Cuba's largest island .
 Arawak Indians inhabiting Cuba when Columbus landed on the island in 1492 died from diseases brought by sailors and settlers . Columbus landed the island on the coast of Cuba on the Spanish coast of the island .
 Havana's superb harbor made it a common transit point to and from Spain . Cuba's sugarcane industry boomed, requiring massive numbers of black slaves . Havana's harbor was a major transit point for Spain .
 A simmering independence movement turned into open warfare from 1867 to 1878 . Independence movement turned to open warfare between 1867 and 1878.
 In 1895, the poet Jos Marti led the struggle that finally ended Spanish rule . In 1898, the U.S. intervened in Cuba after the sinking of the battleship Maine in Havana .
 The United States occupation, which ended in 1902, suppressed yellow fever and brought large American investments . The U.S. occupation of the Philippines ended in 1901 .
 The 1901 Platt Amendment allowed the United States to intervene in Cuba's affairs . The U.S. did four times from 1906 to 1920 . The United States intervened in Cuba four times .
 In 1933, a group of army officers, including army sergeant Fulgencio Batista, overthrew President Gerardo Machado . The Batista government overthrew Machado in 1933 .
 Fidel Castro Ruz launched a revolution from his camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains in 1956 . Batista became president in 1940, running a corrupt police state . In 1956, Fidel Castro launched his revolution against Batista .
 Castro's brother Raul and Ernesto Guevara, an Argentine physician, were his top lieutenants . Castro was Castro's first president .
 The United States ended military aid to Cuba in 1958, and on New Year's Day 1959, Castro took over the government . Batista fled into exile and Castro took control of Cuba .
 Fidel Castro established military tribunals for political opponents and jailed hundreds . Fidel Castro's Cuba broke ties with the United States and with the Soviet Union . Castro established a military tribunal for opponents .
 Castro disavowed Cuba's 1952 military pact with the U.S., confiscated United States assets, established Soviet-style collective farms, and established Soviet style collective farms . Castro also disavowed Cuban military pact, confiscated U.K. assets and established collective farms.
 Castro formalized his alliance with the Soviet Union in 1961 . The United States broke relations with Cuba on Jan. 31, 1961, and Castro broke it with the Soviets .
 In 1961, a U.S.-backed group of Cuban exiles invaded Cuba . The Bay of Pigs disaster was the result of the invasion of Cuba by Cuban exilees .
 President Kennedy refused to give United States air support during the invasion . Planned during the Eisenhower administration, the invasion was given the go-ahead by President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy promised a United States blockade of Cuba to stop missile delivery . Kennedy promised to stop the missile delivery in Cuba . President Kennedy .
 The U.S. established limited diplomatic ties with Cuba on Sept., 1977, making it easier for Cuban Americans to visit the island . Six days later, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered the missile sites dismantled .
 Contact with more affluent Cuban Americans prompted a wave of discontent in Cuba, producing a flood of asylum seekers . Contact with the more affluent American prompted the wave of refugees in Cuba .
 Cuban refugees were swelled with prisoners, mental patients, homosexuals, and others unwanted by the Cuban government . Thousands of Cuban troops were sent to Angola during the 1980s . Cuban government fomented Communist revolutions around the world .
 Cuba's foreign trade also plummeted, producing a severe economic crisis . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of its foreign trade .
 In 1993, Castro permitted limited private enterprise, allowed Cubans to possess convertible currencies, and encouraged foreign investment in its tourist industry . Castro permitted private enterprise in 1993 .
 In March 1996, the U.S. tightened its embargo with the Helms-Burton Act . Christmas became an official holiday in 1997 as a result of Pope John Paul II's 1998 visit to Cuba .
 Cuban community had demanded that the boy remain in Miami rather than be returned to his father in Cuba . U.S. Cuban community has demanded that boy stay in Miami . The boy's father had been in Cuba for more than a year .
 In March and April 2003, Castro sent nearly 80 dissidents to prison with long sentences . The Bush administration tightened its embargo in June 2004, allowing Cuban Americans to return to Cuba only once every three years .
 In October, it was revealed that Castro has cancer and will not return to power . 81-year-old Castro released a public statement declaring that he was not healthy enough to campaign .
 The 81-year-old has ruled Cuba since leading a revolution in 1959 . He has ruled the country since leading the revolution in the 1950s . He said he would not accept another term as president .
 Ral Castro succeeded his brother, becoming the 21st president of Cuba on Feb., 2008 . Castro succeeded him in 2008, becoming Cuba's 21th president .
 At the UN in Feb.08, Foreign Minister Felipe Prez Roque signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . At the same time, Cubans began to win small rights in Cuba .
 The Covenants ensure citizens' political and civil freedom, and gaurantee the right to work, fair wages, social security, education, and high standards of physical and mental health . They also guarantee citizens' social security and education .
 The government relaxed land restrictions for private farmers in July 2008, in an effort to boost the country's poor food production . The United States Congress voted in March 2009 to repeal the long-standing restrictions on Cuban-Americans visiting Havana and sending money into the country .
 President Obama has signaled a willingness to establish warmer ties with Cuba . Castro made the surprise announcement in July 2010 that he plans to release 52 political prisoners .
 It was the first time since the 1959 revolution that someone other than the Castro brothers has been named to the position . The Castro brothers were elected to the post in 1959 .
 The appointment was made at the party's first congress in 14 years . It coincides with several changes being made to allow for more private enterprise in Cuba .
 Raul Castro started allowing Cubans to go into business for themselves in a variety of approved jobs, from accounting to food vendors . Cubans were allowed to work for themselves, including accounting and food vendors.
 The following month, the government began allowing real estate to be bought and sold for the first time since the revolution . Real estate was allowed to be purchased and sold in the days immediately following the revolution.
 A new law, applying only to permanent residents, went into effect on November 10 . The law applies only to those living in permanent residence .
 The law limits Cubans to owning one home in the city and one in the country . The law is an effort to prevent massive real estate holdings . Cubans are limited to owning two homes in one city and the other in one country .
 The new law also requires that all new real estate transactions be made through Cuban bank accounts . In December 2011, the government pardoned more than 2,900 prisoners .
 Of those pardoned, 86 were foreigners, but Alan Gross was not one of them . Gross was pardoned by the U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday . Gross is the only person to be pardoned in the country's history of pardoning .
 Gross, an American contractor, has served a 15-year sentence since 2009 for distributing satellite telephone equipment in Cuba . Gross, a contractor, was convicted of distributing satellite phone equipment in the country .
 Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba on March 26, 2012 . His case has dampened President Obama's efforts to improve relations between the United States and Cuba .
 The three-day visit came after years of tension between the church and the Cuban government . The Cuban government has been heavily criticized by the church for its policies .
 It was the first papal trip since Pope John Paul II visited 14 years ago . It was also the first visit since the pope's first visit to the Vatican .
 Around 200,000 attended the Mass in Santiago de Cuba, including people from as far as Miami . The Mass was attended by people from all over the world .
 In early 2013 Cubans would no longer be required to have an exit visa when leaving the country . One attendee was removed by security after he started shouting negative comments about the government .
 As of January 13, 2013, Cubans could leave the country on vacations or forever . This new policy was promised by President Ral Castro in 2011 as a way to answer calls for change .
 They would only need a valid passport and a visa from the country of their destination .
 Cubans could stay abroad longer, up to two years before they lose their citizenship and benefits . It also stated that Cubans can stay abroad more than two years . Cubans are allowed to stay in the United States for up to three years .
 The new policy also stated that Cubans could be stopped from leaving the country for ""defense and national security" reasons .
 The Cuban government freed U.S. aid contractor Alan Gross, who had been in captivity for five years, on Dec., 2014 . The new law suggests that while Castro and the Cuban government were answering the demands for change, they were also maintaining tight control of political dissidents .
 Gross had been sentenced to 15 years in prison in 2011 for his effort to create a way to communicate outside of the Cuban government's control . Gross was sentenced to a 15-year prison sentence in 2011 .
 There hasn't been any diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba since 1961 .
 The prisoner release was part of a deal negotiated in secret over 18 months . The prisoner's release is part of the deal negotiated by the government in secret .
 Talks began in early 2015 between the two countries over how to restore diplomatic relations after five decades . Pope Francis also hosted a meeting at the Vatican to help with the negotiations .
 Cuba asked the United States to remove its name from a list of states that sponsor terrorism . Cuba has asked the U.S. to remove the country's name from the list . Cuba says it is a sponsor of terrorism and wants its name removed .
 The United States insisted that its diplomats should be allowed to work freely and meet with dissidents in Cuba . The U.S. insisted that the diplomats should work freely .
 A second round of talks is scheduled for late Feb. to hammer out these issues and more . The talks are expected to take place in late February . The U.S. Senate is scheduled to meet with the White House this week .
 Reaction to the resumed relations with the U.S. has been mixed in Cuba . Reaction to resumed relations is mixed in the country .
 With diplomatic relations restored, the ban for Americans traveling to Cuba has been lifted . Some praised the move while others were skeptical .
 Before Dec.14, Americans could only travel to Cuba with permission from the U.S. State Department . The Cuban government has been tight-lipped about the embargo .
 After Dec.14, tourists from the U.S. still had to go as part of a religious, educational, and cultural group . The travel ban being lifted made it easier for Americans to visit Cuba .
 Internet access, an embassy, and the use of credit cards were soon available for the first time to assist Americans while in Cuba . Internet access and credit cards soon became available to Americans .
 The U.S. government began allowing Americans to bring small quantities of items back from Cuba, including cigars . Also, the United States government allowed small amounts of items to bring back .
 Cuban cigar makers estimated that their sales would increase from $3 million to $6 million in 2015 . President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro met at the Summit of the Americas in Panama .
 It was the first time the countries' leaders held a face-to-face meeting in more than 50 years . It was first time they had a meeting together since the 1950s .
 Obama and Castro have vowed to open embassies in both countries . Obama, Castro have pledged to open both embassies in Cuba and Mexico .
 Cuba removed Cuba from its list of state sponsors of terrorism in May 2015 . The U.S. removed the list of Cuba's list of terrorist sponsors in May of 2015 .
 Cuba and the U.S. announced on July 1, 2015, that embassies would open in Washington D.C. and Havana . The embassies will be located in both Havana and Washington DC .
 The reestablishment of embassies was another major step in rebuilding relations between the two countries . In early Feb.16, plans for President Obama to visit Cuba were announced .
 Obama and Cuban president Raul Castro appeared at a news conference together at the Revolutionary Palace in Cuba . Obama and Castro appeared together for the first time since 2009 .
 Both presidents challenged the policies of each other's country . While cordial, both were cordial . Both presidents were critical of the US government .
 Obama criticized Cuba's policy on human rights . Castro challenged the income gap in the U.S. and the country's failure to provide universal health care . Obama and Castro met in Havana .
 President Obama and his family attended a baseball game between the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban national team during their visit .
 Infoplease knows the value of having sources you can trust . Encouraging curious minds for nearly a century. Encourages curious minds .