 Participants seemed to dge the events of 1962 from the per>ective of the cooled political cliate of 1989 detente . To my disappointment, however, me of the participants seemed to . dge of the events . from the . events of the . 1962 from 1962 to 1989 det
 It seems clear, r instance, that the Kennedy Ad.inistration, under heavy political essures, was indeed planning to in*de Cuba in the fall of 1962, and that that . ie Kremlin sent the missiles to Cuba » forestall an attack .
 Robert S IcNamara, who was John F Kenedy’s Defense Secretary, denied that Washington had any such plans . But Robert S. Icamara said Washington had no such plans.
 The Soviets managed to get 20 nulear warheads to Cuba, Another 20 aboard a ship blocked by the Inited States Navy . Another 20 /ere aboard the ship blocked .
 During the crisis, Moscow had only . t) intercontinental ballistic missiles .n Soviet soil . During the . crisis, the . Soviet Union had only t.intercontinental ballistic missile missiles . n Soviet soil.
 Her re Salinger, former press secreary lo John F Kennedy, is senior edio r, Europe, for ABC News . At the time, American intelligence thought they had 75 to 100. intelligence thought .
 The Kremlin had stationed 40,000 Soviet troops inside Cuba, four times more than the Americans believed it had there at the time . And we learned for the first time that the Kremlin had posted 40,500 Soviet troops .
 The nuclear warheads had never been attached to the missiles, they said . But they convinced the conference that the warheads were never attached to them .
 Soviet sources say conversations with Havana convinced them that the Cuban leader did not ask for a missile launch . Soviet sources said that conversations with Cuba after the crisis convinced them they did in fact want to launch the missiles .
 The conference helped fill many gaps in the historical record, but some questions remain . The conference was held in New York City .
 The U.S. didn't in some sense provoke a confrontation by planning a second invasion of Cuba, even after the embarrassing Bay of Pigs disaster in 1961 . One major question is whether the United States .
 President Obama's insistence that the U.S. never intended to invade Cuba flies in the face of the facts . But his insistence that he didn't intend to invade the island, either before or during the crisis, is wrong .
 Attorney General warned two days after the Bay of Pigs that the failed attack might lend to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . For reasons that remain a mystery, the Attorney General, Robert F Kennedy, warned .
 Cuba at that time was a sharp political issue and there was growing pressure on the White House to do something to get rid of Mr Castro . The White House was under pressure to remove Mr Castro from Cuba .
 The Administration’s response was to create a vast covert program called Operation Mongoose . The program was created by the U.S. Department of State Department .
 Its aim was to destabilize Cuba and bring down the Castro regime before Oct. 1962 . The Cuban regime was overthrown by the Castro government .
 Operation Mongoose brought together all the elements needed for a military overthrow of the Castro regime . Edward G Lansdale handed lo the President on Feb., 1962, clearly indicates that Operation Mongoose was successful .
 A report on the Cuban crisis by the commander in chief of the Atlantic Forces has been declassified . The report was declassified recently by Adm. Adm., the head of NATO's Atlantic Forces . The U.S. has never been involved in Cuba since 1961 .
 Operation Mongoose is the name of Operation Mongoose . The operation was set up under the framework of Operation Mongoose. McCone was tasked to undertake . "massive activity" under the . framework of the operation . McCone will undertake . .
 This information clarifies Mr Khrushchev’s reasons for sending a message to President Kennedy through his back channel operator, the K.G.B. agent .
 President Kennedy would never have ordered an air strike against Cuba or an invasion of the country, he says . MK McNamara and his colleagues argued that even at the moments of highest tension, Kennedy would not have ordered such a strike . The president would have never ordered a strike at Cuba or
 I agree that John Kennedy was not the kind of President who would have wanted to launch a military attack . John Kennedy would have not wanted to attack the U.S. in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev offered to pull out his missiles if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba . The day before, the United States had received a message from Mr Khrisschev offering to pull .
 The Soviet leader added that we should withdraw our Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey . But then we received a second, much tougher message from the Soviet leader .
 President Kennedy had already ordered the missiles removed from Turkey, but the pullout had been delayed at the request of the Turkish Government . The Turks had just spent a lot ofimonej^nstalling the missiles and didn't Want to look foolish by dismantling them immediately .
 Mr Kennedy was anxious to avoid the appearance of acceding to Mr Khrushchev’s demands .
 Eventually, he told Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles would be pulled out, but not as part of the deal . The Jupiter missiles were pulled out of the Soviet Union's hands .
 It was clear at the meeting that day of the executive committee of the Ihe National Security Council that we were heading for escalation. "It was clear that the ... situation was going to escalate," he said .
 Maxwell D Taylor, . called for an air strike against the missile sites on Monday, Oct. Oct., and an Invasion of Cuba soon afterwards .
 McNamara says no air strike or invasion would have been ordered, but that there might have been a tightening of the naval blockade . McNamara: 'No air strike would've been ordered'
 He says he left the White House that night that night he had the impression that he might not be alive the next Saturday . But even he says that when he left that night, he had a feeling he might be alive that Saturday .
 The following morning, Mr Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles . The next morning, of course, the withdrawal .
 Pressure from a number of members of the executive committee, not only General Taylor, might have forced the President to take a military action that he did not want to accept . President Obama may have been reluctant to take military action .
 Two leaders reached an understanding that nuclear war was unthinkable . Rather, two leaders reached a understanding that such a nuclear war would be unthinkable .
 The rapid evolution of relations after the crisis demonstrates that both leaders wanted to work toward a better understanding of each other, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Both leaders want to work together to improve relations"
 If Kennedy had HVed and if Khrushchev had retained power, they might have brought nuclear arms to a low level on both sides .