 The biography and historical perspective are based on text in The Presidents (National Park Service, 1977), edited by Robert Ferris and James Charleton and revised by Lewis L Gould .
 Henry Gwiazda, Janice Hargett and Janice McCarthy are featured in this week's edition of The Daily Mail . This week's gallery includes a selection of personalised galleries .
 All photographs are from the collections of the Dwight D Eisenhower Library unless otherwise noted . The Eisenhower Library is home to the Eisenhower Library .
 Eisenhower was a popular World War II military hero who had achieved a distinguished Army career . Eisenhower led the nation during two terms of international peace and domestic prosperity . He was the Thirty-fourth President 1953-61 .
 He negotiated an armistice in Korea, furthered international disarmament, reduced cold war tensions, and launched the U.S. space program . He also furthered the disarmament of the Korean War .
 He emphasized governmental economy and decentralization of federal projects . He emphasized cooperation with state and local government and private enterprise .
 Some have criticized him for not exercising greater leadership in the area of civil rights . He did send federal troops to Little Rock, AR, to enforce the courtordered desegregation of Central High School .
 He was a strong and effective President whose historical reputation has improved greatly since leaving office . President Obama's reputation has since improved since he left office . He was an effective President .
 Dwight Eisenhower poses with his parents, David and Ida, and brothers Edgar, Milton, Milton , Earl , Arthur, and Roy in 1902 . Eisenhower died in 1953 at the age of 65 . Eisenhower was the first president of the United States .
 The family belonged to the River Brethren religious sect, an offshoot of the Mennonites . The family was a Mennonite Mennanite sect .
 He met Ida Stover, a bright young woman from Virginia, at the University of Virginia . Stover was a student at the U.S. College of Technology in Virginia .
 The two returned to Dickinson County to open a dry goods store in the small farming community of Hope, KS, some 20 miles from Abilene . The two were married within a year, and the newlyweds returned to the area .
 The business failed when disastrous weather ruined the farm economy, and David found work with the Kansas-Pacific Railroad . David worked for the railroad .
 Dwight D Eisenhower was born on October 14, 1890, in Denison, Texas, during the brief period his father worked outside the state for the railroad . Eisenhower was the third son of David and Ida Eisenhower .
 Ike and his five brothers received strong religious training from his pacifist parents . Ike's pacifist and devout parents were devout Christians . Ike was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Ike attended public schools and was a good student who excelled in sports . Ike was born into a family of six children .
 Ike worked for 2 years at the Belle Springs Creamery with his father to help put his brother through college . Ike worked 2 years with his dad to help pay for his brother to go to college . After graduation from high school, Ike worked at the creamery .
 Eisenhower applied to West Point and Annapolis after learning about the “free education” offered by the U.S. military academies . Edgar was expected to return the favor, but instead he applied to Annapolis .
 He was too old for admission to the Naval Academy but was accepted by the Army . In June 1911 he reported to West Point, West Point .
 Little did he know he was embarking on a course of public service that would span half a century . "I'm going to be a hero in the public service," he says .
 At West Point, Ike was an above average student whose first love was athletics . Ike's first love is athletics .
 Eisenhower graduated in the top third of his class and was commissioned an infantry officer with the class of 1915 . Eisenhower was inspired by his classmates to continue his studies .
 During his first assignment as a second lieutenant at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, TX, Eisenhower met Mamie Geneva Doud of Denver, Colorado . Eisenhower married Mamie in 1953 .
 Ike camps with friends along the Smoky Hill River just south of Abilene, Texas, ca.07.07 . The first child died in infancy, an event Ike's first child was an infant . Ike campsed with friends with friends near the Smoke Hill River near Ab
 Second Lieutenant Eisenhower married Mamie Geneva Doud of Denver, Colorado in 1916 . Eisenhower was married to Mamie Doud in 1918 .
 Eisenhower was frustrated at not serving overseas during World War I, but impressed superiors nonetheless . Eisenhower impressed his superiors at the end of the war .
 Only eight of his classmates were promoted to the rank of temporary lieutenant colonel by war’s end . His performance was so outstanding that he was one of only eight classmates to be promoted by war's end .
 The Eisenhowers fell in love with the Gettysburg area and some 30 years later would purchase a farm there . It was the only home they ever owned, and it was their only home in the area .
 Eisenhower further enhanced his reputation among the Army’s senior officers with his excellent staff work and planning . Promotion was slow between the two world wars, but he continued to be promoted .
 John J Pershing preparing a guide to European battlefields for the American Battle Monuments Commission . Pershing's guide is based on his work on battlefields in Europe .
 After graduating from the Army War College in 1928, he served in Washington, DC, as executive officer for the Assistant Secretary of the War until 1933 . Major Eisenhower was then appointed chief military aide to Gen. Eisenhower .
 The 4 Army Chief of Staff was assistant military adviser to the fledgling Philippine army . In 1935, he followed MacArthur to the Philippines, serving as assistant military advisor to the new army . He served in the Philippines with MacArthur .
 With war looming, he was a key officer in the famous Louisiana Maneuvers of 1941 . The largest peacetime military exercise ever held in the United States .
 He received his first star in September 1941, just 9 weeks before the attack on Pearl Harbor . He was awarded his first Star of the Stars .
 When the United States entered the war, Eisenhower was immediately called to Washington to serve in the War Plans Division of the War Department . He began developing the plan for United States military action in the European Theater .
 Chief of Staff George C Marshall suggested that Eisenhower lead the U.S. forces in the endeavor . Greatly impressed by this work, he suggested that the United States lead the effort .
 Eisenhower’s direction of the invasions of North Africa, Sicily, and Italy brought him international fame . Eisenhower was one of the world's leading military figures of the war .
 In December 1943 Eisenhower was appointed Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, and displayed a genius for running the wartime coalition . Eisenhower was the supreme commander of the Allied Forces in Europe .
 The Supreme Allied Commander consults with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in France in March 1945 .
 D-Day invasion of France signalled the beginning of the final phase of the European war . On June 6, 1944, the French capital was invaded by Allied forces in Normandy .
 Eisenhower promoted to the newly created five-star rank of General of the Army on December 20, 1944 . Germany would surrender 11 months later in May 1945, but first Eisenhower would be promoted .
 Eisenhower viewed his leadership of the Normandy invasion as the single greatest accomplishment of his life . He felt humbled by the fame it brought him . Eisenhower said he was humbled at the fame his actions brought him to fame .
 Eisenhower headed the American occupation forces in Germany until November 1945, when he returned to the U.S. to serve as Army Chief of Staff . Eisenhower was the American President of the German Army in 1945 .
 During the next 3 years, he oversaw peacetime demobilization and the integration of the Army into the newly formed Department of Defense .
 His high school nickname of ""Ike” and his distinctive grin were trademarks of his winning personality . His winning personality was his winning smile and trademarked grin .
 Crusade in Europe was a bestseller . His memoirs of his service in Europe were bestsellers . He died at the age of 92 .
 Late in 1950 President Truman asked him to return to active duty to command the military 7 forces of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The organization had been formed the year before .
 Ike was persuaded to return to the United States in June 1952 and to cast his lot with the Republicans . Ike returned to the U.S. and joined the Republicans in 1952 .
 He gained the party's nomination on the first ballot and chose a young Senator from California, Richard M Nixon, as his running mate . Nixon was elected to the White House in 1968 .
 Eisenhower proved to be a popular campaigner whose political views were those of the ‘middle way” between Old Guard Republican conservatism and the “big government” philosophy of the New Deal and Fair Deal Democrats .
 His promise to go immediately to Korea if elected in search of an end to the conflict was reassuring to the war-weary public .
 Mamie Doud Eisenhower was well prepared for her husband's new responsibilities . Mamie was well-prepared for her new role as president of the nation .
 Mamie first moved into the spotlight when her husband was named commanding general of U.S. forces in Europe in 1942 . Mamie became a national celebrity when she married Gen. George S. Eisenhower in 1944 .
 She felt it her duty to serve as a role model to the other war wives waiting for their husbands' return from overseas .
 She led a simple existence, avoiding an active social life, and volunteered time to wait tables at the Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines Club . She lived a simple life, avoiding social contact with others .
 She saw Ike only once during his 3-year absence and wrote him almost daily . She said she saw him only once . She saw him again during his absence .
 The popular hero won a landslide victory over Democratic Presidential nominee, Adlai E Stevenson Maryland State Police . Eisenhower won the election in a landslide .
 Eisenhower supported federal aid for educational programs and school construction . During his administration, Eisenhower supported education programs and construction .
 Mamie’s influence as a fashion trendsetter was apparent at the White House reception for the finalists in the I960 Betty Crocker Homemaker of Tomorrow contest .
 National Park Service photo taken from Dwight D Eisenhower Library . Eisenhower Library son. son.
 When her husband became President, Mamie did not seek out a public role as first lady . Mamie didn't seek to be a public figure .
 She was the wife of the NATO commander who had entertained all the royalty of Europe . In her view, being the best hostess possible was her primary' duty, she said .
 She was “commander in chief” in the residence, quickly establishing her rule over the staff . She quickly established her rule . She was quickly established .
 She was far from an activist first lady but seemed perfect for the times . She was the first lady of her generation .
 The newly elected President w'as a moderate who quickly recognized that he would have to accept much of the New Deal and Fair Deal programs that Roosevelt and Truman had achieved . President Truman was a moderate .
 Eisenhower, who had led the largest armed force the world has ever known, was also intimately aware of the high price paid for national defense .
 Ike feared the nation would become bankrupt if its leaders w r ere unable to control the military budget . Ike feared he would be bankrupt if leaders failed to control budget control . Ike: "I'm not afraid of the nation becoming bankrupt. I'm afraid the nation will become bankrupt"
 Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and not clothed . "Every gun that makes, makes, and every rocket fires, is a theft,"
 The President's ""Modern Republicanism" sought to achieve a balanced budget and to scale back the amount of social welfare legislation and the extent of government regulation .
 Eisenhower had a Republican majority in both houses of Congress for the first 2 years of his Presidency . But for the remainder of his time in office, he had to w r ork with a Democrat-controlled Congress .
 Eisenhower administration achieved a good deal of important domestic legislation . Generally, the President and Capitol Hill cooperated constructively .
 Eisenhower signed law's broadening Social Security coverage and increasing the minimum wage . Eisenhower signed a law that broadens coverage of Social Security and increased minimum wage. Eisenhower signed the law in 1953 . Eisenhower also signed a bill that expanded Social Security's coverage of the elderly .
 The St. Lawrence Seaway is a joint American-Canadian venture . The Seaway was opened to ship traffic in 1959 .
 The President also supported federal aid for local health assistance, school construction, and educational programs, particularly for 7 . The President discusses the Suez Crisis with Secretary of State John Foster Dulles .
 Eisenhower proudly displays a brown trout, which he caught during a fishing trip to West Greenwich, RI, in September 1958 . Eisenhower caught the fish while fishing in West Greenwich .
 President Eisenhower expanded the national park system with his “Mission 66” program . Eisenhower expanded national parks in the 1960s with his "Mission 66" program . President Eisenhower also expanded the park system in the sciences .
 Eisenhower's interstate highway system was a key program of the Eisenhower years . Interstate highway system is a key part of Eisenhower's highway program .
 In 1919 Lieutenant Colonel Eisenhower had participated in the Army’s famous transcontinental truck convoy across America, a journey that took 3 months . The journey highlighted the pitiful state of the nation's highway system . In 1919 the Army's famous truck convoy took three months to complete .
 Eisenhower began thinking about the need for good, two-lane highways . The convoy prompted Eisenhower to begin thinking about highways . Eisenhower was inspired by his wartime service in Germany .
 The President signed the Federal Aid Highway Act on June 29, 1956, and thus began the biggest peacetime construction project of any description ever undertaken by the U.S. The Federal Highway Act was signed by President Eisenhower in 1956 .
 Eisenhower is recognized as the father of the modern interstate highway system . Eisenhower is credited with the creation of the Interstate Highway System . Today, the system has over 40,000 miles of interstate highways .
 His administration lowered individual and corporate taxes, abolished the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, stressed reduction of the federal budget . His administration also rejected proposals for public utility dam projects .
 The 49th and 50th stars were added to the United States flag when he welcomed Alaska and Hawaii into the Union . During his administration, he added the 50th and 49th stars .
 Eisenhower was a strong proponent of the United States national park system . Eisenhower was an avid outdoorsman and a strong advocate of the U.S. national parks system .
 He believed it was the government’s responsibility to preserve and manage these national treasures for the enjoyment of all Americans .
 In 1956 he announced a 10-year program, called “Mission 66,” which would increase funding and expand the nation’s park system . In 1956, President Eisenhower announced the program, which was called Mission 66 .
 Previous administrations had attempted to make progress through legislation that was blocked by opposition from southern Democrats . Previous administrations have been blocked by southern Democrats in the past .
 Eisenhower ordered an end to segregation in the District of Columbia and on military installations . Eisenhower thought that the executive branch should first “get its own house in order,”
 His efforts to integrate the military completed a process begun by President Truman in 1948 . President Truman began the integration of the military in 1947 .
 Foreign affairs attracted most of Eisenhower’s attention during his first term . He spent most of his time focusing on foreign affairs .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was a highly visible policymaker, but the President exercised the real power in rendering decisions in this area . President John Reagan exercised real power, says historian John Avlon .
 While maintaining a strong defensive military posture, the new President sought to lessen cold war tensions . President Obama sought to ease tensions with Russia .
 The Commander in Chief aboard the nuclear submarine USS Seawolf off the coast of Newport, RI, on September 26, 1957 . Fulfilling his campaign promise, he went to Korea after the election .
 Eisenhower oversaw the expansion of the United States military’s nuclear capability w hile simultaneously promoting peaceful uses of atomic energy . The U.S. armistice ended the conflict in 1953 .
 The following year, the United States joined the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization . The U.S. joined the collective security arrangement among anti-Communist governments .
 Eisenhower resisted the pressure inside his own administration for military' involvement in Southeast Asia . Eisenhower wisely resisted pressure from the White House for military involvement in the region .
 He would not support France's ongoing colonial war because the French government would not announce publicly its intention to grant independence to Vietnam . Vietnam would not be granted independence by France .
 Eisenhower correctly felt that the Vietnamese would “transfer their hatred of the French to us” if the U.S. replaced France as an occupying force . The Vietnamese would be “hated” by the United States, Eisenhower said .
 Eisenhower extended economic and military assistance to the government of South Vietnam after France withdrew its military forces in 1954 .
 U.S. would fall victim to temptation of sending troops to fight communism on the shores of Asia . Unfortunately, subsequent administrations would fall prey to temptation .
 Joseph Stalin died 6 weeks after Eisenhower took office . Eisenhower quickly took the opportunity to extend the olive branch to the Soviet government .
 Eisenhower: “The hunger for peace is too great, the hour in history too late” for governments to give their people mere empty promises or gestures . Eisenhower said in his April 1953 “Chance for Peace” speech, “the hunger for . peace is . too
 Eisenhower's initiative led to a gradual easing of East-West tensions during the early years of his Presidency . Eisenhower’s initiative was led to an easing of tensions between the two countries .
 In 1955 the new Soviet leaders agreed with the other three occupying powers to sign a treaty creating an independent Austria . The treaty was signed by France, Great Britain, and the United States .
 There was talk of peaceful coexistence between capitalism and communism . There was also talk of the possibility of coexistence of capitalism and Communism .
 Eisenhower: The growing nuclear arsenals of the U.S. and the Soviet Union created a sense of urgency . Eisenhower: "The growing nuclear arsenal" of the United States and Soviet Union was created by the Cold War .
 He tried to obtain an agreement with the Soviet Union limiting nuclear arms and halting testing . He also tried to get a deal with the Soviets to limit nuclear arms .
 He proposed to the U.N. in 1953 what he called an ‘Atoms for Peace” program . He envisioned the peaceful use of atomic energy in developing countries .
 His efforts eventually led to the creation of the International Atomic Energy Agency in 1956 . The IAEA was created by President Eisenhower .
 Eisenhower met in 1955 with French, British, and Soviet leaders at a summit conference in Geneva, Switzerland . The conference was the first since the 1945 Potsdam Conference in 1945 .
 The meeting of the Big Four focused on the German question and other East-West issues facing the former World War II allies . The meeting was held in New York City .
 Eisenhower proposed to the Soviets an ""Open Skies” plan, which entailed the interchange of military installation blueprints and mutual rights of aerial reconnaissance and inspection . The plan was a surprise move, which involved the use of military blueprints .
 Geneva Summit contributed to the continuation of a short-lived thaw in relations between the U.S. and the West . Although the Soviets rejected ‘Open Skies,’ the Geneva Summit added to the thaw .
 In 1993, the United States and Russia implemented a program of mutual nuclear inspections . The U.S. and Russia now have a nuclear program of inspections .
 In 1956 the Russians put down a revolt in Hungary, the United States offered asylum to refugees of the uprising . The U.S. offered asylum in Hungary to refugees fleeing the Russian invasion .
 The crisis in Hungary arose in the midst of Eisenhower’s campaign for a second Presidential term . The crisis was the beginning of Eisenhower's second term in Hungary .
 The election of 1956 found Eisenhower the dominant figure on the political landscape . Eisenhower's victory in 1956 was the first time he had been elected president .
 In 1953-54 the Senator continued his ongoing anticommunism crusade against the new administration . In 1954-54 he continued his anti-communist crusade .
 The President did not attack McCarthy directly but allowed the Senator to make political blunders that destroyed his own credibility . McCarthy's credibility was destroyed by the blunders he made in the Senate .
 Eisenhower's unwillingness to counter McCarthy's more reckless allegations hurt the administration . Eisenhower’s unwillingness to fight McCarthy's claims hurt Eisenhower's administration, he says .
 Eisenhower also surmounted major health problems in the 1956 Presidential race . Eisenhower also faced major health issues in the 1952 Presidential race.
 He had suffered a serious heart attack in September 1955 and had intestinal operation in June 1956 . By fall he had recovered enough to carry on a reelection campaign .
 The Democrats renominated Stevenson, but he lost to the popular incumbent President by an even more substantial margin than in 1952 . Stevenson was the Democratic nominee in 1952, but lost by a larger margin than 1952 .
 The foreign crises that eaipted during the later stages of the campaign sealed Eisenhower’s triumph . Few voters were willing to switch administrations while fighting raged in Hungary and along the Suez .
 Eisenhower created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in 1958 . The agency was created to reopen the Suez Canal in order to help reopen the canal . Eisenhower created it in 1958 to help the U.S. nation reopen the Canal .
 The principled stand Eisenhower took against his own allies, whom he thought were violating Egypt’s national sovereignty, was well received by Third World nations . Eisenhower took a principled stand against the allies of Egypt .
 In 1957 Eisenhower announced what became known as the ‘Eisenhower Doctrine,’ which committed the U.S. to helping Middle Eastern countries resist communism .
 The next year United States forces briefly intervened in Lebanon at the request of the Lebanese President . The U.S. intervened in the country's first intervention in Lebanon since 1982 .
 The Middle Eastern problem would remain an intractable one for U.S. policymakers . The Middle East would remain a problem for American policymakers .
 The second term brought more foreign and domestic problems and fewer political successes than the President had enjoyed during his first 4 years . President Obama's second term brings more foreign problems than his first term .
 In October 1957, the Soviets launched Sputnik, the first earth satellite, in the Soviet Union's first satellite . The first satellite was launched by the Soviets in 1957 .
 The United States would counter 4 months later with the launching of its own satellite, Explorer I, but the psychological defeat aroused the country . The U.S. would counter .
 The President created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in 1958 .
 Eisenhower did not advocate a crash program to regain the lead in space from the Soviet Union . Ever the moderate, Eisenhower didn't advocate a return to space .
 At his direction, secret U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had been overflying the Soviet Union with regularity since July 4, 1956 . What he could not share with his countrymen was the fact that, at his . direction, the U.2 had been . at his direction .
 "Because of this intelligence source, he was well aware of the limits of the Soviet military threat," he said .
 Eisenhower knew that the U.S. would soon begin a reconnaissance satellite program . Eisenhower also knew r that the United States would soon start a satellite program as well as continue the U-2 missions .
 By launching Sputnik first, the Soviets had established the principle of “freedom of space,” which precluded any grounds for future protest they might have lodged against overhead surveillance by the U.S. Ironically, by launching Sputsnik first . The Soviets had already established
 Civil rights confronted Eisenhower with hard choices in his second term . Civil rights faced a tough time in Eisenhower's second term as president .
 In Brown Board of Education of Topeka, the Supreme Court had declared segregation in public schools to be unconstitutional . The Supreme Court in Topeka declared segregation unconstitutional .
 Eisenhower has been criticized by some historians for not lending his moral authority to the 1954 court ruling . Eisenhower has not been criticized for his role in the decision .
 In September 1957 he deployed federal troops to Little Rock, AR, to implement the court-ordered enrollment of blacks at Central High School . Local and state authorities tried to block the action .
 Eisenhower signed into law the Civil Rights Act of 1957 . Eisenhower signed the act that same year as the civil rights act .
 During the Eisenhower administration, black Americans began turning toward demonstrations and sit-ins to express their demands for equality . The act created a Civil Rights Commission along with other provisions and was the first significant We protest I School St.
 Eisenhower meets with Martin Luther King, Jr. and A Philip Randolph in the Oval Office on June 23, 1958 . Eisenhower met with King, Randolph and other civil rights leaders .
 Nikita Khrushchev and his wife join the Eisenhowers at a state dinner during the Soviet Premier’s September 1959 visit to the U.S. piece of federal legislation .
 In I960 he supported another bill providing voter registration protection for blacks . He supported a bill to protect black voters from discrimination .
 Critics say that the President's overall record on civil rights did little to meet the demands of the black community . Despite these actions, his critics say that his overall record is not good .
 The Democratic opposition increased its majority in the Senate . A number of hopefuls for the I960 Democratic Presidential nomination vied for public attention .
 On the Republican side, Vice President Nixon seemed the clear frontrunner . Nixon seemed to be a clear frontrunner for the nomination .
 Fulfilling a 1954 commitment to Nationalist China, the President backed that government’s resistance to Communist China’�s bombardment of the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu .
 Eisenhower invited Premier Nikita Khrushchev to tour the United States . Eisenhower invited the Soviet Union's premier to visit the U.S. Eisenhower was the prime minister of Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 In May I960 the promise of a relaxation of international tensions faded . The promise of an international relaxation of tensions faded in the past .
 After an American U-2 reconnaissance jet was shot down inside the Soviet Union, Khrushchev abruptly shot it down . The incident occurred in the wake of the U.S. reconnaissance jet being shot down in the USSR . The plane was the first U.2 to be shot down
 White House successors often consulted Eisenhower about matters of state . Paris summit meeting canceled the reciprocal trip Eisenhower planned to visit the Soviet Union .
 Tensions flared elsewhere in the world as political factions clashed in Laos and secessionist and revolutionary elements fought in the former Belgian Congo just after the nation achieved independence .
 Disagreements between the U.S. and Cuba led to a rupture in diplomatic relations . Fidel Castro’s government began favoring the Soviet Union . The United States and Cuba broke diplomatic relations in 1953 .
 Eisenhower had sent large amounts of economic aid and some military assistance to South Vietnam . The total number of U.S. military advisers in South Vietnam was well under 1,000 .
 The I960 election of John F Kennedy was a great disappointment to Eisenhower . Eisenhower was disappointed by the outcome of the election in I960 .
 His campaigning for Nixon in the latter stages of the election had helped to make the result very close .
 The election of Massachusetts senator was a disappointment to Eisenhower, who had campaigned for Vice President Richard Nixon . Eisenhower campaigned for Richard Nixon, but was disappointed .
 The image of Eisenhower golfing was a popular one during his Presidency . National Park Service photograph from the Dwight D Eisenhower Library .
 Eisenhower is seen less as a grandfatherly, golfing-playing President and more as an active Chief Executive skilled at the “hidden hand” style of governing . The increased availability of his Presidential records, however, has made him more popular .
 Eisenhower's resistance to political pressure for increased federal spending was an important achievement . Eisenhower resisted political pressure to increase federal spending throughout his presidency . Eisenhower was President Eisenhower's first President .
 He balanced the budget in 3 of the 7 full fiscal years during which he served . No time in the other years did the deficit exceed 2. percent of the gross national product .
 His conservative position on taxes and spending, while politically unpopular, ensured that there was a balance or surplus in the government’s fiscal accounts, except during recession . His conservative stance on taxes was politically unpopular but ensured there was always a balanced budget .
 His accomplishment is all the more remarkable in view of the economic records of subsequent Presidents . President Obama's economic record is remarkable in light of his economic record .
 Out of office, Ike retired to his farm in Gettysburg, PA, and wrote his memoirs . Ike retired from office to write a book about his experiences .
 He enjoyed being a gentleman farmer, raising purebred Angus cattle, and spending time with his four grandchildren . He enjoyed raising pure bred Angus cattle .
 His successors consulted him on important matters of state . During his retirement years, his successors in the White House often consulted him . President Obama often consults him on issues of state policy .
 In the 1960s Eisenhower’s historical standing suffered in the shadow of the John F Kennedy mystique . In the 60s Eisenhower's historical standing was in the shadows of the JFK mystique. In the 1970s, Eisenhower's legacy was tarnished by the Kennedy scandal .
 A poll of historians ranked Eisenhower as a “below average” Chief Executive when compared to all who had held the office before him . Shortly after he left office, historians ranked him as "below average" Eisenhower .
 He was perceived as a grandfatherly, golfplaying, caretaker President who had served merely as chairman of the board during his tenure in the White House .
 Some 30 years later, Eisenhower has achieved a “near great” ranking in the scholarly community . Eisenhower's ranking is now considered a "near great" ranking .
 The series of “failed Presidencies” (an assassination, the Vietnam War, Watergate) that followed his made Eisenhower’s 8 years of peace and prosperity look very good in comparison . The series was a series of "failed presidencies"
 Growing evidence that Eisenhower was an engaged leader who set the policy of his administration . Also, as his Presidential files have become available for research at the Eisenhower Library .
 Historians and political scientists began crediting him with a ‘hidden hand’ style of governing that left few public traces of his efforts but brought impressive results . Historians, political scientists have credited him with having a 'hidden hand'
 Dwight D Eisenhower handled the Presidency with skill and determination, and his historical position is likely to remain secure and even improve in the years ahead . Eisenhower handled his job with skill, determination and determination .
 Collectively, the five buildings, located on a park-like mall, are known as the Eisenhower Center . The Eisenhower Center is located in the Eisenhower Mall .
 A larger-than-life bronze statue of General of the Army Dwight D Eisenhower provides a central focus for the 22-acre site . A grouping of five monumental pylons defines the eastern boundary of the complex .
 The Eisenhower Center was developed through the efforts of many individuals over a span of five decades . Built entirely with private funds (as are all Presidential libraries in the National Archives), the Eisenhower Center is .
 At the end of World War II, a number of Kansans who w r anted to honor Eisenhower for his wartime service organized the Eisenhower Foundation . The Eisenhower Foundation was established in 1945 .
 Eisenhower brothers donated the family home to the foundation . Eisenhower's mother, Ida Stover Eisenhower, died in 1946 . The family home is located on the southern edge of town .
 The Eisenhower The Dwight D Eisenhower Library home from 1898 until 1946 . The modest three-bedroom dwelling was built in 1888 by an Abilene schoolteacher . It witnessed the growth of Arthur, Edgar, Dwight, Roy, Earl, and Milton Eisenhower .
 The Eisenhower boyhood home is furnished with the original furniture and artifacts enjoyed by the Eisenhower family . The home is a classic example of the two-story clapboard, carpenter-designed home constructed throughout the Midwest .
 The first building project of the Eisenhower Foundation, the museum, was begun in 1952, the year in which Eisenhower first won the Presidency . The museum is the first museum in the museum .
 Completed in 1954, the building set the architectural precedent that all subsequent buildings at the center would follow . The building was constructed of Kansas limestone .
 The addition of an east wing in 1971 doubled the museum’s size, providing more than 30,000 square feet of exhibit space .
 This bronze statue of General of the Army Eisenhower serves as a focal point for the Eisenhower Center . Dedicated in June 1985, this bronze statue was dedicated to Eisenhower in 1985 .
 The Eisenhower Museum features more than 30,000 objects from Ike’s boyhood, 40-year military career, and two-term Presidency . Ike's boyhood and 40 years of presidency are included in the museum .
 The museum’s galleries bring to life the ‘Happy Days’ of the 1950s during which Eisenhower was President . The museum's galleries are filled with photos of the 'Happy Days' of Eisenhower .
 The museum's 35,000 artifacts constitute a largely untapped source of research materials for students of military, political, and art history . Approximately one-third of the artifacts are on display at any given time .
 One of the most striking components of the museum’s holdings is the collection of orders, awards, and medals presented to Eisenhower during and after the war . Eisenhower's medals and medals are among the most impressive collection of memorabilia .
 The Britt Brown Small Arms Collection contains examples of most U.S. military small arms used during World War II . The collection also includes many of the ancillary items used with the weapons .
 A large collection of political cartoons, consisting of original drawings, and a vast array of campaign objects, including posters, buttons, and jewelry . The cartoons reflect the political issues, events, and personalities of the 1950s .
 The museum’s fine collection of original art includes paintings by Eisenhower and other artists, prints from several centuries, sculpture, art glass, tapestries and ceramics .
 Its oriental art objects include such items as scrolls, cloisonne, and lacquer work . It is also known for its scroll work and lacqué work .
 Of special interest are several bronzes and paintings by western artists . Of particular interest are bronzes, paintings and bronzes by Western artists .
 The museum’s remaining holdings include philatelic and numismatic items of note . The museum's remaining holdings are philateic and numistatic items .
 Eisenhower Foundation originally formed in order to develop a 16 memorial honoring the general's wartime service . Foundation members realized that the general’s election to the Presidency signalled the beginning of a new era in the history of the center .
 The foundation led by former Kansas Senator Harry Darby initiated a movement to construct a Presidential library in Abilene, Texas .
 Darby and his associates worked with Kansas Governor George Docking to formulate legislation creating the Eisenhower Presidential Library Commission . Darby worked with Docking and leaders of the state’s legislature .
 Through public subscription, the commission, along with the Governor’s National Committee for the Eisenhower Presidential Library, raised the funds necessary to build a suitable facility .
 On October 13, 1959, the day before his 69th birthday, Dwight D Eisenhower spoke to a crowd at the groundbreaking ceremony for the Presidential library bearing his name . Eisenhower's library will be named after his father .
 The library is built of the same Kansas limestone used to constaict the museum . The two-story library was built in the same state of Kansas .
 Grand lobby, with a 35-foot-high ceiling, is faced with polished Italian book-matched marble, which contrasts with the rough-cut exterior stone . Grand lobby is faced in marble, with 35 feet high ceiling .
 The facility’s ornamental bronze work features a motif of bison heads and native bluestem prairie grass symbolizing the surrounding Great Plains environment . The facility's ornamental work features .
 A majestic interior courtyard, lit by skylights and a large chandelier, serves as a reception hall for the library's frequent public programs . The library's interior courtyard also has skylight lighting and chandelandelier .
 The library’s manuscript holdings, which amount to more than 22 million pages, document Eisenhower's life and times . The library's manuscript holdings document not only his life but also the careers of his military, political, and government associates .
 The library holds the papers of 33 general officers, including NATO Supreme Commanders Alfred Gruenther and Lauris Norstad . World War II generals Courtney Hodges, Walter Bedell Smith, and “Lightening Joe” Collins are well-documented .
 Transcripts provide information on all phases of Eisenhower’s life as well as on 18 major events associated with his military and civilian public service . These transcripts provide information about the life of Eisenhower .
 Numerous articles, books, theses, and dissertations have been based wholly or in part on the library's materials .
 Research was conducted by scholars who conducted research in Abilene. Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference .
 Average researcher visit is 4 days, with many scholars in residence for several weeks . The average researcher visit lasts 4 days .
 Historical Materials in the Dwight D Eisenhower Library are published by the Eisenhower Library . Additional information about the library’s historical resources may be obtained by writing for the library's publication Historical Materials .
 In recent years the library has developed innovative programs to bring its unique historical resources to the general public .
 Guided tours that include hands-on experience with historical documents are given frequently to history and government classes . Research projects have been developed that offer foreign language students the opportunity to learn their language through analyzing and interpreting original documents .
 In 1966 the foundation turned over the home and museum to the National Archives . The National Archives turned the home into a National Museum .
 Eisenhower Presidential Library Commission completed the Place of Meditation chapel . That same year the chapel was completed in which President and Mrs. Eisenhower were seated .
 In 1974 the center’s building program Members of Elderhostei, one of the many public programs offered by the center, salute General Eisenhower . The center's building program was part of the building program members of ElderHostei .
 In 1966 the Eisenhower Presidential Library 7 Commission completed the Place of Meditation chapel . The chapel was completed in 1966 by President Eisenhower and his wife .
 Eisenhower and their first-born son are interred in a large visitors center . Eisenhower and his wife were interred with their son . The visitors center was built in honor of the couple .
 The year 1990 marked the centennial of Eisenhower’s birth, which marked such major events as a conference on civil rights during Eisenhower's Presidency . The year also included a World War II vintage aircraft show, a replicated WWII battalionsized encampment, a USO show, and
 In 1994, on the 50th anniversary of D-Day, the library hosted a 2-day national conference that brought together military scholars as well as key British, American, French, and German participants in that epic WWII event .
 The Abilene commemoration also provided the occasion for an emotional reunion of dozens of Normandy Invasion veterans from throughout the U.S. The Normandy invasion veterans were reunited .
 Other library-sponsored programs have included an annual “Eisenhower Era ” Elderhostei and scholarly conferences on such varied topics .
 Public areas of the Eisenhower Center are open every' day (Christmas, New Year’s Day, and Thanksgiving excepted) from 9:00m. to 4:45m. Christmas .
 The library's research facilities are open Monday through Friday, federal holidays excepted, from 9:00m. to 4:45m. and on Saturdays from 9.00m to 1:00 m. by appointment . The library is located in central London .
 A fee is charged at the museum for all persons 16 years of age and older . The museum is open to all visitors to the museum .
 Presidents have become the personification of what the U.S. stands for and seeks to be . Through the crises that have confronted Americans over this period, they have been the personifications of the United States . President Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 The 40 men who have sat in the Oval Office represent an important source of continuity and confidence as citizens of the United States contemplate their government and its affairs . President Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, Franklin D Roosevelt, Abraham Lincoln and George W. Lincoln have all been great men . Abraham Lincoln was assassinated in 18th century . President Obama was assassinated at the hands of President Lincoln in 1918 .
 Many have grown while in office; others fell short of demonstrating the qualities of character needed for Presidential success . Many of these presidents have failed to demonstrate the qualities needed for success .
 As America’s first President, Washington set the standards for all subsequent Chief Executives . Washington set standards for the next Chief Executive .
 The Presidency in Historical Perspective usually defied simple generalizations and easy explanations about why some succeed in its duties and others fail . Library of Congress: The Presidency is a good example of American history .
 The Presidency and the young United States of America did not seem destined for world leadership . The office was created during the 1787 Constitutional Convention . The Presidency was created in 1787 .
 In 1789, when the Constitution went into effect, the U.S. was a small, rural, predominantly agricultural republic . It consisted of 13 states along the eastern coast of North America . The Constitution was created in 1789 after the Constitution was ratified .
 The population stood at 4 million people in a country that had virtually no weight in world affairs . The population of the country stood at four million people .
 Two centuries later, the United States has transformed into an urban, industrial nation of 50 states . The U.S. has 50 states extending westward to Alaska and Hawaii . The United States is now a nation of urban and industrial citizens .
 As the nation has grown, the institution of the Presidency has evolved with it. The institution has evolved as a result of its growth .
 The 19th century was a time when the office expanded its powers somewhat, but a fundamental evolution of the modern Presidency began at the turn of the 20th century with the contributions of William McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt, and Woodrow Wilson . The office was expanded in the early 20th
 The emergence of the strong Presidency has taken place for a number of reasons, says President Obama . President Obama has emerged as a strong force in the world, says Obama .
 Presidents have turned to powers that were implied but not expressly stated in the Constitution . Faced with the chance to accomplish goals that were in the national interest, they've turned to the powers implied in Constitution .
 Cabinet departments were expanded or newly established to meet growing domestic and foreign demands . Cabinet departments have been expanded or created to meet these expanding requirements .
 The size of the Presidential staff grew as special assistants and aides were added to support the work of the Chief Executive . Correspondingly, the number of Presidential aides and aides grew .
 Regulatory agencies proliferated to deal with growing complexities and inequities of national life . As the economy became industrialized and the population urbanized, regulatory agencies in the executive branch proliferated .
 The United States became a world power by 1900, with a consequent growth of the role of the President as a diplomatic leader and as Commander in Chief of the nation's military forces . The U.S. President's role grew to include the President of the United States and Commander in
 The apparatus of the Presidency grew to meet these enhanced world responsibilities . As a result, the apparatus of President Obama's presidency grew to become more powerful .
 The world wars of this century proved powerful stimulants to the rise of a strong and often imperial President . World wars of the century have been a powerful stimulant to a strong, imperial president .
 At that time, the national government was relatively small and easy for a President to administer . At the time, it was a relatively small government and easy to administer, says President Eisenhower .
 Often the President would have only one secretary or clerk to assist him . Often the president would be accompanied by a staff member or clerk .
 Until the need for more stringent protective measures became apparent, such receptions were commonplace and made the President highly accessible to the public . The need for stricter security measures was not apparent until the need became apparent .
 The White House Presidents drafted their own speeches and messages and usually had to write them out in longhand . Presidents drafted speeches and sent them out to the White House .
 Military commissions, appointments to office, and other documents had to be signed by the President . The President signed military commissions and appointments to his office .
 The only time that an incumbent had any semblance of a staff was when he borrowed clerks or specialists from the various departments and agencies of the government . The only . time that . incumbent had a staff is when he borrows clerks from various departments or agencies .
 President sought advice mainly from his Cabinet, or his ‘official family’ as it was known . He sought advice from friends and colleagues in the political community .
 As the first citizen of the nation, the President was expected to be accessible to the people, says President .
 People stood in line to shake hands with the President . Regular public receptions at the White House were common, and the people stood in front of him .
 A Chief Executive could make speaking tours of the country during his term of office . Presidential travel was less frequent than in the 20th century .
 Abraham Lincoln’s assassination in 1865 brought some Secret Service protection for subsequent Presidents . The President was still relatively easy to see the President at the White House during the first three decades of the 20th century .
 James A Garfield in 1881 and William McKinley in 1901 were two more victims of the inadequacies of Presidential protection before the advent of institutionalized security procedures . President McKinley died in 1901 from a gunshot wound .
 The role of the President in American political life was less marked before 1900 . President of the U.S. was elected to the presidency in 1900 .
 After the 1830s political parties handled most of the campaigning duties . Political parties were responsible for the majority of the election results .
 A nominee for the Presidency would make a speech formally accepting the decision of his party and issue a letter of acceptance that would serve as a major campaign document . A nominee would make the speech formally accept the party's decision .
 James A Garfield and Benjamin Harrison began this campaign style, and it reached its peak with William McKinley’s race in 1896 . The campaign style of the 1896 election was similar to that of Garfield and Harrison .
 More than 750,000 people came to his home in Canton, OH, during August, September, and October 1896 to hear his addresses . McKinley gave graceful addresses that were reprinted in newspapers all over the country .
 McKinley’s rival, William Jennings Bryan, made a “whistlestop” campaign of the country . McKinley was defeated by William McKinley in the 18th-18th century .
 The new technique eventually became standard practice in the century to come . Although he lost, the new technique was eventually accepted as standard practice .
 From George Washington through John Quincy Adams, there have been no true campaigns in the modern sense . From Washington to Adams' time, there were no real campaigns in modern times .
 Presidents did not have to be party leaders, and congressional caucuses and state legislators chose Presidential candidates . Presidential candidates were chosen by state legislators and Congressmen .
 Candidates directed their appeals to Congress and the legislatures rather than to masses of voters . Candidates direct their appeals directly to Congress rather than voters .
 By 1828, all of the states except Delaware and South Carolina had turned to the selection of electors by popular vote . By that date, all the states had turned on the popular vote, including Delaware .
 Andrew Jackson in 1828 was the first Presidential candidate to be popularly elected in the modern sense of presidential elections . Andrew Jackson was the President of the United States from 1828 to 1856 .
 Both the Democrats and their Whig opponents held the first national conventions to nominate candidates for President . Further democratization of the process occurred in 1832, when both parties held national conventions .
 The Whigs portrayed Harrison as a national hero who had lived in a log cabin . Harrison was portrayed by the Whigs as an national hero .
 They used campaign slogans and songs and sought voter participation in torchlight parades . They used slogans, songs and songs to seek voter participation .
 Political parties paid more attention to the popular image that their nominee would present on the campaign trail . Political parties pay more attention than to the image of their nominee on the trail .
 Presidential campaigns have become a fundamental part of the American political process . By the end of the 19th century, the appetite for the politics of display and spectacle gave way to campaigns of education .
 The early part of the 20th century saw the rise of merchandising techniques that were borrowed from business and marketed the candidates through advertising and appeals to voters as individuals .
 In comparison to the 19th century, the role of the political party' decreased in Presidential elections . The degree of popular interest and involvement in these Presidential elections fell off from the high levels of the 1880s and 1890s .
 In the late 20th century only about one-half of the eligible electorate votes in a Presidential contest . In contrast to the 75 percent or more of the electorate that voted a century ago .
 Since 1900, the President’s political, economic, military, and diplomatic powers have expanded beyond what predecessors of a century' ago could have imagined . Since 1900 the President's political, . economic, . military, military and diplomatic power have expanded .
 The complexities of the office in an era of instant communication require hundreds of special advisers at the White House . White House.
 The President has become a world figure whose health, opinions, and movements can affect economic markets and political events . The President's health and opinions can affect the world's economic markets .
 Television and radio transmit his statements to the rest of the world in an instant . His statements can be broadcast on television and radio .
 Traditionally, until the early years of the 20th century, the President did not leave the continental U.S. during his term of office . The President was not allowed to leave the country during his presidency .
 Theodore Roosevelt broke this precedent by traveling to the Panama Canal Zone in 1906, though he did not conduct business with foreign leaders . Theodore Roosevelt traveled to Panama in 1906 .
 After World War I, Woodrow Wilson went to Europe for the Paris Peace Conference . He negotiated the Treaty of Versailles . Wilson negotiated the treaty after the war . Wilson signed the treaty in 1918 .
 Now Presidents can travel to any part of the world at a moment's notice . Now they can travel anywhere at any moment of travel .
 More is known about the President's views than at any other time in the past . More is now known about his views than ever before, says President Obama .
 The Secret Service has insisted on tight security for the Chief Executive .
 The result is that the President is better known to the world, but very' much less accessible to the public at large . The result of the President's position is that he's better known but less accessible .
 President is responsible for the formulation and execution of foreign policy . As the nation’s chief diplomat, he must lead the nation's foreign policy.
 Through the Department of State he appoints and supervises a large diplomatic corps . He negotiates treaties with other nations, administers foreign aid, receives world leaders and their representatives, attends international meetings and peace conferences .
 At times of foreign crisis in this century, during two world wars and the cold war that began after 1945, the President has emerged as a leader of democratic forces . The President's role has been described as an important role in the country's future .
 He makes recommendations to Congress regarding legislation, oversees the economy, assures domestic tranquillity, and provides relief during natural disasters . He also oversees the country's finances .
 He is also the chief of state, who participates in a variety of ceremonial activities and embodies the values of the nation when he speaks on its behalf .
 To become President and to be reelected requires that the Chief Executive engage in a hectic and exhausting round of political campaigning . To be President or to be . reelected, Chief Executive must engage in an exhausting and hectic campaign .
 Candidates are required to canvass on their own behalf of voters . That process has become more demanding since it became common for candidates to make an active canvass .
 In the last true “whistlestop"" campaign before the advent of modern air travel, the last "whistestop" campaign was in existence . In the 1930s, air travel was the only way to reach the world's first air travel destinations .
 Public financing now provides the money for Presidential campaigns, but the President has to be the chief fundraiser for his party’ before and during elections .
 It has become customary for the Presidential candidate to establish a separate campaign committee to handle the intricate operation of a large and specialized campaign staff .
 The duties of the President never stop, not even for an instant, during his term, says President Obama . The President's duties "never stop" during his time in office .
 President Wilson traveled to Paris with other members of the American Peace Commission to negotiate the Versailles treaty . After World War I, President Wilson visited Paris in order to negotiate a treaty with the French .
 Wilson was the first U.S. President to conduct business outside of the country during his term of office . Wilson was also the first President to carry out business outside the United States .
 Until the passage of the 19th amendment in 1920, women were one of several groups excluded from full participation in government . The 19th Amendment was passed by Congress in 1920 .
 His responsibility for the nation’s nuclear forces is inescapable, and the mechanism for invoking that terrible option is never far from his side . The nation's nuclear forces are in the hands of President Obama .
 Should the President become ill or need medical attention, the public expects to be informed about his condition and prognosis .
 The activities of his wife and members of his family receive almost as much attention as the President himself . President Obama's wife and other family members often receive attention to their activities .
 The President is the constant object of national attention, understates the degree to which he is in the spotlight of media coverage and public concern .
 The experiment in constitutional and democratic government that was being launched depended on Washington’s willingness to accept the office of President. The experiment was to be carried out in Washington .
 Support for the new Constitution rested in part on the knowledge that Washington would be the first Chief Executive . Washington would have been the first President of the Constitution .
 The first President was an aristocrat, but he approached his new office without seeking to achieve exalted status or arbitrary power . The first American President was a humble aristocrat .
 He was devoted to the principles of republican government and was well aware that he was setting precedents . He said: "He was dedicated to republican government"
 He defined the institution that the Constitution had only outlined in the broadest terms . During the 8 years that followed, he defined the Constitution in broad terms .
 Washington enabled the new republic to survive its early years . In the process, Washington enabled it to survive .
 He overcame the emergence of political parties and partisan rivalries, withstood the instability in the fledgling economy, and avoided difficulties with the more powerful nations of Europe . He overcame political parties, partisan rivals, and withstood instability .
 He laid the basis for a structure of a workable national government . Perhaps most important of all, he laid the . basis for the structure of the . government, he said .
 Washington asserted authority in areas where the Constitution did not specify whether the Congress or the President was to act . Washington asserted his authority in those areas . The Constitution didn't specify whether Congress or President should act .
 Washington respected Congress and maintained good relations with the lawmakers . Washington respects Congress and maintains good relations between the two .
 The next several Chief Executives— John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, James Monroe, and John Quincy Adams— added their contributions to the evolving institution of the Presidency .
 John Adams’s nomination of John Marshall to be Chief Justice of the U.S. proved a decisive step in the development of the judiciary as a force in national life . John Adams nominated John Marshall for the post in 17th century .
 The Louisiana Purchase, during Jefferson’s administration, doubled the size of the United States . Jefferson's administration doubled the U.S. and showed how the powers of the office could be stretched .
 The young republic survived the foreign crises and domestic issues of the years between 1800 and 1828 . The national political system emerged during this period, and the national political .
 The War of 1812 was the one important military conflict of this period . It occurred because of disputes with Great Britain arising from the Napoleonic Wars . It was the first major military conflict to take place in the British-American era .
 The war ended in a kind of diplomatic and military stalemate . But the nation found its independence reaffirmed and its destiny ratified .
 A fervor of nationalistic spirit resulted, along with an expansion of political democracy for white, male Americans . The nation's most recent president, Barack Obama, was elected to office in 1996 .
 Black Americans were still, for the most part, enslaved in the South . Native Americans were displaced and persecuted, and women lacked even measure of full political and social rights .
 Millions of pioneers pushed past the Appalachian frontier into the Mississippi Valley and beyond . The population tripled, and millions of pioneers moved on to the Mississippi River Valley .
 The United States was a growing, more confident nation of two dozen states during the 1820s . The U.S. was a larger nation than any other nation .
 The Presidents from Andrew Jackson through James Buchanan confronted the issues that expansion and social problems presented . The Presidents of the U.S. from Jackson to Buchanan confronted these issues .
 The relationship of the federal government to the states, the role of the 24 government in promoting economic growth, and the balance of sectional power— all these dilemmas expressed themselves in the turbulent politics of the pre-Civil War era . The relationship between the government and the states is
 Added to the mix of concerns was the divisive and explosive issue of human slavery and the fate of blacks in the South . Added to this mix of concern was the issue of black slavery and its fate .
 North and South clashed over the South’s ‘peculiar institution’ during the 1840s and 1850s . The President became a focal point for the resolution of these problems .
 The western influence on the Presidency became evident during this same period . Western influence was evident during that period .
 Andrew Jackson became the first westerner to occupy the White House in the 19th century . William Henry Harrison, James K Polk, and Zachary Taylor followed him in the next 10 years .
 American Indians were the greatest losers in the western movement as they were shoved aside and driven into territories far from their familiar homes . American Indians lost their lives in the west .
 All of the Presidents in these years contributed to the drive to the West and then grappled with the consequences for the slavery issue . President George W. Bush was President Abraham Lincoln's first African-American president .
 Polk came into office as an advocate of expansion, which he achieved through war and diplomacy . Polk pushed U.S. boundaries to the Pacific, pushing the United States into the Pacific . Polk was the first president to be elected to office .
 The aftermath of the Mexican War and the territorial quarrels that ensued shaped the Presidencies of Zachary Taylor and Millard Fillmore . The Mexican War was the result of a territorial dispute in Mexico .
 It was becoming evident that the slavery issue was straining the ties that bound the nation together . The slavery issue is straining America's ties to the U.S.
 By the 1860s the people of the U.S. found it impossible to resolve the slavery problem without civil war . Civil war ended in the death of slavery in the United States .
 Lincoln’s Presidential leadership helped to preserve the Union and end slavery . Sectional tensions led to the outbreak of war, but Lincoln's leadership helped the Union . Lincoln helped to end slavery in the South .
 After Lincoln was assassinated in 1865, the task of reconstruction fell into the hands of Andrew Johnson . After Lincoln's assassination, Johnson took over the reconstruction task .
 His inability to understand the motives and attitudes of the Republicans of the North contributed to the bitter period that followed .
 The nation did not succeed in providing enduring and meaningful civil rights and political opportunity to the new black citizens . The 14th and 15th amendments to the Constitution represented notable achievements .
 During the late 19th century the U.S. moved away from the promise of human equality that had been implicit in Reconstruction . Reconstruction was a step away from Reconstruction's promise .
 Good relations between northern and southern whites were restored, largely at the expense of black Americans, by the creation of a segregation system . The segregation system would last until the 1960s .
 At the same time, the nation was becoming more industrialized and more urbanized . At the time, it was becoming increasingly urbanized and industrialized .
 McKinley died in 1901, the Union had grown to 45 states, and the rise of large corporations and a modern economy was reshaping American life . McKinley’s death in 1901 was the time of the country's greatest president .
 The nation watched the achievements of such inventors as Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas Edison and read of the entrepreneurial activities of such industrialists as Andrew Carnegie, John D Rockefeller, and James J Hill .
 Taft’s tenure, like that of other Progressive Era Presidents, was marked by political reform and industrial regulation . During the 40 years after 1880, millions of immigrants came to the U.S.
 Within the nation's borders, many citizens left the countryside for city’ life . Within the country’s borders, people have moved to city life .
 The general standard of living improved, but the pace of social change brought persistent problems . Social change was slow to reach the end of the 1950s .
 Industrial safety was inadequate, and hundreds of thousands of accidents occurred on the job each year . Industrial safety is inadequate, according to the report .
 Pensions, workman’s compensation laws, and unemployment insurance did not exist . Pensions and workman's compensation laws were not exist in the early 1900s .
 The great mass of industrial workers had no defense against the inequities of the marketplace, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "The great mass industrial workers were no defense"
 American Indians were driven onto reservations, and their culture came under assault . American Indians had to be relocated to reservations, forced to live on reservations .
 The West boomed as prospectors, cattlemen, and wheat farmers pursued prosperity . The West was booming in the early 1900s .
 The return of good times ended that movement as the new century neared . The return to good times in the 1990s was a major setback for the economy .
 The war with Spain over Cuba produced a dazzling military triumph . It added the Philippines, Guam, and Puerto Rico to the nation’s overseas possessions .
 The imperialistic surge ebbed somewhat during the first two decades of the 20th century . The burden of empire became apparent as the burden of it became apparent .
 Arizona and New Mexico were the last of the 2 contiguous 48 states to join the Union in 1912 . Arizona was one of the last two states to be admitted to the Union .
 During the first two decades of the 20th century, the nation experienced a period of political reform and moral uplift that has come to be called the Progressive Era . The Progressive Era was known as the 'Progressive Era'
 Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson dealt with the issue of the extent to which the national government should regulate an industrial society in order to relieve social injustice and promote a more equitable nation .
 The programs they pursued included substantial changes in the role of political parties and special interests in the making of national policies . They included passage of legislation to restrain big business and mitigate the effects of industrialism .
 Roosevelt and Wilson relied on the power of the federal government and the expertise of the regulatory agencies to deal with a wide range of social problems . FDR and Wilson especially relied on federal government to solve social problems such as poverty .
 Progressives also envisioned for themselves a larger world role in promoting a more stable international order . In time the Progressives hoped for themselves to have a larger role .
 Woodrow Wilson would say that the U.S. intervened in the First World War to make the world “safe for democracy,” but the Versailles treaty and the failure of the United States to enter the League of Nations frustrated his idealistic vision .
 The rise of mass society and culture also marked the decade of the 1920s . It was also the rise of a mass society .
 The automobile was changing the lifestyle of the United States . The infant airlines began a slow process of growth that would eventually tie nations and continents together .
 Calvin Coolidge was President as the stock market boomed and the economy expanded . The Republicans dominated the electoral landscape in the 1920s and '30s .
 Problems of unequal income distribution, a weakened banking system, and a depressed farm sector signaled possible trouble .
 President Hoover was elected as the masterful social engineer who could sustain the nation’s economic health . Hoover had been elected in a 1928 victory’ over Alfred E Smith .
 Hoover failed to deal effectively with the millions of unemployed who needed government assistance . Hoover's emphasis on voluntary action over government programs seemed inadequate for the crisis that the United States confronted .
 Hoover's grim personal manner added to the impression of insensitivity that doomed him politically . Hoover’s grim personal . manner . added to . the impression that he was insensitive that doomed . Hoover . doomed himself politically .
 Historians are still arguing over who was the first “modern” President in the style that has become familiar to the nation .
 William McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt, and Woodrow Wilson all made important contributions to the emergence of a powerful and purposeful Presidency between 1897 and 1921 . Franklin D Roosevelt in 1932 over Herbert Hoover brought to Washington a political leader who reshaped the office .
 Roosevelt’s New Deal represented a forceful campaign to find measures that would lift the economy out of its doldrums . Roosevelt's New Deal was a forceful effort to find ways to lift the country's economy from its droughts .
 The Second World War did more to revive the economy than the Depression did during the Depression . More money was spent on fighting the war than had been spent to fight the Depression.
 Roosevelt demonstrated what a President could do to lift the nation’s spirits in a crisis, helped to create the foundations of a modern welfare state, and made it impossible for any successor to remain passive in an economic downturn .
 The size of the Presidency also expanded as Roosevelt reached out to academics and experts for advice and ideas . Roosevelt also reached out for advice from academics and other experts .
 The economic problems of the 1930s contributed to the emergence of totalitarian leadership in Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler . Hitler joined with like-minded aggressors in Italy and Japan to threaten world peace .
 Roosevelt began establishment of what has been called the national security state . Meeting the challenge of the Second World War led Roosevelt to begin establishment of the state .
 The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, brought the nation into the world conflict . It fostered the rise of the military power of the U.S. to new and higher levels .
 Franklin D Roosevelt introduced the New Deal in an attempt to revive the economy and alleviate the social hardships caused by the Great Depression . The New Deal helped to establish the modern welfare state .
 Defeat of Germany in May 1945 came at a high cost in terms of lives and resources . Public Library in New York City: The loss of Germany to the U.S. was a huge loss of life and resources in 1945 .
 The United States looked to the United Nations and the doctrine of collective security to prevent another world war . The U.S. looked to U.N. and doctrine to prevent a world war and maintain the coalition that produced victory .
 A “cold war” between the United States and its wartime ally the Soviet Union began during the years 1945-47 and continued for more than 40 years . The U.S. and Russia were at odds during the Cold War .
 Presidents from Harry S Truman to George Bush who confronted these challenges found the range of their responsibilities and the size of their staffs continually expanding and becoming more complex .
 The President of the United States was now expected to maintain peace in a complex and interdependent world while fostering domestic stability and prosperity . The President was expected to keep peace in the complex world .
 Presidents have relied on instruments of the federal government to lessen the effects of recessions and to keep inflation under control . Presidents since the Second World War relied on the instruments to lessen recessions .
 The Chief Executives have also played important roles in encouraging the nation’s development as an industrial-scientific-technological society . The Chief Executive Officers are also encouraging the country's development as a scientific society .
 The space program received much of its impetus from the leadership of John F Kennedy and Lyndon B Johnson . It landed a man on the moon by 1969, landing a man there by 1969 .
 Other Presidents, such as Dwight D Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan, gained immense political popularity from their leadership during times of economic prosperity and growth .
 Not all Americans shared in the bounty of the postwar period or enjoyed the full rights of other citizens . Not all American citizens shared the bounty or enjoyed full rights .
 African Americans struggled during these same years to achieve their share of the national dream . African Americans struggle to achieve share of national dream, says CNN.com .
 The 1960s brought urban riots as a growing black lower class expressed its discontent with the squalor of life in the ghettos of the nation’s cities . The riots were the result of riots in the 1960s .
 Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and women articulated similar grievances . Native Americans and Hispanic Americans also articulated similar complaints .
 The struggle for a just and equitable society tested the leadership of the Presidents who followed him . During the 1960s Lyndon B Johnson and his Great Society addressed these problems with mixed results .
 That society remains an ideal still being sought as the 20th century nears its close . The ideal society remains being sought in search for a better society .
 Foreign policy was the most pressing concern for all the Presidents in the four decades after 1945 . Foreign policy remained the most important issue for all of the Presidents during that period .
 "The specter of nuclear annihilation formed an ominous background for every foreign policy judgment," says George W. Bush .
 Armed conflicts in Korea during the 1950s and in Vietnam during the 1960s and 1970s produced faistration and division at home .
 In Vietnam, the wounds from that defeat festered for almost two decades after the actual American involvement ended in the early 1970s . In the case of Vietnam in particular, that wound festered nearly two decades later .
 The nation has not yet fully resolved its ambivalent feelings about the war . The nation is ambivalent about the Vietnam War .
 Other foreign policy initiatives of the Presidents after 1945 did not produce such tragedy and dissension . The U.S. President's foreign policy initiative after 1945 produced no such tragedy .
 The economic capacity and military power of the United States sometimes worked in the cause of peace and hope . The U.S. has a long history of using its economic and military might to achieve peace, hope .
 Dwight D Eisenhower sought a safer world through his Atoms for Peace program . Eisenhower sought to create a peaceful world through the program . The program was part of Eisenhower's Atoms For Peace efforts .
 Richard Nixon pursued a policy of detente with the Soviet Union and opened better relations with the People’s Republic of China . Nixon pursued detente policy with the Soviets and opened relations with China .
 Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan both tried to achieve arms control with the Soviet Union . Carter and Reagan tried to find a way to reach a deal with the Soviets .
 In spite of all these accomplishments, the U.S. Presidency seemed to be in great trouble during the 1970s .
 Richard Nixon could claim foreign policy successes during his Presidency, including an end to American involvement in Vietnam, but the Watergate scandal drove him from office in disgrace . Nixon was forced from office by Watergate scandal in 1973 .
 Cold war relations with the Soviet Union troubled Presidents Harry Truman to George Bush . George Bush to George Clinton: Relationships with the Soviets troubled by the Cold War .
 Jimmy Carter began his Presidency with bright hopes in 1977 but left office 4 years later with economic conditions in disarray and another Presidency that failed to last two full terms . Jimmy Carter left office four years after leaving office .
 Ronald Reagan’s rhetorical skill, his personal optimism, and the expansion of the economy contributed to a better national mood and the sense that the Presidency could be an instrument of purpose and effectiveness . By the end of the 1980s, Ronald Reagan's rhetorical skill and the . expansion of
 This renewed optimism was accompanied by a rapidly expanding national debt and an intractable federal budget deficit . However, this renewed optimism is accompanied by an increasing national debt .
 George Bush was unable to maintain the momentum of the Persian gulf victory to win a second election . The fall of communism and continuing problems in the Middle East and Africa marked the Bush presidency .
 William J Clinton continues to grapple with the problems of his predecessors while facing the new challenges of the 1990s . The new Chief Executive, William J . Clinton, continues to wrestle with the challenges of his predecessor .
 Dwight D Eisenhower and the School Desegregation Crisis (Nelson-Hall, 1981) David Eisenhower, Eisenhower at War: 1943-1945i Random House, 1986) -, Ike's Letters to a Friend, 1948-1958. Ike's letters to a friend: 1948-
 Franklin D Roosevelt’s Inaugural Address of 1933 was a clear statement of the aspirations of his Presidency . Roosevelt was inaugurated in the midst of the United States’ greatest economic crisis in 1933 .
 Includes a facsimile of the typed draft of President Roosevelt’s inaugural speech . Includes a . introduction that provides background on the speech's . preparation and delivery .
 For Americans, nothing that has happened since Pearl Harbor has generated the degree of national outrage that swept the country following the unprovoked attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Contains facsimiles of the dictated typed typed typed draft and reading copy of FDR’s historic address to Congress . Includes an introduction that provides insight into the events leading up to the U.S. declaration of war against Japan .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower used this speech to bring his concern about the escalating nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union before the public . Eisenhower’s Address to the United Nations, 1954 .
 National Archives, 1990 #200016 — Softcover — $3-50 ISBN 0-911333-76-2 . Contains a facsimile of the final draft copy of President Eisenhower’s address and an introduction that discusses the arms race and the speech . Includes a fac
 An introduction provides background on the address, which included 77 ad-lib changes . The address was written by Robert Greene .
 One week before President Kennedy delivered this televised address, he received proof that the Soviets had placed medium-range nuclear weapons in Cuba and were making them operational . President Kennedy’s Address to the Nation was broadcast on October 4, 1962 .
 Each booklet features a brief Presidential biography and a description of the respective library and its holdings . Each booklet includes a brief biography of the President .
 Also included is a history of the Presidency, which appears in each booklet in the series .