 Churchillian model chosen, changes required by Cabinet Office and Macmillan’s desire to rebuke those political opponents who claimed that the crisis demonstrated a lack of British influence in Washington, however .
 Macmillan’s real-time experience of the Cuban missile crisis demonstrates the limitations of his own account of this event . Careful reconstruction of MacMillan's real-life experience .
 In October 1962, Harold Macmillan had been Prime Minister for nearly six years . The Cuban missile crisis was the Cold War's first major crisis in October 1962 .
 At the End of the Day, the sixth and final volume of his memoirs covering the period from 1961 to 1963 was published on 26 September 1973 in Britain and 9 January 1974 in the United States . At the end of the day was published almost 11 years later in the U.S
 By this time, Macmillan, 68 at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, was nearing his 80th birthday . The British Prime Minister was 68 when the crisis occurred .
 His physical infirmities were exacerbated by his Great War wounds, but he remained mentally robust . His mental fortitude remained strong enough to cope with the age of war .
 This might help to explain how the autobiography of ‘Mr Harold’ eventually ran to 3763 pages and some 1. million words .
 Macmillan was active in the publishing business before he was first elected to Parliament in 1924 . He was elected to the House of Commons in 1925 .
 Unlike his elder brother Daniel, Daniel's political career was always his priority . Unlike his brother, Daniel has always been a strong political force in his life .
 Publishing was a sideline undertaken when on the backbenches or out of Parliament . It was something he had little time for during his long continuous stint in Cabinet .
 He was pleased to be one of the few in Cabinet who had practical experience in business2 and always knew that he would return to publishing when his political career was over . Nevertheless, he was pleased that he was one of a few Cabinet ministers with practical experience .
 He attended his first Board meeting on 31 October 1963 . He had, by the end of that year, assumed the company chairmanship .
 It was not until the New Year that he felt well enough to set about addressing the managerial and financial problems inherited from Daniel’s long and idiosyncratic reign as chairman . Daniel has been in charge of the club since 2007 .
 The truth is that I am still in a kind of daze – like a man who has had concussion – like I have had concussion . I am in a daze - like I am a man like I've had concussion - but I'm not sure how I feel about it .
 All the flexibility and resilience of my mind has gone. I can just manage to concentrate on a limited range of problems but all the flexibility has gone . I can only manage to focus on a few problems but I can't cope with all the problems .
 I suppose this is the result partly of the operation but partly of 10 years and more of tremendous work at tremendous pressure . However, I suppose it is the end of 10-year-long work at enormous pressure, I said .
 The first brief mention of the memoirs project in Macmillan’s diary was not until a month later . He discussed the idea with a former research assistant, Bill Deakin of St Antony's College .
 Exhaustion and publishing demands were not the only reasons for avoiding haste in such matters . The author of the book was forced to take a break from the publishing scene .
 Macmillan was acutely conscious of the damage done to the efforts of his successor, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, to secure a Conservative re-election that year by the rush into print in early 1964 of disgruntled former ministers, Iain Macleod and Lord Kilmuir .
 Macmillan consciously aped Churchill’s technique of a chronicle of events linked by his own role as witness or participant . In this, he borrowed from Daniel Defoe's Memoirs of a Cavalier, borrowed from Daniel Defoe . MacMillan also ap
 He went through the manuscript diaries selecting around 50 per cent of the total for this purpose . He selected around half the total of the diaries .
 The view that his work was this type of history rather than a memoir was certainly held by his publishing director, while press notices observed that these many words revealed little of their author .
 Macmillan set out with some trepidation on his task, commenting ‘I am beginning to be rather concerned as to whether I can do this or shall have to fall back on allowing someone else … to write it for me’ David Dilks, who had been Anthony
 Macmillan had taken care to again copy Churchill, in this case by taking away duplicates of all possible documents for his private archive . Dilks was apparently ‘impressed by the size of the collection'
 These and related background reading were sorted for him by Anne Glynn-Jones into subjects corresponding to the thematic chapters through which he structured the volumes . These subjects were sorted into subjects .
 Macmillan dictated to two secretaries who created a rough draft to be amended . The draft of the book was then amended by two secretaries .
 By the start of September 1964, he had completed some 35,000 to 40,000 words as a sketch of the entirety of the book .
 Only three volumes, as with Eden’s memoirs, seem to have been contemplated . At that stage, only three volumes were contemplated .
 "I cull a few points, here and there, for my own book. I have been reading all sorts of books of reminiscences," he says . He says he culls a few of the points for his own book .
 I have now finished the synopsis of the 50 years – 1914–64 … It is hard to see how this enterprise is going to succeed. I have finished this synopsis of 1914-64 . It is difficult to see if this enterprise will succeed.
 However frightening, it was at least an opportunity to indulge Macmillan’s favourite habit of reading .
 Trained by publishing, he was both a voluminous and reflective reader . He usually noted his views in pithy comments in his diaries .
 Sometimes he would use these comments to assess issues he was currently dealing with . Sometimes these comments would be used to assess problems he was facing .
 Analysis of the Cuban missile crisis shows a stress on the interplay between character and circumstance . Interestingly, not least in light of his attitudes towards the Cuban crisis .
 President Kennedy warned of the developing stand-off over Cuba on October 21 1962 . He spent part of the evening reading an old life of the Young Pretender19 he had found in the library at Chequers .
 This was his first reference to this emergency in his diaries . In At End of the Day he refers obliquely to the guarded warnings given to British intelligence officials in Washington two days earlier .
 Thereafter, the pressure of the crisis that ensued was such that even Macmillan was unable to keep up his reading . The one work he did finish during this time – Sir James Mackintosh’s writing on the ‘Glorious’ Revolution – saw him continuing
 Macmillan does not seem to have been reading much else during the crisis itself . He was in the midst of the crisis, but he was also in the middle of it .
 It was not until Monday 5 November that correspondence began significantly to accumulate again in the files .
 BBC decided they had so much good material that they needed to do two programmes . One looking at policy issues such as Cuba broadcast on 19 September 1973, and the other covering security and scandal matters transmitted on the day of publication .
 In June 1960, he noted that the Castro regime that seized power in Cuba the previous year was ‘confiscating all the American properties and threatening to seize the oil refineries’
 Macmillan had been aware of the planning for this under Eisenhower and discussed the idea with Kennedy,28 but does not seem to have considered it likely to succeed .
 The British were less inclined to share the Administration’s anxiety to lance the Cuban boil . Nor were the British .
 One of Macmillan’s constant refrains was the need for trade expansion, not least as a means of tying in countries to the West . The British Prime Minister's trade policy was designed to tie in countries with the West as a way of tying them in .
 They had earlier refused Castro’s request for jet fighters under U.S. pressure . Castro had earlier asked for fighter jets .
 This new intervention, however, in their view, would not change the regime, only drive it closer to the Russians, they say . This is a counterproductively drive the regime closer to Russia, they argue .
 Khrushchev decided to send missiles to Castro in May 1962 . The British had not warmed to similar American pressure previously to interdict trade with China . U.S. trade pressure and military exercises suggesting imminent invasion of Cuba helped create the circumstances in which Khrushche decided .
 Macmillan reminded Secretary of State, Rusk, in June 1962, that trade was much more heavily dependent on trade than that of America . Nor was it good for the economy that, as MacMillan reminded, Britain was dependent heavily on trade .
 He was therefore apt to react angrily to what he saw as sharp American practice in arms trade, as over sale of Hawk missiles to Israel in August 1962 .
 Kennedy’s urging of British support for the embargo to Lord Home, the Foreign Secretary, met with observations that British shipping interests could only be coerced by new legislation difficult to justify in peacetime .
 An important factor in such developments was the growing public concern about nuclear testing, the author says .
 Macmillan’s diaries for 1962 are full of his efforts to promote a test ban to both the Americans and the Russians . But Cuba did not trouble the Prime Minister until Kennedy's fateful message arrived .
 Home returned from Washington, prompting Macmillan to reiterate in his diary his objections to a trade embargo . Home's brief exception was when he returned from the Washington trip .
 'The Russians are clearly using Cuba as a counter-irritant to Berlin,' says Kennedy . He also noted that the Russians are using Cuba to counter Berlin .
 Throughout the crisis, it was invariably Kennedy, rather than Macmillan, who raised Berlin in their telephone conversations . Kennedy, not MacMillan, raised Berlin, in their phone conversations .
 This is despite the fact that Berlin, like nuclear tests, was rarely far from Macmillan’s thoughts from when Khrushchev demanded the withdrawal of allied troops from the city on 10 November 1958 .
 Cuba had a political significance well beyond that of a pawn in the Cold War for his ally . But that Cuba's political significance does not seem to have been at the forefront of the Prime Minister’s mind in run-up to crisis .
 Macmillan did not note at the time or subsequently . growing pressure on Kennedy from senior Republicans claiming that the Russians were deploying missiles in Cuba . He hints in At the End of the Day that British intelligence was also suggesting a build-up .
 This claim was publicly denied by Kennedy on 4 September 1962, but was confirmed by Dutch and French intelligence by the time the missiles arrived mid-month . Kennedy denied the claim by Kennedy, but it was confirmed mid-September by intelligence .
 Conclusive proof of missiles and bombers being assembled was provided by a U2 over-flight on 14 October and presented to the President in Washington at 8.45m. on 16 October .
 Neither the British ambassador to Washington, David Ormsby-Gore, nor the American ambassador to London, Bruce, were told of this until 21 October,41 before Macmillan, as Kennedy’s hastily convened Executive Committee debated what to do .
 Macmillan responded to hints from Washington of the need for heightened alert levels by telling General Norstad – the retiring Supreme Allied Commander, Europe – at a dinner in Norstad’s honour that evening ‘that “mobilisation” had sometimes caused war .
 Norstad agreed, assuring Macmillan the following day that these representations had been successful with Washington .
 Calls for a conference were also later issued by Commonwealth figures such as President Nkrumah of Ghana and his friends in the non-aligned movement . Such calls for such a conference have also been made in the past .
 Macmillan described this as a ‘very dangerous message’ to Kennedy in conversation on 24 October . ‘Now that Russians have been proved blatant liars, no unpoliced agreement with them is possible,’ he wrote .
 On 24 October, Home raised with Ormsby-Gore the possibility of a general conference on disarmament, with Cuba as a preliminary, might be a way forward .
 Home’s idea was therefore a non-starter;53 thereafter, discussion of a conference dropped from British contributions to the crisis .
 On 23 October, there were no further conversations with Kennedy . Meanwhile, there was no further calls between Kennedy and Kennedy .
 Macmillan did meet a Labour delegation who asked if he would go to Washington,54 as Attlee had done at a similar juncture during the Korean War . Attlee did meet with the delegation, who asked for him to go .
 The Prime Minister raised the possibility with Kennedy the following evening, in his diary the next evening, ‘They hadn’t much to say’ Nor did his diary entry refer to the related problems of managing the press and public opinion .
 Macmillan now asked for time to think about this, though he was glad to hear that U.S. plans for an invasion were continuing .
 Russian ships were already starting to turn round at the time of the conversation . It is not clear whether he was aware that Russian ships had already turned round .
 By the time he came to write his diary entry for 24 October, this had been confirmed for him from both British and American intelligence sources . The following day, he wrote that he had been informed by British and U.S. sources .
 This, and the soft answer Khrushchev gave to U Thant, may have determined how the Prime Minister replied to Kennedy’s question .
 UN inspection of sites, to ensure their immobilisation, would remove the threat they posed, without the need for military action . Instead of military action, UN inspection would remove threat from the sites, he advised .
 Any ideas of an inspection regime were not discussed by the two leaders that evening . The two leaders did not discuss any ideas of a new inspection regime .
 The latter option was put to the British, French and West German ambassadors in Washington that evening . The British and French ambassadors were asked to consider the option .
 The ambassadors were told of the U.S. estimation that the Russians had intended a showdown over Berlin on completion of the Cuban bases, to coincide with Khrushchev’s upcoming visit to the United States .
 "That's no longer a possibility. That, of course, depended on completion without detection, no longer an option . That depended on completing without detection .
 Khrushchev also failed to consult his ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, either about the missile deployment or the likely U.S. reaction . The missile deployment was the first time the Soviet Union had sent a missile to the United States .
 Britain’s ambassador to the Soviet Union, Sir Frank Roberts, acutely recalled ‘Khrushchev’�s well-known proclivity for setting out courses of action without knowing where they could lead him .
 Khrushchev suggested to Kennedy the possibility of dismantling the missiles in Cuba, first in return for a guarantee that Cuba would not be invaded, tightened in a second message by linkage with the quid pro quo of American withdrawal of the 15 Jupiter Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles installed in Turkey in
 Neither Macmillan nor Kennedy was aware of this when they spoke that evening at 11.15m.66 ,66 though the latter mentioned some unofficial hints along similar lines from Russian officials .
 Prime Minister's interest in an analogy with pre-1914 Belgian neutrality . This was, however, sufficient to pique the Prime Minister’s interest .
 U Thant proposed immobilisation of 60 Thor IRBMs deployed in Britain in 1958–1959 . This would have been a significant gesture as 65 per cent of this force was on 30 minutes readiness .
 59 of the Thors were at 15 minutes readiness, remaining so until 5 November . The Prime Minister agreed a move to Alert Condition 3 for Bomber Command on 27 October . Bomber Command is currently on alert condition 3 .
 None of this, however, was mentioned at the time in Macmillan’s diary, or subsequently in At the End of the Day . None of the events were mentioned in the diary, nor in the book .
 There are, indeed, no diary entries at all for Saturday 27 October . Nor was the fact that, despite the President’s non-committal response, these three schemes were then reiterated in a message to Kennedy in the early hours of 27 October in a . message .
 From the diary of Macmillan’s press secretary, Harold Evans, it is clear that the day was spent in great anxiety that Kennedy might have decided that there was no other way to destroy the missile sites .
 Macmillan ‘felt he must intervene’ in ways that would achieve the immobilisation of the weapons without resort to United States military action . In these circumstances, MacMillan 'felt he felt he . must intervene'
 Ormsby-Gore’s telegram received at 4.00m. that morning that morning . The telegram was sent to the White House in New York .
 Rusk confirmed that the three principal European allies would be consulted before any such eventuality occurred . Rusk also said that the U.S. would consult with the three main European allies before such an event .
 ExComm began to meet that day at around 10.00m. , by which time it was already 3.00 m. in London . ExComm met in London at around 3.30m. in the morning .
 It is difficult to endorse the claim of scholars such as May and Zelikow that Macmillan and Ormsby-Gore became de facto members of ExComm for the duration of the crisis .
 The fact that the former was not physically present, sometimes only received limited reports on what was transpiring in Washington from Ormsby-Gore . Macmillan often had to wait for hours for detailed telegrams to come through .
 News of the shooting down of the United States U2 surveillance aeroplane over Cuba exercised ExComm that afternoon . Khrushchev decided to climb down after the U2 shooting down .
 A telegram from the British embassy in Cuba bearing this news did not arrive until 6.38m. on 28 October . It had seemingly been nine hours in transmission . The telegram was sent by the British Embassy in Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s latest message to Kennedy was the text of the latest message . Another example is that, in the ExComm discussions earlier that day, the text arrived of the message . The text arrived on the same day as the text to Kennedy .
 In contrast, the copy of this broadcast message in the Prime Minister’s files is from the news agency Reuters .
 In ExComm, this message was regarded as further moving the goalposts, by linking not only removal of weapons from Cuba with analogous weapons in Turkey, but also agreement about the inviolability of both countries .
 Khrushchev’s latest communication appears to also have caused alarm, but in a somewhat different manner . From the hand-written notes by Home on the British copy of the message, the message appears to be also caused alarm .
 The build-up, he observed, goes on – while the United States had rejected the Turkey linkage . Kennedy: "The United States has rejected that Turkey linkage"
 Home’s comments ended, ‘Still trying to keep it to this hemisphere’78 This kind of language no doubt reflected British attempts to respond to American sensitivities .
 From the file, it is not clear at what point in the day Home made these notes . It's not clear what point of the day the notes were made .
 Home’s suggestions therefore focused on Cuban inviolability and/or of a nuclear-free zone in Latin America .
 The reciprocity in the European area that the Thor offer undoubtedly constituted was additional, something to be used ‘if it would make all the difference’ A telegram sent to the Washington embassy at 2.30m. asked that Rusk also be informed of these instructions .
 Kennedy's response to Macmillan's memorandum of their previous evening’s conversation arrived in London . It was not until 8.07m. that Kennedy wrote his response to the memorandum of the previous evening's conversation .
 This message is not mentioned in Harold Evans’ diary, but it seems to have been the cause of the anxiety he notes . Harold Evans' diary was published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 "I do not feel that this country should allow itself to become engaged in negotiations affecting the individual security interests of our NATO allies," says British Prime Minister David Cameron .
 Any initiatives in this respect, it seems to me, should appropriately come from Europe, I said . Any initiative in this way should come to Europe, he said .
 In the meantime, I continue to believe that we must secure the actual dismantling of the missiles currently in Cuba as the first order of business . The Cuban missiles are currently being used in Cuba .
 In particular, the penultimate paragraph seems to have been interpreted as an invitation for an initiative along the lines already broached with the President . The President is expected to make a speech at the end of the week .
 No further work on missile sites in Cuba, No imports of ballistic missiles into the island, and No. existing missiles in Cuba being made inoperable (which can be done without any breach of military security)
 Lift the quarantine, and  Not take any physical action against Cuba during the standstill . Lift  quarantine, not lift the quarantine and not take physical action . Cuba will remain in standstill during the week .
 A telegram from Dean arrived at 9.31 p.m. indicating U Thant’s response to the British proposals . Seemingly, it was not until after this point that the telegram was sent to the French .
 Dean reported that in the conversation he had with U Thant at 1.00m. , it was clear that the idea of following in the footsteps of his late predecessor, Dag Hammarskjöld, had not occurred to the Acting UN Secretary-General .
 U Thant considered the idea of leading an inspection team, but treated it as separate from issues such as Turkey or the inviolability of Cuba . He said the inspection team would be separate from those such issues .
 The rest of Ormsby-Gore’s telegram was taken up with how the U.S. responded to the Khrushchev broadcast . Kennedy's thoughts about Turkey were discussed in the telegram .
 The Turkish ambassador to the United Nations made the displeasure of his government at this suggestion apparent to his American counterpart, Adlai Stevenson, at a meeting that evening . The Turkish government was unhappy with the suggestion .
 The problem was how the Americans should react to Khrushchev’s linkage of Cuba and Turkey; a major theme of the ExComm discussions that day .
 The President’s brother, Bobby Kennedy, put it that afternoon, that ‘is very reasonable, and we just turned it down’ As Bobby Kennedy said, ‘The offer is very reasonable . As the President's brother Bobby Kennedy put it . Bobby Kennedy .
 The dilemma was that they were quite happy to discuss Turkey, but they wanted to secure a standstill from Khrushchev first . Turkey and the bases in Cuba … and suddenly we drop a bomb on Cuba’
 Kennedy may, by this time, have received Macmillan’s message and picked up the term standstill from there .
 May and Zelikow failed to reveal communications between President and Prime Minister . Attempts to clarify whether this was the case are not helped by the absence of communications .
 Those around Kennedy were concentrating on the Turkish issue, rather than any idea of a standstill . In any case, as Macmillan was in no position to know, he was not in any position .
 The facilities for United States Polaris submarines were agreed with the Eisenhower Administration at Holy Loch in 1960 as replacement for the phasing-out of the Thors due to start on 1 April 1963 .
 Clearly, as George Ball noted, similar arrangements could be made with the Turks . Clearly, the Turks could also make similar arrangements with Britain .
 Kennedy noted that Khrushchev had raised the Turkey/Cuba swop issue publicly . Kennedy noted this was made more problematic because the Turkey-Cuba swap had been raised publicly by Khruschev .
 His approach to ExComm that day was therefore about how to respond without appearing to cave in, not least to his NATO allies . He said: "I don't cave in. How do you respond to that?"
 U.S. ambassadors were told to avoid any Cuba/ Turkey linkage . United States ambassadors were also told not to engage in any linkages between Cuba and Turkey .
 Bruce was certainly under the impression that the Turkey option had been rejected . Bruce was under impression that Turkey option was rejected . He said: "I'm not sure what happened to the Turkish option."
 ExComm agreed that Thomas Finletter, the U.S. permanent representative, should brief a NATO Council in Paris on Monday 29 October . The United States permanent representative of the United States is expected to brief the NATO Council .
 His briefing notes were passed on to the British government at some time on 28 October . The British government passed on his briefing notes to the government .
 The build-up of the missile sites continued, and ships were still heading to the quarantine zone . Instead, the build up of missile sites has continued, with ships heading to quarantine zone still arriving .
 The U.S. message to its allies was therefore that military action may be imminent and that missile trades were not on the table . The United States message to allies was that military . action, for which a build-up throughout the crisis had been taking place, may be . taking
 President's response to Khrushchev's offer on Cuba and ignoring Turkey was received in London at 1.30m . Neither did the President’s public reply to the Soviet leader .
 Macmillan credits this with successfully solving the crisis without resort to conflict . Subsequently, in At the End of the Day, he credits it with solving the problem without resorting to conflict.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday .
 It also stressed a continuing wish to send his message to Khrushchev ‘when it is apparent that he is not giving way and before you are forced by his stubbornness or by the local situation, take drastic action’
 The text as actually transmitted, seemingly at 9.52m. , was rather more anodyne . It was rather than more than a question mark, but still contained the timing question .
 In At the End of the Day, Macmillan says that he then decided the timing issue for himself in the absence of further communications from an early morning Washington. MacMillan: "I then decided to take a decision for himself"
 The draft he sent to Moscow was rather different from the draft he had sent to Kennedy the previous day . The message was transmitted to Moscow at around noon .
 Evans described this as ‘a mouselike message’102 In the absence of American approval of any other message, it picked up on the one aspect of Khrushchev’s communication that Macmillan, who had long been seeking such a test ban agreement, could
 From Macmillan’s point of view, it gave a fillip to his efforts for a test ban agreement and a reduction in Cold War tensions .
 Khrushchev published some expurgated memoirs in 1971, the year of his death . The memoirs were published in the year he died in Moscow .
 The untimely death of John Kennedy in 1963 ensured that the other Western principal in the crisis had not published memoirs . John Kennedy's death ensured that he did not publish memoirs.
 There was only Robert Kennedy’s posthumously published account, ghost-written for him by Theodore Sorensen, to which Macmillan obliquely refers briefly in his own book . The final volume covers 1961– 1963 .
 Initially, he suggested ‘The Grand Design’, a phrase he had repeatedly used to title policy documents since the 1920s . Initially, the phrase had repeatedly been used to titles policy documents . The new policy document will be published by the UK government .
 At End of the Day was chosen to match the reflective nature of the photograph by Lord Snowdon selected for the dust jacket .
 There was particular concern about verbatim quotes from classified letters, minutes and transcripts of telephone conversations . The then Cabinet Secretary, Sir Burke Trend, wrote ‘you have perhaps given yourself rather more of a free rein … than in the earlier volumes'
 This reflected that Macmillan had indeed taken a Churchillian approach to this work . This reflected the Churchillian take on this work, he said .
 Four were deletions advised to avoid giving offence to foreign governments . Foreign governments might have objected, for instance, to a diary quotation referring to the French as contemptuous .
 The company certainly thought the Cuba section was an important part of the book . It is likely that this reflected publisher reluctance to comply when already close to publication with changes .
 The object was not just to puff the book but also to engage with media and Opposition allegations at the time of the Cuban crisis that the British influence on the United States had been negligible .
 These included Kennedy’s message of 22 October, suggesting that the two men ‘discuss the situation between ourselves by means of our private channel of communication’ This channel was the KY-9 scrambler telephone, installed on 6 September 1961 .
 Macmillan commented in his diary on 4 November – reproduced in ‘On the Brink – that these worked without a hitch.’ – that those who had been sent on the project were ‘not impressed’ by the result .
 The President also apparently kept on forgetting that he had to take his finger off the button to allow Macmillan to speak . This may account for the apparently unenlightening nature of the transcripts .
 Hansard transcripts convey only a part of orality, says Hansard . But then, as anyone who has tried to recapture the fire of a Lloyd George from the reproduction in Hansard would know, it's difficult .
 'We used flat and commonplace phrases of everyday life and humdrum affairs,' he said . Macmillan drafted to add to the chapter but which was not included included .
 There are always likely to be unspoken assumptions and understandings that a transcript may not capture . Nevertheless, we both knew we were discussing the future, and perhaps the survival of the civilised world’
 From the initial reviews onwards, these passages have been taken to demonstrate that Macmillan served as ‘a sounding board’ for Kennedy to test out his ideas . From the start of this article, these . passages have instead been taken instead of . demonstrating that MacMillan served
 Some, such as the question about invasion asked on 25 October, have nevertheless been seen as consultation . Less noticed, though probably no less significant, were the discussions about how to approach the U.N.
 The main British contribution to the management of the Cuban crisis was advice from Ormsby-Gore about the breadth of the quarantine .
 Macmillan no doubt believed that his ambassador did make a significant contribution to the first of these . He said: 'I believe that his Ambassador did make significant contributions to our society'
 De Zulueta’s warnings to senior American intelligence officer Chet Cooper of the likely scepticism of the British press seem to have been the significant factor . The British approach to the UN side of the crisis has been less explored .
 In the historiography, Macmillan’s interest in this has been overshadowed by the Thor offer . In the . history of this, the interest in the . Thor offer is overshadowed by that of the Thor .
 He also reiterated the idea of a UN mission to ensure missiles were inoperable . However, in the same conversation that he raised this with Kennedy, on 26 October, he also reiterated this .
 Once the ships were no longer arriving, this was the crucial issue for Macmillan, hence his change of mind over the merits of military action . The British Prime Minister's decision to take action was made after the ships stopped arriving .
 Getting a credible UN inspection regime in place was a key means of avoiding such military action, with all the risks that implied . Indeed, getting a credible inspection regime is a key way of avoiding military action .
 British experts believed this could be achieved by preventing the use of the ramps and placing the missiles elsewhere . British experts said this was possible by placing them elsewhere .
 A credible inspection regime was also, incidentally, a way of making progress on the test ban issue . The test ban has been introduced in a bid to make progress progress .
 The Thor offer was thus a backup; its minor role in ‘On the Brink’ is accordingly appropriate . The Thor role was a backup to the Thor offer .
 Macmillan responded to the offers Khrushchev made around Cuba in his message of 26 October concerning dismantling in return for Cuban inviolability and ignoring the Turkey element .
 In his subsequent comments, he makes it clear that he did not regard the Turkey missiles as particularly important – except for the Turks .
 He and Home wanted to keep the Turkey issue out of play and resolve matters through the United Nations . The Turkish issue has been a major issue for the British government .
 As Kennedy said in ExComm on the morning of 26 October, the missiles could only be removed by negotiation, trade or invasion . Kennedy said that if the missiles were removed, they would have to be taken away .
 The British line was that they could be negotiated away through a combination of . assuring the territorial inviolability of Cuba and inspection to render the missiles inoperable .
 Adlai Stevenson raised these points when he raised them in ExComm . It is clear that he had already been talking to Dean Dean about them .
 John McCone, Central Intelligence Agency director, was sceptical about the idea . There was some initial scepticism, particularly from the CIA director .
 The idea of a mission – using British, French and other European inspectors – gained traction . However, the idea of the mission has not gained traction.
 This was the message that Macmillan in ‘On the Brink’ saw as solving the crisis . This was what he saw as a solution .
 He probably also believed this, both at the time and when this chapter was written, when this was written .
 The absence of a diary entry for that date is probably a factor, given how important the diaries proved as a mainstay of his text, particularly in Macmillan’s later volumes of memoirs .
 Dean is only mentioned once in the whole of At the End of the Day, as having played a useful supporting role to Stevenson . Nevertheless, it seems remarkable that Dean is not mentioned in the book .
 Given Macmillan’s habitual antipathy to the latter, this was an unusual, and probably unwarranted, act of generosity .
 The Cabinet Office stipulation not to offend foreign governments also means that the very considerable efforts expended by the British on inter-Allied and inter-Commonwealth relations during the crisis are also overlooked in his account .
 There is, however, another reason for the occlusion of the UN dimension . There is also a reason for this .
 Macmillan’s line on the U.N. developed out of his communications with Kennedy, Kennedy . MacMillan's line on UN developed from his conversations with Kennedy .
 He probably assumed that they were thinking along similar lines, as indeed they were, though with subtle nuances in terms of tone and timing . He said they were in a similar way, but subtle nuances were subtle .
 Kennedy instanced in ExComm of getting missiles out of Cuba, that of invasion . He does not go into much more detail in ‘On the Brink’ on a second of the three ways Kennedy used to get missiles out .
 The Russian embassy in London had approached the British to propose a Summit . It was largely irrelevant because of the embarrassing linkage to the (unnamed) Yevgeny Ivanov, who was also to feature subsequently among the lurid details surrounding the Profumo scandal .
 The plan for invasion, scheduled for 29 October, is only mentioned later as Macmillan’s explanation for why the Russians caved in rather than pursuing the trade with Turkey that they had demanded .
 Macmillan was unaware of the President’s dovish response to the U2 shooting on 27 October . This suggests he remained convinced that Kennedy intended to go through with the invasion of Cuba and that this threat was significant .
 This third option, the trade, was not to be placed in the public domain until 1978 . It was only fully declassified in 1991, long after Macmillan’s death in 1986 . The trade was only declassified after the death of the British Prime Minister .
 Kennedy implied in ExComm that these options were alternative strategies . Kennedy implied that these are alternative strategies in his comments . In ExComm, Kennedy said that the options were possible .
 Bobby Kennedy indicated to Anatoly Dobrynin, the Russian ambassador to Washington, that the Jupiters could quietly be withdrawn from Turkey within four to five months if a satisfactory arrangement on Cuba was reached . But the British did not know that Bobby Kennedy had indicated to . Anatoly
 In part, this was because they discounted such a possibility as being outside the Western hemisphere . But they said it was unlikely to happen in the world's most populous region .
 Americans deliberately misled them, their Allies and indeed their own ambassadors on this point . But it was also because the U.S. deliberately misled their allies, their allies and indeed themselves themselves .
 Khrushchev’s attempt to rationalise this, suggesting it was the looming threat of U.S. military action, was nevertheless astute . The threat of American military action was the reason for the move, he said .
 American dissimulation distracted from the Turkey offer and ramped up the risk of warfare . Deliberate U.S. dissimimulation both distracted and distracted from Turkey's offer .
 In order not to be seen as being seen to be letting down allies, they instead misled them . The U.S. should not have been seen as letting down their allies, the U.K. should have been honest .
 The worse example of lack of consultation from the Americans was thus not one Macmillan could try to downplay in ‘On the Brink’ because he did not know about it .
 Ironically, however, neither did those complaining at the time about lack of consultation . Ironically, they did not complain about the lack of consultations .
 When this story did eventually come out, Macmillan’s account had at least scotched the idea of lack of information, even if it was now apparent that it was not complete .
 Macmillan's government was seen as pursuing a Thor trade that would never shape Washington’s thinking, because the Americans were already moving to the Turkey swop instead of the Thor trade .
 The British did not do anything that they considered out of keeping with the American line . This is despite the fact that the same sentence went on to acknowledge that ‘not to do anything (except to talk to the President and keep Europe and the Commonwealth calm and firm) was the right
 The effect of the Turkey swop revelation was to further downgrade the significance of this UN element of the solution of the crisis . Nevertheless, it should be noted that the effect of this swop has been noted that it should not be noted .
 Khrushchev's decision to withdraw was not central to the decision to pull out of the Soviet Union . This is not to say that it was not the actual decision to do so, but it was central to his decision .
 The threat of invasion and the Turkey deal, in that order, seem to have been the drivers there . The Turkish deal, the threat of an invasion and invasion of the U.S. seem to be the drivers .
 The British had envisaged the immobilisation of the missiles that they had hoped to immobilise . So, while it did not play the primary importance in immobilising them, it was not insignificant .
 Before publication, The Spectator referred to At the End of the Day as the most eagerly awaited book in the series . At the end of the day was published in October 2013 .
 This, though, was because it expected revelations not about October 1962 but about the end of Macmillan’s premiership in October 1963 . The end of the premiership was when the British government was overthrown .
 Cuba was not as central to the reception of the book as the pre-publicity had assumed . The book's reception was less than initially thought .
 Reports of 20,326 non-US sales by the end of 1979 was certainly good . At a time, when respectable fiction sales were around 5000 copies .
 However, it was still way behind sales figures for the first two volumes .
 'On the Brink' does not seem to have helped sales in the U.S. Furthermore, ‘On The Brink’ has not been able to sell in the United States .
 Just over two years after publication, Harper and Row wrote that sales had been very slow and ‘we must let the book go out of print’.
 Churchill's volumes gave a sometimes spurious authenticity to his accounts . As has been observed, in Churchill’s volumes, these gave a little spurious authenticity . Churchill's accounts were often given a spurious authenticity by Churchill .
 In Macmillan’s works, such passages present his view of the Cuban missile crisis largely in terms of his relationship to Kennedy . In such passages, he presents his views of the crisis largely as those of Kennedy .
 Anti-nuclear Committee of 100,146 is conspicuously absent in Macmillan’s account . Public responses, such as the demonstrations outside the American embassy organised by the anti-nuclear committee, are absent in the account .
 Macmillan’s portrayal of the Cuban missile crisis conceals as much as it reveals about the British experience of that event . Instead of focusing on his relations to Kennedy, his portrayal conceals more than it reveals .
 I am grateful to Len Scott, Willie Thompson and Mark J White for their comments on an earlier draft of this article . I am also grateful to Willie Thompson, Mark White and Len Scott .
 I am grateful to Alysoun Saunders and Helen Melody for access to these archives . I am also grateful to have been given access to the archives .
 Speech to sales representatives, 18 March 1966. Uncatalogued folder ‘Past Masters 1’, speech to sales reps . Speech was delivered at the end of 1966 .
 Macmillan to Lord Carrington, 6 August 1980 . Uncatalogued folder ‘Harold MacMillan general’, Macmillian to Lord . Carrington . Macmillenan to Carrington: ‘I am sorry. I am sorry I am not
 He noted in his diary for this date, ‘Ever since the end of the Cuba crisis I have felt very ill’, a malady that appeared to have cured .
 Richard Garnett to Macmillan, 31 July 1973 . Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, ’at the end of the day’. ‘Garnett’s letter to MacMillan .
 Political, Military and Intelligence Aspects Aspects (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999), 21. Political and Military Aspects, 21. political, military and intelligence Aspects . Aspects: 21.
 A Case Study of the Leyland Motor Company Contracts with Cuba’ in Alastair Hennessy and George Lambie . The Fractured Blockade: West European-Cuban Relations during the Revolution during the revolution .
 MS Estabrook: ‘Background Dinner with Prime Minister Macmillan’, 21 February 1962 . ‘Back to Mail Online home .
 This interpretation has been borne out by subsequent evidence from Soviet witnesses such as Alexander Alexeyev, the then Soviet ambassador to Cuba . This interpretation is based on evidence from the then-Soviet ambassador to the island .
 It is possible Macmillan conflated that with the previous one which had run into the early hours of that morning .
 Nasuh Uslu, The Turkish–American Relationship between 1947 and 2003 , 159 . Uslu: The Turkish-American relationship between 1947-2003 is a formative part of the U.S.-Turkish relations .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 1’, Macmillan to Maclean, 20 June 1972 . Maclean and Maclean met in London at the end of the day .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Garnett to Macmillan, 29 August 1972 . Garnett sent the file to MacMillan from his office in London .
 'At the End of the Day 2’, Trend to Macmillan, 2 March 1973 . Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the end of the day 2,’ was ‘The End Of the Day’
 M&Co: Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Martin Charteris to Macmillan, 20 March 1973 . Charteris: 'At the end of the day 2' Charteris was a pioneer of British publishing .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, is unnamed to Macmillan, 7 March 1973 . Unnamed folder is unnamed .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, suggested amendment to 220. Uncatalogueued folder .
 David Ballheimer to Maclean, 22 November 1979; note to Macmillan, 26 February 1980. Uncatalogued folder, ‘Harold MacMillan General,’, David . Ballheimer, to MacLean, wrote: “Harold. Macmill
 Winds of Change sold 40,453, Blast of War 33,052, Tides of Fortune 18,676, Riding of the Storm 16,310 and Pointing of the Way 11,981 . The album was released in October .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘Past Masters 1’, Doris Karfinkel to Garnett, 27 April 1976 . Doris was Doris’s partner in the late '60s and '70s .
 Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 1’, was unattributed review enclosed with Cass Canfield to Maclean, 14 November 1974 . Unattributed review of the book, 'At The End of The Day 1'
 From 1989 to 1999, he ran the Institute of Contemporary British History . In 1999–2000, he was Fulbright-Robertson visiting professor of British history at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri .
 His research interests span from setting up a sport and leisure history seminar at the Institute of Historical Research . His recent project on political culture and conflict in Iraqi Kurdistan is his recent project .
 Identities, Cultures and Perspectives 1900–39 and ‘Democracy, Cosmopolitanism and National Identities in a Globalising World’ were published in a special retrospective issue of National Identity 13, 2011 . Identities and Cultures are published in the special issue of
 He is also the editor of Harold Macmillan’s diaries, published in two volumes in 2003 and 2011 . He has also edited two volumes of the diaries .