 In November 1960 John F Kennedy was elected President ol the United States . In November 1962 John F. Kennedy was inaugurated President of the U.S. in Miami, Florida .
 The most historically significant of these occurred in 1962 when Moscow surreptitiously implemented a clandestine plan to locate nuclear-capable surface-to-surface missiles in Cuba . The plan was part of a clandestine effort to locate missiles in the country .
 The U.S. blockaded Cuba by surrounding it with naval ships, creating an umbrella of Air Force interceptors and bombers, and implanting surface-to-air missiles in South Florida . In response, the United States blockaded the island of Cuba . The United States created an
 This plan brought the world to the brink of thermonuclear war and the potential for mutually assured destruction of humankind . This plan was brought to the verge of war and potential for mutual assured destruction .
 Khrushchev planted offensive missiles in Cuba in the spring of 1962 . The denial of information on the deployment of the missiles and deceiving U.S. policymakers was the foundation of the venture .
 During that summer, a close circle of collaborators and contacts expanded to include Russian and Cuban military leaders, while secrecv and need-to-know prevailed .
 The most senior Russian offi­ cers brought into the plan were at least told that Cuba was involved in the operation, but only a few were informed of the exact nature of the mission .
 The top civilian and military officials conceptualizing the operation did not see eve-to-eve about the likelihood of pulling oft a successful deception . The operation was a success, officials say .
 Russian experts believed that the deployment could be made expeditiously and secretly, without the United States discovering the missiles . They were confident that the missiles could be hidden so as to blend in with the palm trees .
 Secrecv surrounded the first Soviet delegation that went to propose the plan to Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders . Secrecve surrounded the Soviet delegation .
 The group included several missile construction specialists and other militarv experts . It was their job to determine whether the missiles could be deploved in secrecy .
 Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro ordered the group to meet with Fidel Castro immediately . They were shown into the leader's office to discuss the situation with Castro .
 USSR began chartering W estern ships to carry eneral cargo from the Soviet Lhion to Cuba in June and July . USSR reserving its own freighters for carrying military cargo .
 A Cuban delegation led by Raul Castro trav eled to Moscow 2 July to discuss Soviet military shipments, including nuclear missiles . The Cuban delegation was led by Castro to Moscow .
 Khrushchev Cold War Nuclear Missiles 7 met with the Raul Castro on 3 July . Khrushchen Cold War . Missiles . 7 .
 Raul Castro initialed a draft treaty with the Soviet Defense Minister that governed the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba . The treaty was signed by the Castro government in 1959 .
 Khrushchev planned to make a visit to Cuba in November . This pact was not to be publicly revealed until a visit Khrushche planned to visit in November.
 The plan was approved by Khrushchev on July 7, 1962 . The Russians began sending officers and specialists covertly to Cuba by air .
 On 10 July, the first Russian general arrived in Cuba to com­mand the Soviet contingent . The first general arrived on 10 July .
 Havana announced that Cuba and the USSR had signed an agreement establishing a regular MoscowHavana civil air route . Havana announced the agreement on 17 July, Havana announced it had signed a regular air route to Moscow .
 U.S. intelligence analysis at the time speculated that the new Tu-114 flights were bringing Soviet military officers and sensitive electronic and signal-monitoring equipment to Cuba .
 The then Minister for Industry, Ernesto “Che” Guevara, and the head of the Cuban militia led another delegation to Moscow from 27 August to 2 September . The head of Cuban militia also led the delegation .
 The purpose was to introduce Fidel Castro’s revi­ sions into the draft treaty . Fidel Castro's revi ­ sions were included in the proposed treaty .
 The Cubans proposed that the deployment be made public in order to head off any American overreaction . Khrushchev, however, successfully argued for continued secrecy . The U.S. refused to make the decision .
 The first SS-4 missiles arrived in Mariel, a Cuban port city, on board the Omsk on 8 September . The missiles are the first to arrive in the Cuban city of Mariel .
 The Indigirka brought the initial shipment of nuclear warheads on 4 October . The first nuclear warheads arrived in October .
 The United States received reports from friendly nations, newspaper correspondents, and other sources indicating that hundreds of Russian troops in fatigues had been seen in Havana .
 The information was funneled through counterrevolutionary organizations and their press in the United States, especially in Miami . The information funneled out of Miami .
 CLA discounted the information, because it did not consider the groups and people peddling it to be cred­ ible . CLA discounted information because it didn't consider it cred­iability .
 Reports flooded in from Cubans, tourists, foreign diplomats in Cuba, and newspaper officials reporting in private capacity . This strategy was highly effective, according to a former Cuban intelligence officer .
 At the CIA focal point at Opa-locka, Florida, intelligence officers screened countless 8 TEQUESTA reports and debriefed Cubans who had fled the island .
 On 4 September, Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin sought out Robert Kennedy and stated that he had received instructions from Khrushchev to assure the President that there would be no surface-to-surface missiles or offensive weapons placed in Cuba .
 Dobrynin also assured his brother that the Soviet military buildup was not of any significance . The Attorney General also said that the military buildup in the Soviet Union was not significant .
 On 6 September, Theodore Sorenson, special counsel to President Kennedy, met with Dobrynin, who reiterated his assurances that Soviet military assistance to Cuba was strictly defensive in nature and did not represent a threat to U.S. security . The Soviet assurances were made to Soren
 The following day, Dobrynin assured the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the USSR was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba . The next day, the USSR assured the U.S. Ambassador to U.N. that the Soviet Union was supplying
 TASS announced that the USSR neither needed nor intended to introduce offensive nuclear weapons into Cuba . On 11 September, TASS said that the Soviet Union was not interested in introducing offensive weapons .
 State Department official questioned Dobrynin on whether Moscow intended to put offensive weapons in Cuba . Ambassador denied any such intention . State Department spokesman: "Russia did not intend to put weapons into Cuba"
 A U-2 aircraft photographed the area of San Cristobal, where the first missile unit was being deployed . The fol­ lowing day was the first day of the missile deployment .
 President Kennedy revealed the missile buildup to the world on 22 October, 1962 .
 The clandestine operation by Russia to place medium-range and intermediate range ICBMs in Cuba allowed them to target almost the entire continental United States . Russia's clandestine operation allowed the U.S. to attack almost the whole continental U.K.
 The offensive military equipment was accompanied by Russian military troops and commanders with the authority-to launch missiles toward the United States . The offensive . military equipment is accompanied by . Russian military . troops with authority- to launch missiles . toward the U.S.
 The President and the Executive Committee were seeing explicit details of the Soviet nuclear offensive buildup . President and Executive Committee saw explicit details, the President said .
 MRBMs and IRBMs were following the advances of the MRBm and IRBMMs toward operational status with each days low-level recon photos .
 The missions, as the President knew, were dangerous and might escalate the crisis beyond the control of either side . President knew that the missions were dangerous . The missions are dangerous, as well as dangerous .
 Arms' units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanized and logistical assets, while the U.S. could not supply sufficient amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armored contingent from the Army . The United States did not have enough amphibious ships to transport a modest contingent
 Initial strikes would eliminate SAM sites and associated conventional AA defenses . Initial strike would eliminate all SAM sites, associated conventional defense systems .
 These strikes would be followed by massive attacks on Cuban hostile aircraft and other offensive weapons including MRBMs and IRBMs . After their pres­ ence was discovered and until thev were withdrawn, they were withdrawn .
 The 82n<^ and 101st Airborne D. ivisions were alert­ ed for immediate movement to southern Florida in order to counter the manned bomber threat . Subsequent attacks would target troop concentrations, artillerverv, and armor .
 The 1st Armored Division from Fort Hood, Texas, augmented by the 2/69ri Armor from Fort Benning . The division includes the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 10th
 Georgia, deployed to Fort Stewart, Georgia, in preparation for move­ ment by ship for the invasion ot Cuba .
 For six weeks the 1st Armored Division conducted live-fire training and amphibious exercises on the coasts of Georgia and Florida . The entire operation took just 18 davs.-6 .
 The Division consisted of 19.000 troops.,000 tanks, and an arsenal ot Hottest John surface-to-surface nuclear-capable missiles . The Division included 19,000 troops .
 Throughout the Crisis the 1st Armored Division was in a position to move out for an invasion of Cuba within a matter of hours . During the Crisis, the division was able to move to Cuba within hours of the invasion .
 The Soviet Union withdrew their missiles from Cuba and ended the crisis . Fortunately, before an invasion or a nuclear exchange could occur, the Soviet Union pulled its missiles from the country .
 One Automatic W eapons AD Battalion was sent to protect the stag10 TEQUESTA in” bases . Twelve support units, ranging in size from detachment to battalion, also deployed to Florida to provide logistical support .
 Battery B, 1st Automatic Weapons Battalion, 59th Artillery arrived in Florida on October 25, 1962 . Battery B was the first to arrive in Florida in 1962 .
 The weapons were of little threat to the supersonic Soviet aircraft then in Cuba . They provided psychological support more than defense .
 The next day Foreign Minister Gromyko met with President Kennedy for two hours . Foreign Minister Gromyko and President Kennedy met for the next day .
 Soviet aid to Cuba “pursued sole­ ly the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful economy” Gromvko assured him that the Soviet aid would contribute to Cuba’s defense capabilities .
 The following day, Gromvko assured Kennedy that Soviet Cuban aid was only for the “defensive capabilities of Cuba’s Cuba” The Cuban government insisted that the aid would only be for the defense of Cuba .
 On October 22, congressional leaders were shown photographic evidence of the Soviet missile installations .
 President Kennedy addressed the nation on the missile crisis in Cuba . At TOOm.m., President Kennedy spoke to the nation about the crisis . To see more from TOO, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 In his address, he assured the citizens of America of the following course of action:--’0 1.0 . In his speech, he said: ‘I’m not going to be afraid. I’ve never been afraid.’
 A strict quarantine on all offensive militarv equipment under ship­ ment to Cuba was being initiated . The quarantine is being initiated on offensive military equipment sent to Cuba .
 The United States would continue and increase surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup . The Armed Forces would prepare for any even­ tualities, the U.S. would say .
 The United States would consider anv nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack on the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response .
 The United States would reinforce the United States base at Guantanamo . Addi­ tional military units would be on standby alert on a standby basis .
 The President called for an immediate meeting of the Organization of American States, to consider this threat to hemispheric securin’
 The President requested an emergency meeting of the Security Council of the United Nations to call for the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba before the quaran­ tine would be lifted .
 The United States would call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and elimi­ nate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace . The U.S. would call on him to establish stable relations with the Soviet Union .
 Navy and Air Force pilots took off on the first low-level photo missions over Cuba on 23 October . Navy pilots of Light Photographic Squadron 62 and Air . Force pilots of the 363rc* Tactical Reconnaissance Wing .
 Forces under his command had instructions to intercept any vessel or craft proceeding toward Cuba and to interdict the delivery' of surface-to-surface missiles, bombers, bombs and bombs . The U.S. government ordered the intercept .
 B-52 bombers, armed with nuclear weapons, flew continuously, ready to head tor pre-assigned targets in the Soviet Union . The bombers were armed with nukes, but were not armed with weapons .
 A thousand Air Force bombers and fighters were transferred to Homestead and MacDill Air Force Bases . Hundreds of Navy and Marine Corps planes were sent to Boca Chica Naval Air Station at Key West .
 Kennedy planned an amphibious invasion of Cuba by the 1st Armored Division . In addition to the U.S. naval quarantine and the preparation for nuclear war with the Soviets, Kennedy planned a nuclear war .
 Ground units slated for the invasion included the First and Second Infantry Divisions, the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions . 12,000 Marines, already afloat in the Caribbean, were also slated to be on the ground .
 With this speed and altitude, the Soviets and Cubans had no warning, only the sonic roar as the reconnaissance planes flew by on flight profiles that brought them in low .
 At the successful conclusion of each mission, the \T-62 pilots would paint another dead chicken on the fuselages of their Crusaders to symbolize “Castro’s chickens coming home to roost”
 The United States failed to provide a ground-based air defense to adequately defend an attack front a fleet of Russian bombers front the southern hemisphere . Although there were Air Force and Navy units capable of defending South Florida against an enemy bomber, it quickly became apparent .
 To do so would require an air defense system of surface-to-air missiles . The U.S. has not been able to use such a system .
 Nike Hercules surface to air and surface-to-air air defense system with an awesome strategic nuclear deterrent capa­ bility was currently defending many other cities, industrial complexes and military installations .
 Nike Hercules also had both convention­ al and nuclear capability, which was initially deployed to South Florida . The Nike Hercules was deployed in South Florida in the 1980s .
 A Nike Hercules with a conventional warhead could intercept and elim­ inate a single enemv aircraft . With a nuclear warhead, a Nike Hercules could wipe out an entire fleet of aircraft, it could also wipe out a fleet of enemvs .
 An additional benefit of the nuclear warhead was that it neutralized anv nuclear weapons carried by enemy aircraft that might continue forward after the explosion . The explosion neutralized enemy aircraft carrying nuclear weapons .
 The Defense Department had alerted the Army 6^ Group at Fort Bliss on 20 October to prepare for movement to Florida . The group was preparing for the deployment of Surface-to-Air Missiles .
 The 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery was preparing for a mission such as this .
 The 2/52 was under the command and control of the 6C^ Air Defense Artillery Group located at Fort Bliss, Texas .
 It was comprised of a headquarters battery and four Nike Hercules field batteries . The Nike Hercules battery is comprised of four field batteries and headquarters .
 Hercules missiles were at the D Battery' missile site, near Krome Avenue and Tamiami Trail, 20 February' 1963 . Hercules missiles at the site were Hercules missiles .
 Soldiers working on radar equipment at one of southeast Florida’s missile sites . August 3. 1963 August 3 .
 On Thursday, 25 October, orders were issued for the HHB, Batteries A, C, D, 10th Signal Unit, and 200thOrdinance Detachment to depart for Florida by rail . Their primary mission was the first line of defense against the threat of Russian bombers
 The 2/52 was scheduled to deploy by troop train on Friday October 26th but were delayed in deployment from Fort Bliss due to a bridge being washed out after heavy rains some distance east of El Paso . The bridge was washed out due to heavy rains .
 The battalion arrived in Homestead, south of Miami, on 31 October . Temporary repairs were made and the train with crept across the washout area .
 The Florida East Coast Railway delivered the troops to deep south Dade, Florida . It was the first time the troops had been delivered to Dade .
 The rail's right-of-way paralleled U.S. Route One for a large portion of the journey .
 Troops moved through a counts’ whose residents were stocking up on food items . Residents were buss’ stocking up food items amid wide-ranging discussions over the severity of the crisis, and concern for the future .
 Cuban exile population gathered in Little Havana to pray for a resolution of this threat to the well-being of the world, as well as for the end of the Castro dictatorship . Especially concerned was the city and county’s large Cuban exile community .
 Once the 2/52 arrived at Homestead AFB, the men deployed to the various locations where the missiles and radars would be set up . The men were deployed to various locations .
 State police pulled over some of the trucks on the way to South Florida with warnings of citations for weight, lights, and other code violations . State police pull over trucks with warnings for weight and lights violations .
 This action was to respond in kind to the Soviet resumption of testing after the tacit 1958-1961 test moratorium . The action was in response to the Russian resumption .
 Most of these shots were conducted with free-fall bombs dropped from B-52 bomber aircraft . Most of the shots were carried out with free fall bombs dropped by B.52 bombers .
 Twenty of these shots were to test new weapons designs; six to test weapons effects; and several shots to confirm the reliability of existing weapons . Several shots were also used to test the reliability and effectiveness of new weapons .
 Thor missile was also used to lift warheads into near-space to conduct high altitude nuclear explosion tests . Operation Fishbowl was collectively called Operation Operation Fishbowl . Thor missile also used in high-altitude nuclear tests .
 Many Nike Hercules sites were equipped with nuclear war­ heads, but many arrived with conventional warheads . This was due to regulations that required a missile battery to become cer­ tified before being armed with nuclear weapons .
 This included site secu­ rity and an “inner security area” within a security area known as “exclu­ sion area’s” with military police and dogs . This included an ‘inner security’ area within a ‘
 Nike Hercules units had to set up very quickly in tents in tents and the only securitv was rolls of concertina barbed wire and roving armed soldiers .
 Nike Hercules missiles were equipped with HAWK missiles for the low-flying and slower aircraft that could slip in under the normal field of vision for the radar system . Additional missile units in Miami, Homestead, and Key West were also equipped with missiles .
 The 8^ Battalion of the 15^ Artillery' arrived from Fort Lewis, Washington, and set up Hawk missiles at Patrick, MacDill, and Homestead Air Force Bases and and the 6^ of the 65 in Key West .
 The soldiers of the 2nc^ of the 52n<^ arrived mid-morning October 31 via rail, with minimal ground equipment . The soldiers arrived in the U.S. on October 31 .
 They set up working air defenses under the most primitive conditions . They then set up their own air defenses in primitive conditions.
 Military planners typically located air defense sites in major cities and their sub16 TEQUESTA urbs in South Florida . First duty stations were located in the Everglades or in the midst of south Dade County bean and tomato fields .
 Soldiers bathed in nearby canals or travelled to Homestead AFB only once a week on an Army bus . Because showers were not immediately available at the temporary sites, soldiers bathed there in nearby waterways .
 The Army tried to improve the conditions lor the troops at the tem­ porary sites as quickly as possible . Some shaved in their steel helmets rather than making the trip to Homestead AFB . A local principal offered the locker room showers to the soldiers of C Battery after normal school hours
 Tents were constructed with sinks and showers in order to provide proper hygiene and boost morale . However, “little could be done to ameliorate the heat, humidity, and effects of the insects.”
 Meals were cooked on open gas ranges, and soldiers ate from mess kits, and shaved from their steel helmets using cold water trucked in from a fire hvdrant . Cold water was brought in from the fire hvrant .
 The 13'^ Group and 2/52 Headquarters and the headquarters bat­ teries based their operations at Princeton in the former B & L Farms tomato packing house . The headquarters of the 13' ^ Group and the . headquarters based their . operations in Princeton .
 The exact location was SW 244th Street and SW 137th Avenue on the west side of United States Highway 1 . It was located near U.S. Highway 1 and was located in the area .
 Battery A was deployed to an area near the main entrance to Everglades National Park on the west side of SR 9336 . Battery A is deployed to the area on the east side of the highway .
 The launching area was along Canal C-l 1 1 and the administration and 1FC was approximately one mile north on the same side of the highway . The launch area was located along Canal .
 He is a member of the 13th Artillery Group, trained in using HAWK and Nike-Hercules rockets to shoot down enemy jet fighters . He is also trained to use the rockets against enemy aircraft .
 Their base is a rudimentary camp set up in former bean and tomato fields . The camp is set up by former bean fields in the area .
 "The soldiers' biggest gripe, after boredom, is the South Florida mosquitoes."" — Caption in the Miami News, 1963 August 18 .
 Battery C deployed to Carol City, with the launch area along the Snake Creek Canal between NW 57thAvenue and NW 47Avenue . The launch area is located along the canal's main canal route .
 Administration and IFC areas were located one mile east near what is now NW 195thDrive and NW 52nd Avenue . The administration was located near what's now known as IFC headquarters .
 Battery D located to a site between Perrine and Kendall west of US Highway 1 . Battery D is located to the site between Perrine and Kendall . Battery is located on the east side of the road . Battery C is located in the area of Kendall and Perrine . Battery
 Tactical considerations and the requirements of each particular weapons system determined the site locations . Cold War Nuclear Minilei 19 were built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 I hese considerations often meant locating the sites in areas prone to flooding .
 Commanders did not always listen to the warnings of local residents about the hazards associated with the temporary sites . Commanders were not always listening to warnings of the hazards .
 When A Battery set up operations near the entrance to Everglades National Park, local farmers told the commander that a better location should be found .
 The commander deployed his troops anyway, ignoring local knowledge . Ignoring the local knowledge, the commander deploys troops anyway .
 Soldiers had to truck in numerous loads of fill dirt just to stay above water . Soldiers trucked in the fill dirt to keep their water levels above the surface of the water .
 The U.S. Army Corps ot Engineers structured permanent structures to house and facilitate the men, the equip­ ment and the overall operation of a nuclear missile site .
 In the summer of 1965, the batteries relocated to newlv constructed, permanent sites . The batteries were moved to permanent sites in the summer .
 Nike sites around the continental United States and in the NATO countries were varied in their configuration based on several factors . Nike sites in the continental U.S. and in NATO countries had different configuration configurations based on factors such as factors .
 Nike Hercules site, environment, and topogra­ phy. factors included variables such as having been converted from an Nike Ajax to a Nike Hercules. site . These factors included . having had to be converted from . an . Nike Ajax site to an Nike Hercules .
 Some launcher areas were below ground and raised the missiles on elevators . Some missiles were in air-supported tents with a -2 foot-long zipper . Others were in above-ground section barns .
 The missiles in South Florida were all in section barns . The sites were all within less than six feet above sea level and surrounded by water . The missiles were all located in section buildings .
 The radar section has to be a certain distance from the missiles so the Missile Tracking Radar could move mechanically fast enough to keep up with the launched missile to send location signals and receive burst commands . Radar section must be within a distance from missile launch to be able to receive location signals .
 Soldiers walk down “main street" of their missile base camp, 1963 Aug 3 .
 The Nike reaches Mach 3. (approximately 2700 mph) as a consequence of this enormous speed, it travels high­ er than its intended target and dives back down for the interception and detonation .
 Batterv was the onlv Nike Hercules site to have the High Power Acquisition Radar with added features and capabilities . Nike Hercules was the first site to offer the radar with added capabilities . The Radar Radar was added to the Hercules site .
 The remaining batteries continued to use the Alternate Battery Acquisition Radar they had used during the initial deployment . The remaining battery use the same radar as the first deployment .
 Administration Area consisted of the living quarters as well as eat­ ing, recreation, and day-to-day administration and operations . Administration area consisted of living quarters, eating, recreation and administration .
 Outside of administration building, but considered part of the administration area, were a main gate securin’ guard shed, water pump and pump house, sewage pump, athletic courts, paint, oil, and liquids shed, sewage treatment planr and drainfield .
 Facilities and equipment included main gate sentry, two perimeter security stands, exclusion area security building, water supply well, pump, and storage tanks, generator sheds, paint, oil, and liquid shed .
 Missile sites had facilities and staff to become cer­ tified for nuclear warheads . Now that the missile sites had the facilities and . staff, the process began. The process began .
 In late 1965, the first nuclear warheads were installed on the Nike Hercules missiles in South Florida . The Nike Hercules missile missiles were installed in late 1965 . The missiles were later used to carry nuclear warheads .
 Military strategists realized that Russia had not increased the size of its fleet of bombers as originally assumed . Instead, Russia had increased its ICBM fleet capable of delivering nuclear warheads anywhere in the United States .
 Nike Hercules was useful against airplanes of a certain speed and altitude . The Nike Hercules could be useful against planes flying at certain speeds and altitudes . The Hercules was a prototype of the Nike Hercules .
 The military needed to shift the costs from the Nike Hercules program to the anti-ICBM program . The cost of the program has been shifted to that anti-IBM program, the Pentagon says .
 Research by the United States military on the Nike Zeus missile system had developed to the point where small improvements would allow it to be used as the basis of a ""real” ABM system .
 Work started on a short-range, high-speed counterpart known as the Sprint . The Sprint will provide defense for the ABM sites themselves .
 Sentinel was a limited ABM system dubbed Sentinel in the mid-1960s . Both systems showed enough promise to start development of base selection for the system .
 At about the same time, the USSR reached strategic parity with the U.S. in terms of ICBM forces . At the time of the Cold War, the Soviet Union was at strategic parity . The Cold War was a time of strategic parity between the two countries .
 A nuclear war would no longer be a favor­ able exchange for the United States, as both countries would be devas­ tated . The United States and the U.S. would be at risk of war .
 This led in the West to the concept of mutually assured destruction in which any changes to the strategic balance had to be careful­ ly weighed . This led to the idea of mutually  assured destruction, which led to mutual assured destruction .
 ABMs now seem far too risky—it was better to have no defense than one that might trigger a war . ABMs are now too risky, and it's better than having no defense .
 In 1972, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treat was a treaty between the United States and the Soviet Union . The treaty limited the use of anti-ballistic missile systems used in defending areas against missile-delivered nuclear weapons .
 Number of sites reduced to one per party, largely because neither country had developed a second site . It reduced the number of sites to one each party .
 Arms' Air Defense Command and formerly the Arms' Antiaircraft Artillery Command . was disbanded in 1974 . The sites were Moscow for the USSR and Grand Forks Air Force Base, North Dakota, since its Safeguard facility was already under construction for the US .
 All 24 TEQUESTA remaining Nike Hercules sites were deactivated except batteries in Alaska and Florida, these being retained due to their proximity to Communist countries .
 When deterrence became a part of the U.S. national strat­ egy, ARADCOM was key and essential to that effort . It was key to deterrence in the United States’ national strategy .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered the Army to remove the W-31 nuclear warheads and replace them with conventional high explosive T-45 fragmentation warheads in 1975 .
 Operation Golden Shoes was named in “Operation Golden Shoes’s” The operation involved the support of Army Chinook helicopters and Air Force C-141 heavy-lit cargo aircraft .
 By late summer, all the W-31s in South Florida had been replaced with T-45s . The W-32s were replaced with the T-35s .
 By June, all Alaska sites had deactivated, and the 2nd Missile Battalion in Florida became the last remaining Nike Hercules missile units defending America within the continental United States .
 In September 1979, the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery stood down from its defense mission within the continental United States . It became a training battalion in support of NATO countries using Nike Hercules as their national air defense system .
 Nike Hercules units of the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery were awarded the Armv Meritorious Unit Commendation . Cold War Nuclear Missiles Deterrence to War to War .
 The award was for exceptionally meritorious achievement in the performance of outstanding services in the defense of their country during the period 20 October 1962 to 1 June 1963 while conducting active aerospace defense .
 Army missile units and their supporting detachments were deployed to complete a defensive ring around southern Florida against the threat posed to the U.S. during the Cuban crisis . Under almost primitive field conditions the missile units were deployed .
 The supersonic ring of weaponry had provided an air defense nerwork with multiple missile systems integrated into a single Svstem for the first time . Multiple missile systems were integrated into the air defense .
 The men were aware the Russians would need to destroy this Svstem to achieve reaching targets farther north . The men knew the Russians needed to destroy it to reach targets .
 In September 1979, the 2nd of the 5th stood down from its CONUS defense mission, moved to Fort Bliss, and became a training battalion . Training NATO countries who were still using Nike Hercules as their national air defense .
 The 2nd Missile Battalion 52nd ADA was deactivated in 1983 at Fort Bliss, Texas . Four years later on March 15, 1983, the 2nd missile battalion was deactivating in a cere­ mony .
 This was the last time a Nike Hercules unit existed in the Continental United States . Nike Hercules units were last used in Continental U.S. military units .
 Nike-Hercules was used as a front-line air defense weapon in Europe until the Patriot missile batteries were deployed . The Army continued to use it as a defense weapon until Patriot missiles were deployed in Europe .
 NATO units from West Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Belgium and Greece, continued to use the Nike-Hercules for high-altitude air defense until the late 1980s .
 With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, the units were deactivated . The units were later deactivated after the collapse in the Soviet Union .
 On April 16, 1988, The 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd ADA Regiment was reactivated at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, as a HAWK .
 In 1990, The 2nd Missile Battalion was reactivated as a Patriot Missile Battalion . It deployed to Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Kuwait as a unit of the XVIII Airborne Corps .
 The 2nd of the 52nd served in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm . The 52nd was the 2nd in Desert Storm and Desert Shield .
 It was awarded the Valorous Unit Award and an embroidered streamer for the defense of Saudi Arabia and liberation of Kuwait .
 The 2/52 ADA moved to Fort Bliss on 15 August 1996 . The 108th Brigade is now located at Fort Polk, Louisiana, as a Patriot and Avenger brigade . The brigade was under the control of the 108th brigade .
 The 2nd of the 52nd added an airborne tab above its patch . Still under the control of the Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg, the 2nd added the airborne tab .
 The 2nd of the 52nd was the brigade's only unit to serve on jump status . The brigade was the only unit in the brigade to be jump-jumped .
 This platoon was the first ADA unit to be deploved in the opening days of the Gulf War . This platoon had the distinction of being the first to be declassified .
 In 2010, South Korea and Italy removed the last of the Nike Hercules as their national air defense weaponry . The Nike Hercules were used in South Korea, Italy and Japan .
 In 1980, the facilitv was transferred to the National Park Service and since then it has been used as the Daniel Beard Research Center . Scientists study and assist in the eradication of non-indigenous species in Florida .
 In 2007, A Battery received National Register of Historic Places . The Battery received significant significance in the history of the United States and its impact on the culture of South Florida .
 It has been designated as a National Historic District with twenty-two remaining structures from the Nike missile site . The Nike missile missile site is located near the Nike Air Force Base .
 Everglades National Park staff conducts tours of the partiallv-restored Nike site from December through April . Since 2009, the park staff has conducted tours from December to April .
 A ceremo­ ny to commemorate the men who served in South Florida from 1962 through 1979 was conducted by the Everglades National Park on Sunday, October 21, 2012 .
 In 1980, the B Batter)administrative building was used to house Cubans who came to Miami as part of the Mariel Boatlift .
 The administrative and IFC areas have been transferred to the Navy and finally to Florida State Parks . Since then, the administrative areas of the IFC were transferred .
 The former launch area was transferred to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1980 . Crocodile Lake National Wildlife Refuge is now a national wildlife refuge .
 The administration of the IFC area was transferred to the United States Navy in 1 980, who converted it into a United States Naw and Marine Reserve Training e> Center .
 The launch area was completely demolished and is the future site of the Florida National Cuard Snake Creek Training Center . The launch site is now a training facility .
 In 1980, the administration and IFC area was utilized to house Cuban refugees during the Mariel Boatlift . Krome Avenue and Tamami Trail is located on Tamiami Trail . The area was used as a place for Cuban refugees to be held during the 1980-80 Mariel
 The launch area was used as a detention center for those who were considered as high risk and need­ ed to be detained . It was used to detain those considered high risk .
 It remained as a federal detention center for Cuban, Haitian, and other non-Americans who were deemed mentally incapable, criminals or deportees . The detention center was used as a detention facility for Cuban and Haitian detainees .
 State Department official George Kennan, then stationed in Moscow, warned of Soviet inflexibility in 1946 . Kennan warned of the dangers of the Soviet Union in 1946. Kennan: "It's not a matter of time"
 Kennan wrote that the U.S. would have to use "vigilant containment" to deter the USSR's expansionist tendencies . Kennan: The United States, wrote Kennan, would use “vigilantic containment"
 Garthoff, 15; also, Gribkov and Smith, 14 . Cold War Nuclear Missiles 29 7 Cold War Missiles: 29 7 7 Garthoffs, 15 .
 This source draws on input from key Soviet/Russian/Russian and American officials who had a hand in the crisis . This source includes input from both Russia and the U.S.
 There is conflicting source information on the number of warheads specifically for the SS-4 missiles .
 36 appears to be a likely figure as that tracks with Soviet doctrinal requirements for re-fire missiles . This issue cannot be resolved based on current evidence, but 36 seems to be likely figure .
 This is a special issue on intelligence and the missile crisis, edited by James G Blight and David A Welch .
 It is a unique collection of articles on the roles played bv different intelligence services . It is the first of its kind .
 Only some of Cuba's nuclear-capable delivery systems were readv tor action in late October .
 Only about half of the 36 SS-4s were readv to be fueled . Not one had been programmed tor flight. Not one was programmed .
 After the end of the crisis in late October, all U.S. Army forces deployed to Florida and Georgia were ordered to return to their home stations . Only the three AD battalions and their support units were sent home .
 Other units deployed to Florida were the 6rh Missile Battalion , 65th Artillery', from Fort George G Meade, Maryland; and the 8th Missile Battalion . 15rh Artillery, from Fort Lewis, Washington; and Battery B , 1st Gun Battalion, 59^ Artillery
 Nikita Khrushchev announced the end of a three-year moratorium on nuclear testing on 30 August 1961 . Soviet tests recommenced on 1 September, initiating a series of tests that included the detonation of Tsar Bomba .
 It was the largest nuclear weapons testing program ever conducted by the United States . The last Cold War Nuclear Missiles 31 atmospheric test series conducted by U.S. was signed in Moscow the following year .