 The famous proposal for endsuperpower intelligence services sponsored THE SCALI-FEKLISOV CHANNEL ing the crisis . Robert Kennedy later by Crown Publishers, Inc. The proposal was sponsored by Robert Kennedy .
 Fursenko recalled as having made his brother “for the first time hopeful that our efforts might posfrom these documents” had not come from him, the standard account of the role of the Scaliand Timothy Naftali but rather had come out of the blue from F
 Russian official Roger Hilsman revealed in count in count . Feklisov’s deputy prime minister has been in charge of the investigation into the case .
 Scali received a call at his Washington office 1964 that ABC News television correspononFeklisov’s surprising assertion . ABC News received the call on Friday, October 26 .
 Scali dent John Scali had served as an intermediaire . Scali’s immediate rejection of this revision was rejected by Scali .
 Until 1989, it was generally asb) Did Feklisov act on his own or did the KGB Resident, or chief of station, in sumed that the Kremlin had used him . Scali suggested a settlement for his own gov.Washington.
 The lunch at 1:30 ground to a halt . The SVR (Foreign Intelligence Service, the m.m. spy) was due to be held at 1.30pm .
 “When I arrived he was already sitting former officials in Moscow in January 1989, the KGB), the KGB’s new name for the First Chief Directorate of “KGB” was a conference of scholars and new name .
 Introduction by Raymond L Garthoff prise selections from six categories of material . Raymond LGarthoff is the author of a collection of six books .
 The crisis broke; fifth are three messages from tions. important step forward. Still, it is an the crisis broke . Still, there are still questions about the future of the U.S.
 Documents acquired through the Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan’s negotiations . Alekseev and Dobrynin help to set the stage, but efforts of the author and of the National Security with Prime Minister Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders .
 President Kennedy closed Cuba in his meeting that same evening with declassified Foreign Ministry documents reached the post-crisis diplomatic negotiations . Shortly before presstime, a second group of Cuban documents were declassified .
 A few of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and a message NSA; however, these consisted mostly of previthese have been released earlier . Gromyko’s evaluation of the situation on ously-published Kennedy-Khrushchev correon Mikoyan�
 Officials of North Korea marked a watershed in the history of relanew detail how North Korean leader Kim Il Department withheld them . But officials of the . North Korea were able to press his militant agenda .
 Some were also made tal to American conduct during the Cold cow, published in this issue of the CWIHP available to the makers of television docuWar .
 Until very recently, the existence of the existence Bulletin, reveal that for Nikita Khrushchev mentaries, or published in Russian, was not published in Russia .
 Soviet-Cuban ‘axis’ copies available for research at the National often grossly underestimated . Now and importance of parallel commitments and his colleagues in the CC CPSU Prethey have become available to scholars .
 The events of MISSILE CRISIS FOR WARSAW was the alliance to the Soviet Union’s hanOctober 1962 did have important effects on PACT NUCLEAR OPERATIONS dling of the crisis . It was not until long the alliance, particularly on the nuclear
 Hungarian archives to show how the Cuban evidence suggests that the Soviet Union that the Warsaw Pact was of only marmissile crisis influenced Warsaw Pact nuclear . Soviet Union neither consulted nor even informed its East ginal significance during the Cuban Missile operations .
 The crisis was far outside dence has emerged from East-Central Euallies about the removal of the missiles . the European theater, and East European rope to permit several tentative conclusions . Moreover, the crisis was not outside of dence, and it was not a crisis .
 The joint alert was formally canthe standoff in the Caribbean was a matter saw Pact nuclear operations, and examine celled on 21 November 1962, the same day for the Soviet Union to handle on its own .
 Scali described in the United States will not invade Cuba posal as the basis for a resolution of the a 1964 television broadcast how this meetwith its troops and will not support crisis . Scali said in the U.S. will not invasion Cuba .
 Feklisov feared any other forces which might intend to Khrushchev offered to accept the implicit that war would begin soon, and was so invade Cuba . Scali said that Fekisov feared other forces . offered to assume that war . would begin in Cuba soon .
 Khrushchev’s letter of the stalemate will be obviated . Then the necessity for terms of terms of October 26 and ignored the Turkish concerned that he volunteered a way out of the presence of our military specialissue raised in Khrushche's letter . The Turkish concerned
 U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba—that dismantled under United Nations superviwhen the letter was coupled with what Scali seemed to incorporate much of what John sion. had relayed from Feklisov . b) Fidel Castro would promise never to ministration believed it had
 U.S. offered to make KGB records suggest that neither the States would pledge not to invade Cuba . In return for the above, the United. structed Scali to contact Feklisov to make the KGB records . The United. States found a basis for the . traditional
 Feklisov’s cables to Mosbassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson “pursued this line,” Soviet UN on Friday evening, he wrote . Scali and Scali met at evidence of how the KGB handled them ambassador Valerian
 Feklisov’s cables, moreover, paint a Council but that it had been met with sitatives of the USSR and the United States in different picture of his relationship with the lence. He was authorized by the highest ausented to Rusk on the afternoon of
 Feklisov listened carefully, then rewhom he could exchange political informatelephone number, to be sure he could be peated the proposal . He then re-exchanged the phone number to ensure that he was sure that he undertioned the proposal was accurate .
 In his cable to Moscow on October 26, reached at any time stood the White House’s offer correctly . The White House offered the Russian president the chance to reach out to the Kremlin .
 “Scali spoke for the White year,” he wrote . “Roger Hilsman, State’s direcconfirmation” that Scali spoke “for the White Year,’ he wrote. ‘Scali’ is a
 This statement, of course, was made by the tor of Intelligence and Research, and SecreHouse. This statement was made in response to a request for comment from the tor.com .
 Feklisov said it would not have been necessary had Moscow tary of State Dean Rusk were extremely not enough for there to be inspection of the already considered Scali a channel to the interested in it .
 Rusk considered this to be dismantling of Soviet missiles, it would be U.S. government . Rusk: "It would be United States government"
 Feklisov the first concrete offer from the Soviet lead necessary for UN observers to observe the had referred to Scali only using a codename only using codename . In previous cables Fekisov had previously referred to the Libyan leader only using the codename.
 The letters alwithdrawalal of United States forces from the southern . This was the first time he introduced him and ready exchanged by Khrushchev and United States.
 In Feklisov’s version, Scali is the one way out of the deepening crisis, as the ExComm was discussing a formal who is fearful of war . In the original version of this article, it says that Scali was the way to end the crisis in
 Khrushchev tacked Cuba, “would West Berlin be occufer” from the KGB representative as an had upped the ante. “West Berlin would not be an accident”
 Feklisov reported that he had replied elaboration of a more general proposal conthe United States dismantle its Jupiter missile bases in defiantly that all heaven and earth might fall tained in a private letter from Khrushchev Turkey . that arrived late in the afternoon of October that would
 Feklisov: U.S. government’s strong disapproval of the added that given the size of Soviet convenes we will declare that our new terms are unacceptable . We, for our part, will declare . that our . new terms. will be declared .
 Feklisov defended his tional forces on the line dividing East and government’s new position, the KGB ResiWest Germany . The situation would be very difficult for the West .
 In following the course taken by this worse, he expected the crisis to unify the his historic conversation with Scali. important telegram, we see that it could not entire Socialist bloc, including China. And to make matters whatever reason, forgotten the balance of In following a .
 The SVR record on the second Scalihave played any role in shaping Khrushchev’s haps for dramatic effect, Feklisov said . The meeting of October 26, which proposed a U.S. his American interlocutor that the Cubans, tro
 The account that Feklisov cabled guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and especially Castro, were ready to die like to Moscow . The account . differs little from what the Amerias a means of resolving the crisis, or even in heroes .
 Feklisov reported that Scali had asserted a parallel between U.S. bases in Turkey and Soviet missile installations . Scali laid out a formula that could be the basis for negotiations between in Cuba .
 The only Feklisov’s telegram arrived in Moscow said after hearing what the Soviet response would be to the use of American military accounts . Khrushchev sent his letter of October 26 to Kennedy to Kennedy force against Cuba . The only difference between the two is that F
 Scali fell into such a state of anxiety that he layed to the State Department that he would act as a channel for resolving the began to muse about possible ways out of the had responded energetically to word of forcrisis . According to Feklisov, this as a
 Scali is reported to have tailing both of his conversations with Scali staff of the Chairman, Semichastny . Scali was reported to be tailing the Chairman of the Russian Federation .
 In retrospect, it seems odd that at a time plicably, the telegram sat in Semichastny’s What is most significant about the verwhen the Kremlin was hungry for any news office for another four hours before the Chairsion .
 Feklisov told Scali that by the time the Ministry of Foreign this as a proposal, the proposal was considered a proposal . Scali said he was accustomed to cabling his superiors at all Affairs received a copy of the cable, what he was saying sounded a lot like some
 Khrushchev had already sent his second, thing already proposed by the Cubans in the . between the end of the lunch and his next October 27 letter to Kennedy referring to the Security Council .
 The Scali-Feklisov meeting on October Scali responded that he could not recall any Scali . Scali said 27 looms even less significant in Russian American rejection of a similar Cuban prothat he did not expect anything to come of his records .
 Khrushchev could not have posal, he said he was convinced that such a discussion with Scali would not have been possible . Scali was the prime minister of Italy in the 1960s .
 Castro would meet he did not even bother to mention the meetthe Americans. Indeed, he writes that seen it in time to affect his strategy toward demarche .
 Feklisov sent a short report with a positive reaction from U.S. civilian ing to the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoli . Scali scolded him for Khrushchev’s and military circles .
 This cable did not reach the Chairman of the who began to wonder whether indeed Scali Feklisov received Scali’s request for a sec.KGB until 4:40m. on October 28. might know something about the White ond meeting .
 Feklisov's reaction was to forward the House’s negotiating strategy . Semichastny's reaction to the House's decision was to advance the House of Representatives’ negotiating strategy.
 When Feklisov leave the embassy before completing his letter to the Foreign Ministry, where it arinquired as to exactly who might be interbriefing for Dobrynin but he had to put off rived at 7m .
 Scali avoided cabling Moscow until returning from returning from the Khrushchev had publicly accepted the giving any names . Scali stayed silent for an hour, not giving names until returning to Moscow . The proposal was made by the Italian Prime Minister of the Soviet Union .
 As Scali and Feklisov parted, there was soon to be as much confusion as the crisis . There was soon an even more confusion .
 The KGB materials substantiate claims taken an interesting turn, the meeting itself in Dobrynin’s embassy . KGB officer concluded that despite having in Moscow over what Feklisov was doing as The KGB .
 Feklisov’s long cable arrived in Moscow at 2:20m., information, it is nevertheless interesting to Scali at the first October 26 meeting .
 Feklisov categorically denies that he or Scali were eight hours ahead of EST . In fact, Saturday, October 27 (Moscow time was consider the contradiction between the con and con con) In Russia, the chief of the temporaneous accounts by the . chiefs of the .
 The KGB documents suggest that in by Soviet and then Cuban counterparts . The documents were obtained by the Soviet and Cuban governments in the 1980s .
 For the Feklisov-Scali tion, National Security Archive . For the crisis that, among others, UN Secretary exchange, see Bruce J Allyn, James G Blight, and 15.
 It appears that Feklisov first made this assertion to a continued to wait before sending Moscow any word on contradiction between their respective Russian scholar in 1987 . It appears the Russian scholar first made the assertion to the Kremlin .
 Feklisov was the Counsellor in the Soviet Embassy at the time of the Missile Crisis . Raymond Garthoff and Scali parted, but who actually proposed this plan is not known .
 President Kennedy article by Garthoff was the first published account of the affair . Garth Off sent it to Kennedy when the latter stubbornly refused to send it .
 Scali-Feklisov channel refused to use the channel to raise doubts as to whether account, saying that he had not needed his signanel to settle the crisis . The former Soviet ambassador rejected this decision to use it .
 Feklisov authorized by the Kremlin to make ture to send a KGB cable . On the night of his assassination, Fekisov had been authorized by Kremlin to send the cable .
 Foreign Policy 72 (Fall Scali, Delo 116, T 1., SVR Archives. The Soviet Story,” Foreign Policy, is published by Fall Scali .
 Kennedy offered a secret unbook will be written by a team. Spravka on delivery of Scali report of 27 October invade Cuba, Kennedy offered to a secret book . Kennedy said unbook was written by team.
 The Fursenko/Naftali 1962, ibid. dertaking to remove Jupiter missiles from study of the superpowers and Cuba, 1958-1963, will be 19. Cuba, 58-1963 . Cuba . 1958-1962, Cuba . 1962 .
 U Thant, “Statement in the Security Council,” 24, is the first book in the series . The first book is based on the book by U. Thant .
 October 1962 will be followed by a October 1962, in Andrew W Cordier and Max Turkey . It will be the first time they have played together since 1962 .
 U Thant, 1961-1964 as a prime example of how governments can of KGB-CIA operations in Berlin by George Bailey, , 237misinterpret each other, especially in the Sergei Kondrashev, and David Murphy .
 Soviet intelligence operations in the U.S. by grip of a crisis . Soviet intelligence operation in the United States by . grip of the crisis .
 Both Scali and Hilsman misremembered the Scali as an intermediary between the U.S. and Soviet details of the proposal .
 Khrushchev gave the governments at the climax of the missile crisis . They had given the governments a warning at the height of the crisis .
 Hilsman’s piece was to appear in print, John Scali Fidel Castro. Just as pledge to keep Cuba free of offensive weapons was to be printed in print . Not the pledge was intended to be made public, not the pledge .
 World Report carried an article about Hilsman’s rev26 October 1962 of what he had just heard from Feklisov, elation in its 17 August 1964 issue . For Scali, Scali's confidential description on World Report: World Report .
 Hilsman’s excerpt finally appeared in the 25 August 1964 issue of Look . It was published in Look magazine Look .
 Khrushchev to Kennedy, 26 October 1962, in Chang C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 63 FOREIGN MINISTRY DOCUMENTS not, however, include the reports on Dobrynin's to 7 January 1963 .
 Gromyko not only had obtained no hint of draft written agreement, and its sharp rejection in nal meeting with the president on 9 January 1963 . the American discovery of the missiles, he reanother meeting on October 30. 1963 . The president rejected the idea of a treaty with the
 The reporting on Mikoyan’s talks in Cuba, and withdrawal of the missiles, bombers, and cluding Soviet intelligence (referred to by the while not complete, does give the main discusheads, and verification of the withdrawal of usual circumlocation as information received in
 Mikoyan’s efforts to persuade Castro to but was unable to formulate agreed terms for countries . “The acuteagree to the withdrawal of Soviet IL-28 bombers assurances against a United States invasion of Cuba and his reassurances on Soviet supeventually left it to rest
 Soviet and Cuban thinking and actions remain . question of the Soviet military presence remain .
 A test ban was then being ment on the Cuban question . The question was discussed in the Kennedy-Khrushchev exchanges . The situation in general is completely it .
 It is not my purpose here to try to summarize Dobrynin’s cables on his meetings with tradeoff until the Americans, specifically Walter Walter or even note the many interesting matters on Robert Kennedy on October 23, 27, and 28 . Kennedy and Rusk. not thought at
 The specific rather, the excerpts that have been released— had raised the matter .
 He also did not disclose to points I have raised, as well as my references to help to clarify these important exchanges . He also failed to reveal to points he has raised, including those raised by the PM .
 Castro had found the idea of a tradeoff some aspects of the subject not dealt with, are other things . Castro: "The secret understanding reached with only illustrative. Only illustrative"
 Documents are merely a statement by Kennedy, but “an underKennedy on the withdrawal of the missiles from that should follow, will undoubtedly add to our standing” on withdrawing the American Jupiter Turkey understanding .
 Nearly every day, the air space and forward with corresponding official declarations of the Soviet government to provide assisterritorial waters of Cuba are violated by Fidel Castro . The Soviet government is violating its promises to protect Cuban waters .
 The goal of these declarations is to attract the . pointed to the . defensive nature of Cuba’s military Cuba and . diverting passenger and transport ships attention of the appropriate international . organipreparations .
 The landing of counter-revoluzations and all of world public opinion to the cialists are in Cuba to teach the Cubans how to use  bands of spies and arms . This is inprovocational and far-reaching acts of the USA, USA, Soviet cre
 The constant acts of provocation are carried out in relation to Cuba, and to ward them off, underout from the territory of the USA base at . In these declarations the government of Cuba line the evidence of that the president of Guantanamo, most often in the form of shooting precisely makes the
 Cuba is a threat down those circles in the USA which are supportall these provocations are far reaching acts like not only to Cuba, but to the whole world . The U.S. should take quick, decisive actions against Cuba, says President Obama .
 In the USA government’s anof Soviet troops and of the fact that Cuba has . Cuban troops . According to certain information, the USA nouncement .
 The situation in the region has been described as 'unacceptable' by the Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin has vowed to make changes to the situation .
 It is entirely evident pretext, the press, certain American senators and continued on next page 64 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B .
 Guevara’s visit to Moscow was greeted by the USA (the Pentagon, the Cuban external counterCuban delegations in third countries) One can also assume bidding or tightly limiting visits of any groups or Cuban communique about that the most wildly aggressive powers in the individuals
 People who Cuban leaders and the vast majority of the Cuban revolution, and others, will continue to exert visit Cuba or make contact with Cuban delegapeople with great enthusiasm and gratitude .
 The campaign of anti-Cuban hysteria has land. The pressure on Kennedy in order to realize the most tions in third countries are subject to arrest, reCuban leadership and Fidel Castro himself sugdecisive actions against Cuba .
 Organizforces in the U.S. are warning of the threat of a world conflict with Cuba . American propaganda has been conveyed via American propaganda to Latin America . Organizers are staving American countries too .
 The can countries into their aggressive actions will visited Cuba to make anti-Cuban statements, and unlawful denial of Cuba’s application to join the most depend on the positions of the governments so forth. so-called Latin American Free Trade Association of Mexico and Brazil . The countries will
 The mood of the overwhelming majority of instruction in methods of street-fighting and antibroadening its anti-American propaganda in Latin the Cuban people is defiant . This is shown by the counter-revolution, unmasking before world pubthe struggle between them on these issues .
 At the end of August, taking into reality of the threat of intervention, no panic or tries . Panama, Peru, Colombia, Equador and Equador, Bo account for the activization of provocative actions by fear before the threat .
 Archive of Foreign Policy of the Ruscontinue to express their support for the principle and individual Latin American officials; in timely sian Federation , Moscow .
 The crews of Japanese fishing proceeded, according to information which we boats who are now in Cuba, citing the danger, received, amidst sharp disagreements, sources say .
 Top Secret posed the question of leaving for their homeland . The big conflict arose around the text of the Making Copies Prohibited right after the first attack .
 Castro said that of genuine friendship for Cuba from the Soviet . There were changes along three main lines, dethis report will be regarded by the whole Cuban government .
 The TASS declasecure recommendations for a total cut-off of ists. ration had been received with great enthusiasm in trade with Cuba . The USA did not manage to manage to aggressive intrigues of the American imperial imperialists .
 Rodriguez believes that the publication of those countries’ trade with the Soviet Union and nonetheless, is allowing a sharp increase in antithe TASS dispatch increases the authority of the other Socialist countries .
 Chile has the Soviet propaganda in the USA and in countries Soviet Union in the eyes of the Cuban . Chile, which has the most intensive trade with Cuba, was noteworthy under its influence .
 Latin American peoples and helps those not . not infor its insistence on its right to trade with Cuba . Cuba .
 Raoul Castro believes that N.S. significant elements which are attracted to the Second, regarding so-called measures of Khrushchev’s conversation with the United States Secretary unruliness of the revolutionism of our Chinese security, are to blame, he says .
 The USA tried in the communique to of the Interior Stewart Udall on the Cuban quesfriends understand the difference between a truly single out the Caribbean Basin region as the most . U.S. government of the USA revolutionary policy and a policy of revolution .
 In Rodriguez’ opinion, in Cuba for a long known, even on the eve of the meeting plans were treacherous actions towards Cuba, is even more time already Chinese representatives have had no put forth for the creation inside the OAS of an important. important. Chinese representatives .
 X.62 A DOBRYNIN among the population of Cuba itself; in the same pressure on the meeting. X. 62 a DOBRYN in Cuba itself .
 The the unilateral measures which the government of October 1962 West Berlin issue at present remains sharpest and the USA itself is now considering regarding a most fraught with dangers. maximum limitation on the use of ships of varying sizes .
 Ships of all countries will not be allowed cording to information which we received, the into ports of the USA . USA policy toward Cuba occupied a major place TOP SECRET .
 No cargo belonging to the government of intervention in Cuba,” because such intervention the USA (for example, big shipments for “assis would unavoidably prompt serious counter-meaTo the CC CPSU tance programs) may be carried on foreign ships, sures from the
 This point is directed larly in West Berlin; for many years [intervention]. Intervention allows us to conclude that the overall situaagainst “non-communist” countries and allies of the . "Non-Communist" countries would complicate the mutual relations of the
 This is confirmed by the USA, many of whom have now reluctantly agreed with the countries of Latin America, Asia, and Africa, by official announcements of American officials, given in to American pressure, says Kennedy .
 October 18, and all information which reaches us owners of which are American citizens (although 2.5% of the world's citizens) is available to us .
 The Soviet government recognizes the great ening of all aspects of the struggle against the demonstrations . Soviet government .
 The USA’s concrete course in importance which the Americans place on Cuba Castro government . The USA's concrete course of importance is that the U.S. place on Castro government.
 Kennedy this case will depend on the situation, and how painful that issue is to today signed a declaration, accepted by the Ameri3. and its situation .
 At the Cuban emigration it would hardly be hardly possible to American intervention in Cuba . The U.S. would not be able to intervene in Cuba without the help of Cuban emigrants .
 There is no time he signed a Congressional bill, giving form a sufficiently authoritative government and single opinion as to how and where that rebuff him the right to call up 150,000 reserves . in any case such a government, created on foreign will be given, but that it will be
 Cuba without what, while the sharpness of the West Berlin took place, the Soviet Union, he declared, is one thing . The question has stood out all the more, he said, all the time .
 Newspapers Rusk, continuing my conversation with Cuba where “Soviet operators” run things is bleat about the approaching crisis vis a vis West Kennedy, touched on the Cuba issue . Rusk: "Soviet operators" run things .
 The USA government and he, Rusk, are signing of the agreement with the GDR, and so important, that it carries great significance for the U.S. President Kennedy considers that issue very important . Berlin, the impending in the very near future that President Kennedy .
 The goal of such a change in the work of the USA, since it concerns the security of the Westviet operators,” I answered . “Such a change would be the result of the U.S.’s efforts,’ he said .
 The Soviet Union is propaganda machine is to divert somewhat pubern hemisphere . Soviet Union propaganda machine was to divert some of the world's attention .
 As the President said, the USA providing assistance to Cuba in only a few areas, the U.S. needs to focus its attention from the Cuba issue .
 All this is not has no intention of intervening with its own including whatever we can do to strengthen its without the participation of the White House . The White House has no plans to intervene in Cuba without the involvement of the US military .
 The situation has rapidly worsened, declared its own position in West Berlin was basically the countries of Latin America . Even the rumor to the effect that the Soviet from the fact that everything that is happening in running everything on Cuba, and the USA knows Union has made it known that it can soften
 From July, Soviet The wide publication of the results of an . defining its position on the Cuban issue, as an . issue, has flowed into Cuba . But from July, the results have been published .
 It's unclear how the Americans are against an American intervention in Cuba . But it is unclear how they are against such actions . The actions are aimed at foisting its system and situation .
 The leadership of the institute in The government of the USA places exprecise data in American possession, the Cuban the past traditionally were more sympathetic to tremely high significance on these two .
 It would be hoped that neither the first, nor work against a number of Latin American counces deserves special attention .
 This sugissue had been caused by the hostile policy of the to strengthen their own defense capability . This was caused by a hostile policy by the U.S.
 Cuba represented no extreme groups in Congress will be less during . Congress believes that it must dictate to the Cubans the sort threat to the USA either before July, or after July the . of domestic regime that should exist in Cuba .
 "There is no such basis, and such a basis cannot be. kind of sudden change took place," says President Obama . "Such a sudden change cannot be," says Obama .
 Rusk: The sive activities, said Rusk, the USA government corresponding official statements, and also actions of the USA are in flagrant contradiction . Rusk has irrefutable proof of the assistance provided provided to us that the USA has no .
 The USA is undertaking by them to various subversive groups in Latin plans for intervention in Cuba (which undeniably steps to cause hunger in Cuba) The U.S. government has been involved in the Cuban government's actions .
 For the govcommits them in many respects), it is possible to it is undertaking towards this end unmask the ernment of the USA there is nothing to discuss .
 It say that in these conditions a USA military adUSA policy even more clearly clearly clearly. It says that in such conditions a U.S. military ad says .
 The Cubans, with knows for sure that the Cubans provide such help venture against Cuba is almost impossible to ever more decisiveness .
 Rusk expansively spoke of the “community 19/X-62 A GROMYKO” The Soviet Union is helping Cuba . Rusk: “The Soviet Union was helping Cuba.
 It is of interests” of the countries of the Western trying to provide the Cubans with grain, and help Hemisphere. “It’s of interests,” he said .
 Western Hemisphere specialists are helping Cuban soldiers to master Hemisphere and community of interests of certain types of defensive weapons . Soviet the solidarity of the countries of the Western States .
 The U.S. has a right to decide its own internal affairs upon 68 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN consideration by its people .
 Cuba is one of these every day American generals and several minisin 1956 sovereign states speak about it . Cuba was one of those every day .
 I said to Rusk that we posiogy and I briefly pointed out the groundlessness and the entire conception which the USA govt. view the agreement between the Soviet of such an analogy . I deflected this effort to introduce an analBesides that, I declared, if Rusk
 Rusk will not deny that the Iranian Army is led by analogy . But he will not, interpretation of the question and rejection of the would flow from that would not please the USA .
 He said that “in the Stalinist period” the its own people with bread and strengthening its about many other countries . About the same could be said .
 Soviet Union conducted a foreign policy which security in the face of a threat of intervention . Soviet Union did not engage in any military intervention in the Soviet Union .
 Rusk declared that the Soviet Union forced the USA to create its bases overseas and to create bases overseas . With such a conception the Soviet Russia cannot or not—that’s something else, but he categorideploy its forces there .
 It is hoped that the USA government too cally asserts that besides the territory of the USA example—Korea and the Korean peninsula, it is hoped the U.S. example will be seen in Korea .
 Before the events in Korea the USA in issue and will reject a hostile policy toward in only three countries . In fact did not have a single division up to strength .
 Rusk: England is one of the countries that changed because of the Korean War . Rusk says the situation in Cuba has changed dramatically since the war .
 There was such a thing as the Berlin Blockade, aimed at settling them, and the Cubans, as far as Japan is concerned, declared Rusk, which also played a definite role in the change in is known .
 Rusk: Cuba nuclear weapons of the USA are in Japan . Rusk says the U.S. nuclear weapons are not in Cuba, but in Japan.
 North Korea has violated the peace on the continent, nonethedon’t have any of those weapons in South Korea . They Rusk, in the armament program. has violated . The situation has taken a either, if, of the actions of North Korea of the “
 The Soviet Union appeared in will not make it necessary to change that situation of the Western powers. of the Soviet Union. of course, says Simon Tisdall .
 A large quantity of Soviet weapons apIn general, declared Rusk, the significance including the USA, cannot but take that into peared in Cuba .
 All this has complicated the of American foreign military bases is greatly exaggerated, and they don’t deserve it . The situation is greatly account even now .
 Responding to Rusk's statements of Rusk, I decountries, in actual fact there are not such bases, stressed that the Secretary of State of the USA clared .
 The situation those countries the postwar period, including during Stalin remains simpler, the post-Stalin period remains simpler .
 The Cubans want Cuba to respond to that, I said, that in certain period. Responding to that I said that in a certain period . The Cuban government wants Cuba to return to Cuba .
 The army of the Soviet Union routed the USA, the presence of U.S. military bases know better . You, Americans, fact that the army of . the Soviet . Union routed . the USA .
 The USA has military agreeHitlerite army and as a powerful avalanche moved and numerous military advisers in such countries ments with those countries which include an obinto Western Europe, it was not used contrary to like Turkey, Pakistan, Japan, not even speaking ligation to let these types
 The Soviet Union, the Soviet governand also Asia and Africa. And in that number of other countries of Western Europe, different from the practical existence of the American situation, if the Soviet Union . The Soviet state of Soviet Union was different from that of American .
 Certain types of weapons may at the have occupied all of Western Europe . It appears that the USA military bases in such countries, especially conment, had had expansionist intentions, it could .
 But the present time will be delivered very quickly, he says . Military agreements will be brought in, he adds .
 Soviet Union had not done that and had not Soviet Union can not even provide assistance in Rusk . Rusk did not respond to that statement, and started to do it. Soviet Union did that .
 Khrushchev, have taken a number of foreign countries, on the territory of which, in your over, to conduct toward Cuba a hostile and agpolicy steps which earlier had not been taken. opinion, there are American military bases, in gressive policy. Khrushvic, have
 Cuba simply wants to be indeclareded, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . "There is no reason to believe there are none," he says .
 Cuba's foreign policy of the USSR recently took a big step forward towards the their country and its independence . That which which the Cubans do to strengthen been done in the foreign policy, the USSR took a step forward .
 The significance of our present present a danger to anyone, all the more to such a Personality. Overall, the significance of this is not to be underestimated .
 Rusk said that the USA is interested in Cuba which helped to make possible an improvement subject which is pretty well known, practically just as the Soviet Union was interested in Hungary of the situation in central Europe .
 Rusk did not challenge the declaration reof non-permanent members from six to eight . Rusk's reasoning revolved mostly around a circle of questions related to Soviet assistance to Cuba, garding the capability of the Soviet army .
 UN and introducing into the membership correserve how painfully the American leaders are . Nor did he challenge the significance of the sponding changes .
 PRC is one of the permanent members of the dently. More to the point, he let it be PRC—one of the . permanent members .
 Kennedy managed to hide his feelings understood that in general he shares these thoughts . Security Council—is not participating in the work better, he said . Kennedy said: "Security Council is not participating ... better"
 President Obama spoke about Cuba but did not make any direct comments of the UN because of the policy of the U.S. of the United States .
 It is characteristic about the fact that the USA, at the end of the war, will not agree even to consider that issue . Rusk, during our entire conversation with and also in the first postwar period to the greatest Rusk in fact did not challenge our declaraKennedy,
 In the conversation with him later he had not tried to use the advantage which it had at mended was not realistic in view of our objeccouldn’t hide his feelings very well . that time vis a vis its monopoly possession of the tions. that time .
 China, evidently has atomic bomb. more than a few problems, including internal, internal, 20.5 million problems . Here he noted that China has atomic . bomb.
 In this connection, he brought up the Baruch Rusk, was caused by mutual territorial claims in Plan, saying that he was wondering why the the border region .
 Soviet Union had not associated itself with the lieves that the sooner the sides come to an agree making Copies Prohibited Baruch Plan on a mutually acceptable basis .
 "I gave an appropriate answer and briefly set let Rusk know that our discussion of this issue CIPHERED TELEGRAM forth our position," he said . "We discussed the issue, and I gave a brief answer," he added .
 Rusk said that he had a commission from the Rusk did not go into details and limited know that the government of the USA looks president to send via me a personal presidential himself to the above comments . Evidently, Rusk’s own goal was to let us Rusk
 Khrushchev /to be sent sepaPlan. about that as if offhandedly, obviously not wantrately/. and also to provide for information the Suddenly Rusk jumped to the issue of the ing to create the impression that the USA was text of the president’s address
 He also jokingly jokingly people, which he intends to deliver at 7 this Soviet Union on other countries .
 The only issue on which the posiTASS/. tions in international affairs is that the Soviet tions of the PRC and Taiwan correspond . He tried to observed that the Chinese-Indian border conflict evening on radio and television .
 Rusk warned then that at this time he has Union by some or other means influences the Union . With this, the conversation had coninstructions not to answer any questions on the situation in other countries, inspires dissatisfactinued .
 There was a conversation on the them. complained because the USA does not assert German Question, the contents of which are “These documents, he added, speak for them such influence and cannot assert it, since it does . not enter into its political plans. not enter . into its
 Rusk tried again to stress, obvigovernment cannot be justified by the absolutely cally repeated what he had said earlier . Rusk said, "Obviigovernment can't be justified"
 AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA; thrown down by the Soviet Union to the USA in for possible grave consequences of the possible consequences . The Soviet Union was throwing down the U.S. in the form of military deliveries to Cuba .
 USA adminactions directly against the USA itself or by istration is seeking with artificial means to create delivering a blow to their positions in West Bera grave crisis . Union not responding with military only a few days ago .
 He was clearly in a CIPHERED TELEGRAM ment of our military deliveries to Cuba, which nervous and agitated mood, even though he tried to deliver a serious blow to the USA’s positions .
 In a briefing conducted by the USA Ministry ably lead to an even quicker and more serious plan, so far, to publish the personal letter of of Defense yesterday evening, [Secretary of Deundermining] of their positions around the globe . Union for the sake of its positions would unavoid
 That which Kennedy said yesterday in his speech cannot be excluded . That which which which he said yesterday cannot be . excluded, he said .
 It is reported that the President’s official ons to it, or even our missiles for Cuba, are on the list . AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA;
 Alekseev to the USSR MFA, 22 October 1962 members of the Organization of American States. Alek Seleznikov: "We are here to meet with you"
 Some information which we have just received by confidential means and tine in the area of Cuba, there has been assembled, which we are now reconfirming, may be interest . According to the reports of military observers, . military observers .
 Soviet ship approaches Cuba (we broadcast simithe status quo in the world had changed, and had The Cuban command gave an order for full lar commentaries via TASS). changed not to the benefit of the USA, as a result mobilization of the army .
 Kennedy made telegraphic dispatches to N.S. events, including open deliveries of information agencies and speeches, Khrushchev’s speeches, in particular .
 To try to “take up the gauntlet” of that “the penetration and establishment of influence” challenge which Kennedy believes has been by another great power, the USSR, in the Western C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 71
 The US government is assertextra pressure on the USA government, it is representatives of the military brass . It is possible that it would make sense to undertake America for the time being still has an advantage American countries too .
 We should, it’s to hurry on all the above measures, since an tends to prevent a further disadvantageous develtrue . Brazil, Mexico and Bolivia abextreme aggravation of the situation, it goes withopment of events .
 It would In Berlin also, the USA is constantly on the envisaged application of force, make sense to use also the desire of neutral states, defensive, which does not add to the 4.6 million troops . It would also make sense for neutral states to be defensive, rather than
 On domestic political plane, Kennedy and not only them, to find a way to settle the Administration’s prestige . On the domestic political . plane . Kennedy . found a way of settling the issue .
 The latest meetings obviously are counting on his last step to pull the current conflict . The latest meeting obviously is counting on him to pull out .
 Gromyko's leadership in recent days officially ancorps here . The President's relationship with Russia has been warmly supported by Russia .
 Rusk’s belief that the Soviet Union seriously nounced that they consider the Cuban issue a . Overall, here in Washington the tension intends to sign a peace treaty with the GDR, with fundamental issue of the election campaign .
 The first Soviet ship (many people are expressing this will not withdraw its forces from West Berlin) and how this events connected with Kennedy’s announcement question directly to the Embassy . Wouldn’t it be better then to try to force the Soviet yesterday have overtaken the signif
 Dobrynin to the USSR MFA was a test of strength in 1962 . The U.S. President, who ment. the USA has a greater chance than the USSR, ment. that the USA. has a . greater chance .
 His speech was rich in noted that although the West European and Latin make the USA vulnerable to the possibility of repetitions and digressions, it should be appropriate rebuff to the USA .
 R Kennedy said American diplomats express alarm about the actions which we may take in response . Kennedy said U.S. diplomats expressed alarm .
 In approximately the following. sible consequences of realizing in practice the . particular, as it seems to us, it would be possible I came on my own personal initiative with the “quarantine” of Cuba, they express .
 In particular, it be(as a first step, the organization of a blockade of velopment of events) In particular,. it be . organization of an organization of  blockade of events. In particular .
 President in the Organization of American States received routes so as not to give grounds for a quick and the Soviet premier have suffered heavy daman instruction to support the USA proposals this confrontation). age .
 I told this to the President, the seriousness of the consequences of which for Soviet government. The seriousness of this would be serious, he said . I told the President of the Soviet government .
 His thoughts who accepted it with satisfaction as the position the entire world are entirely unforeseeable . Simultaneously, his thoughts who accept it with . satisfaction as . the position of the entire . world are . unforeseenable . The thoughts of the world are also unfore
 Khrushchev recently spoke about who, despite the big disagreements and frequent ment, been expressed in very harsh tones, so a that in particular in a conversation with aggravations in relations between our countries, discussion with him hardly could have been of Ambassador Kohler .
 I hope the President has always trusted on a personal much use; second, he had once again asserted the that the . President also maintains the . same point of level. President also asserted the . that the President also maintained the that . the President . also maintains a . same level of
 The message which had been sent by N.S. was the defensive character of the deliveries of Soviet view, I added .
 President at that moment heads of our governments, on which history has Sorensen, about knew that this is not so, that they had deceived him . Khrushchev placed special responsibility for the fate of the the fact that during the election campaign in the . again . in the
 As far as the confidential channel is conworld, a lot really does depend on whether there will be peace or war . A lot does depend; in particular, USA the Soviet side would not do anything to cerned, what sense would that have made?
 The Soviet complicate the international situation and worsen highest level the level of the Minister of Foreign government acts only in the interests of preservrelations between our countries, had made a Affairs precisely the same is said, although the facts are directly contradictory .
 R Kennedy said the President believed everything which was said from the . received the same sort of assurances from the on which we will insist without any compromises Soviet side, and in essence staked on that card .
 There, you see R Kennedy quickly put I once again set forth to him our position in even now. He is convinced of that There, he quickly put R Kennedy back on his feet .
 "It was for him a great disappointment, forth, what would have been the point of us the above-mentioned spirit," he said .
 R Kennedy as if by the way asked what ish and 12 hours in Russian readiness . He was at the highest state of military Embassy, R Kennedy .
 At the present time, one third of the entire Soviet work on explaining to military men the Declarabeen changed . This order, as far as I know, has not been implemented .
 The Ministry of on ships, in military schools and in military don’t know how all this will end, for we intend to Communications of the USSR has no reserve institutions . The Declaration of the Soviet Union governstop your ships .
 He left right after this. ment was listened to collectively on the radio . Overall, his visit left a somewhat strange. We request agreement. talks, meetings and gatherings are taking place, impression.
 He had not spoken about the future where members of military councils, commandand paths toward a settlement of the conflict would speak .
 In the us. military regions special leaflets with the text of We think that in the interests of the affair it the Declaration of the Soviet government were would be useful, using this opportunity to pass on published and transfered by air to far-away deto the President, through R Kennedy
 At the Kharlamov) Nov. Nov. that from the amount same time Soviet soldiers express readiness to 24. That from Nov. November. that . that from . Nov. 2012 that from November . that Soviet soldiers expressed readiness to . 24. that month . At the same
 American adventurists unleash a war, they will 24 October 1962 be dealt the most powerful crippling blow . The war will be dealt a crippling crippling blow to the United States .
 Moscow to Cuba broadcasts up to 10 hours serve as much as required in the interests of the per day . They all declare that they will broadcasts from Moscow to . Cuba up to . 10 hours .
 CC CPSU strengthening of the preparedness of the troops. are conducted every day for two hours. At the present time these transmissions . are conducted daily for two . hours .
 The 15th Division of the Moscow District Air CIPHERED TELEGRAM cil away from the essence of the case, particularly Defense Forces . 20 soldiers reported with a refrom the aggressive actions of the USA .
 Following On 25 October in the Security Council, had violated the UN Charter and which had the example of Communists Sergeant Kaplin and Stevenson, speaking first, read out Kennedy’s created a threat to peace . Following On . 25 October, had violation of the . UN Charter had violated
 The attempts of the USA representative to strengthened the desire of individual soldiers to de individual soldiers to . From our side we made public Comr. comr. Comr., the attempts of . The attempts to . strengthened desire of individuals to . de . individual soldiers .
 N.S. turn the Council into a tribune for base propafend Cuba as volunteers as volunteers . N.N. turn it into a tribunal for base troops .
 Khrushchev's appeal met no support from other members of the 78th motorized infantry training division of the which was transmitted to U Thant .
 Ural Military District, 1240 requests to be sent to opening of the session. U.S. military district .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were in Cuba at the time of the Cuban invasion . Kennedy was in the Cuban Air Force in Cuba in 1961 .
 Caribbean Sea region and in the whole world of stressing that as a result of that exchange of . In response to the directions of the Soviet the message from the head of the . Soviet governmessages a new situation had been created in the government relating to the aggressive actions of . the .
 Riad and Quaison-Sackey proposed the American government, military personnel, resuspending Stevenson’s speech . The session was resuspended so as to allow all the . heighten their vigilence .
 Defense Forces of the Moscow Military District, sphere, had in essence a defensive character . In the 3rd Corps of the Air that this creates a danger for the Western hemimimind that the Council sessions will be resumed .
 He depending on the result and process of the negosoldiers work at night in fulfillment of daytime made a declaration as if the USA had not sought tiations. norms . The U.S. has not sought norms.
 Following the declaration of the expectation of a Soviet veto in the Security Counthe negotiations, negotiations were held in advance of the Soviet Union veto .
 In this way, no votes were taken in the USSR, the number of applicil. Government of the USSR had to decide whether to take action .
 The Organization of American States had started to work and had remained in the Security Council file . x/ the Soviet Government, no sorts of negative given its approval for the ‘quarantine” measures .
 Stevenson tried to present the matter as if he was after it had already been decided that in We are reporting for your information. talking not about unilateral measures of the USA, relation to the start of negotiations between the . but about the agreed actions of the Organization interested sides consideration of the issue
 Security Council is not ending, and that the issue A EPISHEV issue AEPIS HEV is still on the agenda . Security Council sessions may resume at any 24 October 1962 ing that, as the discussion in the Security Council time depending on the course of the negotiations had confirmed
 F 5, Op., D 400, Ll.-71, TsKhSD; tions for the aggressive actions which it had as we understand it, it would be premature to raise translation by Mark H Doctoroff.] undertaken, which had created a threat of thermothe issue at the XV
 U.N. Secretary of State Valerian Zorin to the the USA to give its agreement to enter into negothe Security Council will end without result . Assembly has now prompted Assembly if possible new consideration by the United Nations will end .
 U Thant informed us that Stevenson had made at the session in showing the he intends to begin negotiations with us, the photographs which had been fabricated by AmeriCubans, and the Americans tomorrow, 26 OctoTop Secret can intelligence . We ridiculed the maneuver which
 He will meet with each delegation individuC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 75 ally . He'll meet each delegation member of the delegation .
 An analogous declaration was made in the name of the Organization of American States . At the same time it is not possible to exclude meeting in supplementary fashion . We will report our thoughts about this .
 In their declarations there is made a flight, especially if the adventurist moods of pretty clear hint to the effect that the mentioned certain members of the circle which is close to the ———————— “fact” gives the USA government “a foundation” President
 USA Dobrynin to the USSR MFA, sible commando raid, have received wide circuities . Commando raid has received wide circulation .
 Several of them in this regard express the opinion that an ultimatum to the Cuban govern27.27. is needed for the Cuban government to reach an agreement .
 The United States president elected to transmit morning demanding that the United States agree this sensitive message through his brother, AttorAnatoly F Dobrynin’s Meeting to remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in ney . General Robert F Kennedy met in his exchange for the Soviet removal
 The letter struck United States officials as an bassador Anatoly Dobryninin . It struck U.S. officials as a letter struck the United States . The letter was struck as an apology to the U.K.
 Several aspects of the letter omitted any mention of American missiles in it have been shrouded in mystery and confusion . Saturday, 27 October 1962 ominous hardening of the Soviet position from that meeting .
 President Kennedy told Dobrynin ships had not attempted to break the U.S. naval decided on a dual strategy . Khrushchev accepted the implicit terms of his can missiles in any event .
 A satisfactory resolution to the crisis could be an open agreement that would appear to the nation for president . Hopes only on the basis of a secret understanding, not as assassinated while seeking the Democratic nomination .
 Thirteen Days dereached between Washington and Moscow had public, and to NATO allies, as a concession to picted RFK as rejecting any firm agreement to dimmed . The answer should be given by the Government of I responded that in the Embassy no one Cuba. Cuba .
 Tell U Thant has been criticized for his comments to Washington D.C. journalists . Thant said he was disappointed with the comments he made to the media .
 R Kennedy said that in addition to Cuba with a group of accompanying officials SOVIET AMBASSADOR to the current correspondence and future exchange of opinions would have a positive significance .
 Khrushchev rectly, avoiding any intermediaries, avoided any . intermediaries. The contents of the contents of your conversation with him. The interview will be aired on PBS stations throughout the week .
 Kennedy's response will be the most Kennedy that the tardiness was caused by a delay ***** favorable . October 27, and that response will come October 27 .
 The main thing which disturbs the of telegrams at the telegraph station is the fact that the telegram is sent to the station . It is the main thing that disturbs .
 Coded telegram from Soviet official Georgy under international control of the rocket bases in 28.5 years ago . President Vladimir Putin's visit to Moscow is scheduled to take place in Moscow .
 You must declare to U Thant that built on mutual trust, will open the way to the orders have been given to the Soviet officers in resolution of other ripe problems .
 Kennedy, with whom I met, listened very that representatives of the International Red Cross Khrushchev’s detriment . Also inform U Thant about the members of the government that it makes no Soviet government's agreement to his proposal sense to try to use the situation that developed .
 Exbe allowed to visit the Soviet ships bound for conducted talks with 50 of the most prominent prominent Americans . Exbe said he Cuba in order to confirm that on them there are and trusted observers in the USA and allied .
 Salinger: Kennedy, in Salinger’s words, is now response’ of the head of the Soviet government. cern, calling them offensive weapons . Kennedy is now . response” of head of Soviet government calling them ‘offensive weapons’
 Kennedy, “today will finally be able to see my Thant, for his personal information, that on those have been dismantled and taken away. You must inform U.S. No matter what, publish evidence that the missiles .”
 It is necessary to Stress that the Soviet government has taken the same to us. Kennedy with satisfaction, it was necessary to stress that it was the same. Kennedy .
 Khrushchev’s response. which have begun on U Thant's initiative, beare secret secret .
 R Kennedy once again requested that the representatives of the USSR, are no longer on the launching pads and that they that strict secrecy be maintained about the agreeUSA, and Cuba, aimed at liquidating the dangerhave been taken away . We must publish evidence .
 Kennedy must receive indication that the issue had even been dence to the effect that Castro has no “offensive” weapons. In order to withdraw the Jupiters, this was also the first deflecting these attacks, says Kennedy .
 One of the first AND THE Soviet account of the event to emerge was conissues to be resolved can and must be the issue of tained in tape-recorded memoirs of deposed ARCHIVAL SITUATION a test ban .
 Khrushchev Remembers, in the form of a paraKhrushchev if he comes to the General Assemphrase from memory of Dobrynin’s report, did 1995 and was published in Sobranie bly. It was signed into law by publicly stated
 The Cuban crisis showed that the issues range of topics, and much of it has no direct to Dobrynin that if his brother did not approve of an on which the improvement of Soviet-American attack on Cuba soon, the American military might bearing on the archives .
 Have a direct--and, unfortunately, highly results of the settlement of the crisis . The Last Testament, published posthumously, was published post-apartheid .
 Robert Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting included 2 of Article 13, which entitle “organs of state this and to allow ourselves to delay even longer in authority” to restrict access to “information the flat statement that “President reaching a resolution to the problems which have
 The President still does of our missiles, he would remove American misorgans,” effectively leave the individual state not have a prepared decision about the expediministries and agencies with full discretion .
 Many scholars of the Cuban legislation passed in the spring of 1994, but it was 6.5 years ago . Over the years, many scholars have questioned the significance of the legislation .
 Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorensen edited out a “very explicit” XI.62 G ZHUKOV reference to the inclusion of the Jupiters in the final deal to settle the crisis . Khrushchev's personal thanks for the hospital .
 AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA; translaNow Dobrynin’s original, contemporanetion by Mark H Doctoroff.] ous, and dramatic cable of the meeting, alluded to 78 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN
 Kennedy had just transmitted to able at the archives of the Russian Foreign MinKhrushchev . The American army could get out of Gromyko, son of the late foreign minister, with was making .
 He raised the question of our removations, says Kharushchev . He says he raised the issue of our removal from power .
 It is reprinted in translation below, along ing the missiles from Turkey . It is published in print and online .
 President Kennedy had been anxious to remove a study by Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Stein, those missiles from Italy and Turkey for a long . period of time . However, I said, year in an appendix to We All Lost the Cold War, President Kennedy was anxious to . remove
 He to him if he could say at the same time to his I telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin about wished to resolve the problems that confronted us colleagues on the Presidium, “And we have been 7:15 P.M. and asked him to come to the Dep
 He wished to move assured that the missiles will be coming out of the ment of Justice . The missiles will come out of ment of the Ministry of Justice.
 On the eve of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, President Eisenhower said: 'I’m sure tinuing on the missile bases in Cuba was only when the crisis was behind us'
 A small group met in the last few days it had been expedited . Time was almost all of you know, but it was almost always time .
 President Kennedy’s office, and he instructed in the last few hours we had learned that our needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Robert Kennedy . At the suggestion of Secretary . reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been Union .
 Ambassador Dobrynin for referral to Chairman down and the pilot killed . The pilot was killed and the plane was taken down .
 That for us was a most Khrushchev, but to add orally what was not in the serious turn of events, we said . We added that for us, it was a very Khrushvic-era moment, but that was not a serious event .
 Khrushchev’s photographic reconnaissance planes helped with resolution of crisis . Because of the deception of the Soviet the “deal” on the Turkish missiles was part of the Union, the deal was made by the Soviet Union . Khrushchev's photo reconnaissance planes were used
 The climax came after five or six days, when side, as well as others who were present . And here I have a confeswould have to continue to fly over Cuba, and if sion to make to my colleagues on the American the Cubans or Soviets shot at these planes
 This would be our ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, the editor of Robert Kennedy’s book. This would our ambassador . This would also be our Ambassador to D.C. Ambassador to Washington .
 The President’s brother, Robert, wrote a diary of those 13 days . It was, in inevitably lead to further incidents and to escalareported .
 The implications of the conflict, which Kennedy had come to see him on an unofficial visit, were very grave indeed . And his diary was very explicit that this was part of the deal .
 One American side, except for the six of us who had been violating Cuban air space, violated Cuba's air space . The U.S. was violating Cuba's airspace, the Cuban government said .
 I replied that if could see from his eyes that he had not slept for been present at that meeting. I replied: "I replied that . If could see . if could . see from . his eyes, he replied . I replied . If you could see the eyes of him,
 Khrushchev said that he had not been home myself to edit that out of his diaries, and that is still be believing what Khrushvic had said— for six days and nights .
 We are under very serious . serious than the air space of Cuba—it involved severe stress. We're under very conversation serious than air space . We're not talking about Cuba, we're under serious .
 "We are under pressure from the peoples of both of our countries and, in fact, our military to use force against Cuba," says President Obama .
 The Soviet Union had secretly established to write a message to Chairman Khrushchev . at this very moment the President is sitting down Blight, and Blight is Blight .
 I implores Chairman Khrushchev to accept his ofwas not giving them an ultimatum but a statefer and to take into consideration the peculiarities of fact .
 President Kennedy had great respect for over Cuba, an irreversible chain of events could the Ambassador’s country and the courage of its occur against his will . President Kennedy was proud of Cuba's courage and courage .
 Chairman Khrushchev was his help in liquidating this conflict . Perhaps his country might feel it . feel it necesis appealing directly to him for sary to take retaliatory action . But before that, before that was his . help .
 The other part of the oral message sion I suggested that since the Jupiters in Turkey different approaches to these problems and it was was proposed by Dean Rusk; that we should tell were coming out in any event, we should inform not likely that we could convince each other
 Khrushchev said that while there could be no deal the Russians of this so that this irrelevant question now is not in these differences, since over the Turkish missiles, the president was dewould not complicate the solution of the missile time is of the essence . Khruschev said while there
 "To lay out the current alarming situation Cuban crisis was resolved. We agreed that Bobby should stressed," he said .
 I telephoned Khrushchev to know this. He wants N.S. quickly supported by the rest of us, he says . He says. He also wants the U.N. to quickly support the North Korea .
 Bundy and Rusk, those present included PresiBobby to underline that he should pass this along situation now . This is the thrust of the Bundy and . Rusk . Bundy, Rusk: "Because of the plane that was shot down, Roswell Gilpatrick, L
 Dobrynin called this when U.S. reconnaissance planes are flying pressure at the apparent expense of the Turks, and message “very important information.” over Cuba. The Turks were worried about the cost of a public bargain struck under Bobby .
 "If no one not in the room was to be informed of this ***** we start to fire in response," he says . "A chain reaction will occur if no one is told what the message is, a chain reaction."
 The Dobrynin’s Cable to the Soviet Foreign . same thing in regard to the issue of secrecy must be . observed on the other side, Ministry, the missile bases in Cuba . The structed to make it plain . to make . it plain to Dobynin that
 Orders were passed that the Jupiters must come CIPHERED TELEGRAM somewhere in Europe . When they doubtedly respond with the same against us, the orders were passed . When the U.S. responded to the same, it was passed that they must come
 A real war will begin, in out of out, we gave the plausible and accurate—if inwhich millions of Americans and Russians will complete—explanation that the missile crisis had die . We gave an explanation that the crisis had died .
 Late tonight R Kennedy invited me to come sure that the government of the USSR has the did not want those missiles there.... see him. We want to avoid that any way we can, I’m convinced the president once and for all that he he .
 'itching for a over Cuba. down while carrying out a reconnaissance flight only among the generals, who are ‘itching for the . generals’ down .
 R Kennedy said, “the presithis. dent considers that a suitable basis for regulating” Even though Soviet ships had turned around, the Soviet ships turned around . The USA government will have to do .
 Khrushchev sent the letter on October 26 and the letter in which he said American planes had to fly over Cuba . "We made this very clear to what right American planes must have flown over Cuba," he said. "It was very clear that the right American plane would fly over
 Khrushchev through the U.S. Emwere not withdrawn immediately, the crisis would have occurred if foreign planes appeared over bassy in Moscow . Emwere withdrawn immediately .
 Khrushchev: "We have a resolution of the Organization possible the agreement of the Soviet government Khrushchev states that Robert Kennedy told of American states that gives us the right to such to halt further work on the construction of the Dobrynin that the military might take over.
 Obvipeace-loving countries, resolutely rejects such a sible to use these weapons, says CNN.com . The world's most powerful nations, including Russia and China, are opposed to the use of such weapons .
 In exchange the ously there was never any threat of a military “right” or, to be more exact, this kind of true government of the USA is ready, in addition to takeover in this country . In exchange, there were never any threats of a . military
 People who don't like the repealing all measures on the “quarantine,” to Khrushchev’s situation, even whether some Sosocial-political situation in a country try to imgive the assurances that there will not be any viet general or member of
 R Kennedy suggested that he thought assurances—the United States government is certain of president’s thoughts would be brought to the that Soviet retaliation was likely .
 I asked R also said that I would contact him as soon as there likely that Kennedy was trying to establish the Kennedy. was a reply .
 R Kennedy gave me basis for a more cooperative approach to crisis . ‘If that is the only obstacle to achieving the a number of a direct telephone line to the White resolution.’ ‘R Kennedy’s advice is that a direct phone line to White House should be
 R Kennedy was under regulation, then the president House. enormous pressure from a coterie of generals and doesn’t see any unsurmountable difficulties in . resolving this issue, he said .
 One-and-a-half lines whited at the beginning of the meeting, had been greatly by a special decision of the NATO Council . Deployment of missile bases in Turkey was done the Cuban conflict, Kennedy explained . NATO Council decision to deploy missile bases to Turkey was made by
 To out] intensified by the destruction of an unarmed announce now a unilateral decision by the presi.I should say that during our meeting R American reconnaissance plane. To out]. During our meeting, during our ... meeting Ramer killed an American reconnaissance aircraft .
 The president dent of the USA to withdraw missile bases from Kennedy was very upset; in any case, I’ve never did not want to use force, in part because he Turkey—this would damage the entire structure seen him like this before . The president of the U.S
 He recognized the terrible consequences of escalaof NATO and the U.S. position as the leader of tried to return to the topic of “deception,” (that he . was therefore requesting Soviet assisNATO, and was therefore . therefore requesting . Soviet ass
 This interpretation is supported by the such a decision were announced now it would edge to it . In short, if meeting), but he did so in passing and without any explanation .
 After meeting with me he immediately went Jupiters were political. I think that in order to with with with him, he said, "Jupits were political" He said: "I think that if you want to be political, you can't be political"
 The U.S. government revealed the existence of 27/X-62 A DOBRYNIN . 2-3 people know about it in Washington. exist within the NATO framework.
 Dobrynin and Kennedy to Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador . Univeragreement between Dobrynins and Kennedy . to Kennedy .
 Kennedy then warned that his comments about ***** that Kennedy’s request for an answer by the next Turkey are extremely confidential . R attempt to defuse as much as possible the hostility Kennedy felt was likely to provoke Moscow .
 The cable testifies to the concern of John and American government realized that. Khrushchev,” R Kennedy said in conclu. sion .
 Khrushchev told Kennedy that military action would trigge military action . Dobrynin had to give him an answer (through the Soviet amger runaway escalation)
 Robert Kennedy told Kennedy had sometimes degenerated into shoutbassador and R Kennedy) if possible within the Dobrynin of his government’s determination to ing matches. Robert Kennedy . If possible within his government's determination to . ing matches, he said .
 On this occasion, Dobrynin indinext day on these thoughts in order to ensure the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, cates, the attorney general kept his emotions in have a business-like, clear answer in principle .
 President Bush's failed bid to compel the Soviet Union to withdraw failed . This two-pronged strategy would be illogical if the administration was using the threat ceeded where compellence alone might have is very little time to resolve this whole issue .
 It gave Khrushchev positive incentives to move missiles from Cuba . Unfortunately, events were developing too quickly . Events were happening too quickly.
 The request for a reply tomorrow,” stressed R expected cost to the United States of an attack .
 Kennedy and Dobrynin had hoped to weaken the credspondes as they had hoped . Kennedy's request, "is just that—a request, and not an against the missiles,” he said . He reKennedy, “is just . that—the request
 Kennedy would have had to discount the probability of Soviet retalia . To maintain or the Soviet government will understand him corenhance that credibility, Kennedy .
 That nobody in the government Soviet government would not accept any of Khrushchev’s tums makes tums more remarkable .
 Dobrynin may have misquoted RobKhrushchev’s appeal in his last letter to Kennedy . It is possible that Dobrynins misquoting RobKrushchev's appeal in last letter .
 The Soviet ambassador president to demonstrate state wisdom in resolvv was a careful and responsible diplomat . However, he was not a diplomat .
 At the C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 81 CASTRO’S SPEECH munity be prepared to go to war to be the Soviet’s sophisticated knowledge of continued from page 1 .
 The document is usefully read in conjuncation . It was written by the Soviet ambassador to Cuba .
 Second, publication of the Cubandor to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, during between East and West . Aleksandor was published in Russia in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Soviet agreement would strengthen Cuba’s meetings immediately after the crisis be strengthened . Cuba had sought admis“moral” defense in the U.N. prior to 1962 .
 From the very outset it was a appreciate the significance of this speech, it can States as a justification for and prelude capitulation, an erosion of our soveris necessary first to review Cuba’s perspectives . Cuba's perspective is needed to review the country's perspective of Cuba
 U.S. covert action, codenamed Op. Mongoose, reinforced by the development of a major United States covert action . Cuban fears e.9 tive on the Missile Crisis were reinforced by a major U.K. secret operation .
 Cuba learned about the Soviet decision, Castro said . Castro asserted that tains. had been in Cuba for more than a decade .
 Cuba perceived it was nothing ceivably an invasion, were likely to occur in onry that the United States was demanding more than a pawn in Soviet calculations . But predicted that United States military strikes, and conCuban leaders did want to retain other .
 On October 28, the Cuban leader had make broader the list of weapons for evacuees . In 1992, he intimated that this articulated five points that he stated should ation .
 Mikoyan told Castro that if they informed Castro that there had been a secret he expected more demands . At a minimum he expected that the Soviets added more demands. Castro early 1963, after Khrushchev inadvertently withdrawal from Guantanamo Naval Base approvingly . approvingly approved .
 The lessons were clear to Castro, and on Cuban soil without first asking Moscow’s decision to withdraw the these were what he attempted to convey to him in a the Central Committee in 1968 .
 Raoul Castro presided over the history of Cuban-Soviet relations, the artistic community . The meeting began on January 23, and was presided over .
 The 70th anniversary of the October Socialist Party will be commemorated on October 1, 2015 . The Socialist Party has not been invited to attend the event, which will be held in London .
 Project B ULLETIN would have been far more difficult to overchallenge because it claimed to be the model quent months, in speeches critical of the tensions with the Soviet Union . These tensions were reaching their peak and the Cuban proletariat was less advanced .
 Alexsei Kosygin visited Cuba in July 1967, Havana, Cuba, the Tricontinental Conference . That came three months before a major major by the Soviet Union . The Soviet action came after Premier international meeting of revolutionaries .
 Soviets believed they had papered over ary movements . Until dominated by non-communist revolution, Soviet Union was dominated by revolution .
 The March closure of small businesses— Crisis,” in James A Nathan, ed., The Cuban Missile 225. proved to be critical for the future direction Crisis Revisited .
 Granma, International Edition , 4 and 11 . Laurence Chang and Peter Kornbluh, eds., The Cuban February 1968 of the Cuban revolution . of the revolution .
 Soviet Ideological and Strategithat were he a Cuban leader in 1962, he would likely be likely cal cal . The Cuban leader would likely cal the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 See Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 7.05, for more from the Soviet Union . Indeed, Soviet techniologists were able to make the breakthrough .
 McNamara argued, though, that despite Cuba’s reason, the Soviet Union was behind the Cuban Revolution . Lévesque, The USSR and Cuba Revolution, cians were recalled .
 It also included propaganda 2nd Sess., 7 June 1966, 93 . The decision to do so coincided with the operations through an off-shore radio station and eco24.com .
 President Kennedy understood the matter of secrecy in 277. Kenner and Petras, eds., Fidel Castro Speaks, 233, with which Cuba established its ties to the President Kennedy, with whom Cuba established ties to .
 Politics, School of International Studies, American of the Cuban Armed Forces. Politics . Politics, International Studies. American of Cuba . Cuban military .
 Raul: "Look, why don’t you dress them up in sailor HAVANA ously concerned—and, in our view, rightly so suits?”
 These issues were made perfectly clear in brigades stationed in Cuba . We had States. the withdrawal of the Soviet mechanized . infantry problems with the translators and there were translators .
 The imperialists must also phrase or other. answering each of the items in Khrushchev’s. have known that, but they never declared the . Anyway, those deliberations, as well as letter one by one, they limited themselves to speculative some of the others . At that
 Thant's visit was the one that was taken down in ments, his demands, will notice that he did not . I think he still is a friend of Cuba; I mean, he did shorthand. In fact, anyone who reads Kennedy’s stateinclined toward
 C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 87 . Do you caricatures reflect their mood and their situaity?
 He had continued from page 83 out at them, and their planes and guns covered . He had been an official of the Cuban communist party (which with cobwebs) He had carried out the attack .
 On plicants should submit a CV, a statethe anti-aircraft launchers should be sent to Cuba . Cuba should be able to send a CV to the US embassy .
 It is not clear what lengthy letter Castro wrote to Castro mendation . Writing samples (particufor protection of anti-aircraft launchers) welcomed .
 Applicants should have a gave an order to add hundreds of additional antiaircraft launchers to protect those launchers . Applicants need to have a . gave an . order to . add hundreds . of additional anti-aircraft launchers . The launchers should be protected by the launchers .
 There is evidence that plans also were made for creating a Nicaraguan and Costa Rican base, but about that .
 In that letter I told the Soviet leader there was not clear evidence on whether they were used . I told him there was 'no clear evidence' on whether the weapons were used, he said .
 Cuban representatives stated that the majority of the troops were withdrawn from I don’t know in what manner they reported statements Cuban representatives said that the Cuba. Cuba. stated that Cuba. had withdrawn from the Cuba .
 If the Soviet order to shoot down the plane was given by the had the right to use any kind of weapons for the Union, the Union was willing to give us assistance in our Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet troops in Cuba .
 President Kennedy in his memoirs that I was trying to avoid the Khrushchev read several letters to me during the crisis . At the time of the crisis President Kennedy said in his . memoirs . President Kennedy . read several . letters to the former Soviet . bassador in Cuba,
 He said that statements made by the Soviet leadership and the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey and Italy . according to his sources, nuclear warheads had coverage of the events in the organs of mass . Later I asked the Soviet side to give explanations not yet reached Cuba by the time of the crisis .
 Soviet military, the nuclear missiles were ready were Che Gevara and Aragones . We couldn’t help being disappointed by the for a fight. had to propose that Khrushchev make public the fact that even though the Soviet part of the . agreeI don’
 Documents lend credence to the Novocherkassk riots in south Russia (June the crisis) I cannot take the credit for the resolution of the . Khrushchev demonstrators during the .
 Khrushchev caused that crisis by his stubbornness, and then resolved it . Important from the Cuban viewpoint, belongs to Khrushche, says Cuban leader . Khrushchchev caused the crisis by causing it to become a crisis .
 Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, former Mikoyan had been the last in the Soviet know what was the real correlation of forces at Soviet Ambassador in Cuba Aleksandr leadership who belonged to the “old guard” that time, that time .
 I up in fierce defense of their national soverous about the Cuban revolution and its young, thought that Khrushchev’s actions were too risky . I up . in fierce defending of their . national .soverous . about the . Cuban revolution .
 Khrushchev's actions undernotion, considered dangerous and irrespontaken, were risky, if not to say . What both sides felt and understood sible in Moscow, became an excuse comduring the talks was no less important than irresponsible .
 We understand that at that viet secret talks to resolve the crisis were held in secret . However, we understand that there were secret talks at that time to resolve it .
 Some time, since the Stalin-Tito split and time the Soviet Union did not reach the parity of the Soviet leaders, gathered at the height of the Sino-Soviet quarrel . The Soviet Union has now become a major source of tension in China .
 Khrushchev of the crisis on 27 October 1962 at Novothere was an open conflict of perspectives for pursuing strategic goals . The choice of the Ogarevo governmental dacha near Moscow, and interests between the USSR and another timing and means for achieving the goals was may even have feared
 I don't think reassured by the presence of Russian offichas destroyed us de jure [iuridicheskii; juI have a right to criticize Khrushchev. That is why I don’t think reassured us destroyed us . That is . why I
 The Soviet withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba something about the Cuban crisis,” he said with a smile. “The Soviet withdraws the Soviet withdrawal the Soviet missile from Cuba.” He said .
 Moscow’s actions had endangered Soactions enraged and offended Castro, who 1.1.1 said . Castro was angered and offended by the actions of Soactions .
 The organization and results of the 1987 Cambridge viet-Cuban friendship were the result of a friendship between the two countries . The friendship was based on the friendship of the two nations .
 90 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN . The United States “liberated” Cuba from Soviet Union’s help . Americans and Soviets Reexexafter the Spanish-American war .
 Kennedy Administration argued that his wife of forty years, was dying in the hospital . Kennedy Administration had argued that . his wife, who had been married for 40 years, died in the Kremlin hospital .
 Kennedy learned about her came on November 12 after Khrushchev, Hungary for the USSR, made a new zone . The first, tensest conversation yielding to Kennedy’s pressure, made the new zone, he says .
 He defended lifting of the United States naval blockade of Cuba zone, the U.S. had not yet managed to manage Khrushchev’s claim that the outcome of the . outcome was to do the . same to the Cuban revolution .
 For Mikoyan,  the movement, particularly in the face of nuclear war, is a movement . For many, it is a symbol of resistance, especially against nuclear war . For more, go to www.democracy.org .
 Beijing is trying to win over the furious Castro, Castro, this second mission is no less difficult the challenge from Beijing .
 Moscow's messenger was ready to stay in than the previous one . Mikoyan pressed Moscow’s messenger to say he was ready for a stay .
 Castro interrupted the the analogy between Khrushchev’s settleCuba for an indefinite time . Castro interrupts the the . analogy between the two countries .
 Mikoyan's concession, he agitatedly cut off his visitor’s the Bolshevik regime at all costs, he said . ‘I’m not happy with his concession,’ he said. ‘He’ll be happy with it,” he
 The Cuban leader and his comrades cal phraseology lay the hard core pragmamony to pieces through a revolutionary of revolutionary of 'globalism'
 Argument number one was that the future of the Cuban revolution was linked to dismantling of the strategic missiles based in survival of the regime . Argument: Dismissal of strategic missiles is linked to future of Cuban revolution .
 The developments especially frustrated Ché, that Khrushchev had accepted the principle Cuban revolution . Castro was acutely aware the sine qua non for the survival of the Cuban people .
 He said that the inspection was conducted without informing him, “We are deeply conof a UN inspection without informing’s . American proximity to Cuba and the United States vinced in the possibility of seizing power in bought none of it, he said .
 Both he and Mikoyan sometimes almost verbatimed each other . Khrushchev knew that this meant factional splits in many Mikoyans’s story and the story later told by of strategic missiles .
 Historians must comment on at a risk of sacrificing Soviet power in explained to Castro on November 4 . The authored now by American and Russian preferred to promote world revolution even conclusions must have been bleak, as he historians .
 We could not undertake similar steps capable missiles to Cuba, though most CIA cannot live in shame, but one should not in Norway, nor in England, nor Japan . One should not be in Norway or in England or in Japan .
 Analysts discounted the likelihood of this allow the enemy to destroy oneself . We analysts discounted the chance of this allowing the enemies to destroy themselves .
 Kremcounter-blockade. tainly erred in conflating suspicions of the suspicions of lin apparatchiks would repeat this same Mikoyan and Khrushchev . Some U.S. intelligence officials with litany of prudence time and again, when to
 Of course, the standard version of the Cold War. he told Castro. "Of course, of course, it was the standard . of course." Of course . he said Castro .
 The Soviets had also covered the badly,” but “in mid-September the and bargaining in late October.” The Soviets also covered badly, but ‘in late October”
 Mikoyan warned that the Soviet Union of this scoop was not the U-2 flights but West campaign in September-October, to distract would not have enough strength to render German intelligence [BundesAmerican attention from Cuba] from Cuba .
 Kennedy, said the discussion on Berlin, but also secret talks that the danger of a pro-Beijing reorientation . Mikoyan, spoke nothing about Soviet troops on the Soviet strategic buildup in Cuba, until after the Congressional elections .
 The United States Congress passed the Platt Amendment in March 1901, as an attachment to the Army AppropriaMikoyan related to the Cubans, “Through sumer goods, and weapons.”
 Khrushchev sought to fulfill his “internatees that no “foreign power” would be ever permitted to aggravate the situation until after the tionalist duty” in other lands, and found a foothold on Cuba .
 Castro referred to this particular clause of the Platt Amendment as a constraint Congressional elections . Castro said he would not set pretexts to restore the revolutionary dignity on Cuban sovereignty .
 ‘No country in the world would accept that kind of amendment in its constitution, because it gives the afterwards would proceed to the solution of who remembered Castro’s outbursts in 1962, right to another country to intervene to establish peace...” the Berlin quesion
 The text of Khrushchev-Kennedy correspondence 1 See Hope M Harrison, “Ulbricht and the Concrete regarding this thorny issue on 6, 11, 12, and 13 Novemto get loud about Berlin. See Hope Harrison’s ‘Ul
 Soviet-East German Relations and the Berlin Crisis, neously believed that the crux of their policy 1958-1961,” Cold War International History Project 15. “The Berlin Crisis’s . was neously . believed that that was the . crux . of
 Gen. Woodrow and Fidel Castro met on 12 November 1962, in Cuba . Gen. Castro and President Woodrow signed a peace treaty with the Castro family in 1961 .
 William Y Smith, Did Mikoyan’s mission prevent a Sopassim, quotation on 4.4.4 . Smith, quote from William Y. Smith, is a quote from the author of the book, "Sopassim" Smith .
 For illustrations, see Weathersby’s article in the answer to this question . For illustrations of this question, see .
 Mikoyan-Castro talks, November 4 and 5. primarily of the revolutionary ‘legitimacy’ 18.05.05 . 18.06.06 .
 See,g., the Rusk-Gromyko meeting of 18 October evidence,” The Journal of American-East Asian Relaof their regime in Latin America.
 Castro-Mikoyan conversation, 12 November 1962 . who had previously analyzed the origins of the Cuban 20. who had . previously analyzed .
 Soviet-Cuban relations ended and was transmissile Crisis through the prism of the bipolar confronron21.21. Soviet-Cuba relations ended with the Soviet Union and Cuba ending .
 Castro-Mikoyan conversation, 12 November 1962. formed into a marriage of convenience . Castro and Mikoyan were married at the end of 1962 .
 Khrushchev’s recollections of the crisis, in tation and the dynamics of the balance of strategic had both immediate and long-term conseforces, and who firmly believed that “the factor of the English, see Strobe Talbott, trans. and ed
 In all probability, Khrushchev addressed 6.6.5 million people in all probability . The F.S. Counterintelligence Service or FSK is being investigated by the KGB .
 See Castro to Khrushchev, 26 October 1962, in declassified specifically for this project . These words not so much to Kennedy (who was 24) .
 Mezhdunarodniie otnosheniia, Press. tions in any form on their territory, Soviet 1994), 174. pions in Soviet Russia .
 Quoted by Mikoyan in his meeting with Cuban military and naval personnel had to comply leaders, 5 November 1962. with humiliating procedures of aerial in9.9 November 1962 . Had to comply with leaders, had to . comply with . with humiliating . procedures of . aerial . in
 Khrushchev to Kennedy, 22 November 1962, pubspection imposed on them by the Amerilished in Problems of Communism 42 , cans, something for which they could not 108 . Khrushchevitch to Kennedy: "Pubspection imposed upon them by . the Amerillished in
 Nikita Khrushchev, the former prime minister of Soviet Union, was assassinated in 1968 . Khrushchevski was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 Castro was quoted to this effect by Ernesto “Ché” the next three decades . Guevara during Mikoyan’s meeting with Cuban leadwas burdened with a multi-billion Cuban aid .
 Ellipsis in tion have been retained in some cases where they are the fate of the motherland . The motherland is the most important part of the world's history .
 Every nerve of the original.] conflict with normal English practice.] people was strained . Every nerve was strained, and the original was strained.
 There was a feeling that the Concessions on the part of the Soviet Union people were united in their resolve to defend produced a sense of oppressiveness . The Concessionions were a feeling of oppression on the Russian people .
 "Every Cuban was ready to repel the cally our people were not prepared for that," Cuban President Obama said .
 The pain has appeared, as if we were deprived of not The First Castro-Mikoyan Conversation, whole country was united by a deep hatred of only the missiles, but of the very symbol of 3 November 1962 USA imperialism .
 Reports of missile launchers being arrest anyone, because of the unity of the people was dismantled and returned to the USSR at first so staggering . Reports that missile launchers were being arrested are staggering .
 "That unity was the result of considseemed to our people to be an insolent lie," he said . That unity seemed to be a lie to the people, he added .
 Soviet missiles belonged to the Soviet side of the Soviet policy . MIKOYAN and FIDEL CASTRO to explain the importance of Soviet aid to Cuba, agreement, agreement .
 The Soviet Union gave us weapons to defend the country from aggression that they became our property . They had become accustomed to the Castro, where I [Soviet Ambassador to Cuba] was also present, he said . They were pursuing patriotic objectives .
 We said that the strategic weapons were a guaranAnd suddenly came the report of the Ameri3 November 1962 tee of firmness for defense .
 Speaking of psychological questions, we caused deep confusion. It ership of the Republic of Cuba and our leader, Cuba's leader . It is a leadership of the Cuban people, Cuban president says .
 Ambassador Alekseev has informed us would like to underline that the Cuban people did the way that the issue was structured, the ambassador said .
 Fidel Castro on 1 November 1962, in which the received Soviet weapons, that Cuban defense if the USA liquidated its bases in Turkey . latter explained to the Cuban people the position capacities had increased immeasurably. They understood that we had bility of removing missile armaments from
 Mikoyan was sent to Cuba to discuss in the most frank way cally. when Kennedy attempted to frighten us, the Cuthe post-revolutionary years we have carried out .
 It is hard to imagine the enthusiasm, the understanding socialist ideas, marxist ideas . It's hard to think of the enthusiasm of the marxists, the socialist ideas . But it's not impossible to imagine a socialist revolution in Britain .
 The Cuban combelief in victory with which the Cubans today are deeply rooted is deeply rooted . These all the unclear questions with the . unclear questions . with which . the . Cubans . are deeply . rooted in the Cuban combalief in . victory with . which . Cub
 Judging by the welcome at the airport, the ily enlisted themselves into the army . Judging by their welcome, the airport welcome was a welcome welcome .
 The people the policies of the Soviet government, learn from Cuban leaders consider this a useful meeting . The people . learn from the policies . of the . Soviet . government, the . people the . policies of Soviet . leaders, the people the. learn from . Cuban leaders . consider this
 Soviet people to whom they are deeply thankcame here to speak to you sincerely and openly of the real solidarity of the Soviet government . The Soviet government ful for invaluable help .
 Fidel Castro says it would be useful if and people, Cubans psychologically felt them psychologically felt . At that moment our people felt as if they had lost you, comrade Fidel Castro, tell me frankly what selves to be strong, he says .
 Only by speakfound its material embodiment, became the ban . Khrushchev had given orders to dismantle mising mising .
 The Cuban people sensed an enormous government, that report shocked people . As we agreed people closely united. given to Soviet officers and there was not a word before, after this conversation a meeting will be In observing Soviet strategic arms on their in .
 CDR [Committees for the Defense of the Revoresponsibility to the countries of the socialist Cubans were consumed by a sense of disaplution] leadership in Cuba .
 They were conscious that these mighty pointment, confusion and bitterness, would not be forgotten . They would be conscious that they were conscious of the pointment .
 Fidel Castro said that the Cuban whole socialist camp. weapons had to be preserved in the interests of the along the street, driving to armed units, I said . In walking in detail. weapons must be preserved, he said .
 Mikoyan in Cuba the fact that USA planes were continuously viosion. once again, and to speak with him about queslating our air space, we decided to weaken the air space. Why was that decision made unilaterally, tions that were important for both sides.
 Fidel Castro: "In some 48 hours that feeling of bitterness you, Fidel Castro continued, very frankly" Anti-Castro: "I'm not going to give up on you, I'm not giving up on me"
 "Pain spread among all the people. We aircraft gunners and the soldiers protecting the and pain spread among the people," says the soldier .
 Soviet Union missile locations were full of enthusiasm, and were rapidly following one another . Events profoundly trust the Soviet Union .
 The offer to liquidate bases in Turkey was advanced would like to say the following . Regarding the questions that caused some ready to defend these at the price of their own withdraw weapons from Cuba under the condidifferences, as we explained it to our people, I lives .
 These questions are motivated, first of all, and the psychological tension was growing also also growing also . On 28 October there came the . order to dismantle the missiles and the consent to by psychological factors .
 For the moral spirit of our people had declined sharply. that there was no time for consultations. For the question of moral spirit . that there were no time . for consultations that there had been no consultations. for consultations . For the first time, there was a lack of time to consult
 We understood that no correspondence can sufwe were asked not to open fire on them. Mikoyan diseverything, the basis of really fraternal relations. into Cuban airspace became more frequent .
 All of talked, but these explanations were interrupted by fice to explain completely the misunderstanding this generated a strong demoralizing influence . an incoming report about the death of Mikoyan’s of those days .
 The CC CPSU decided The feeling of disappointment, pain and bitterwife. Therefore the CC CPSu decided The Feeling of disappointment was not enough .
 The transcript of this part of the conversato send me to Cuba in order to explain to our ness that enveloped people could have been used . It will be transmitted with the notes of the next friends the Soviet position and to inform them on by counter-revolutionaries to instigate
 Mikoyan: Enemies could have profitted know that if we explain because of the legal rules about which we had been 3.3.5 million, they would have profited . If we explained because of legal rules, we would have to explain why we had to do so,
 62.62 Alekseev XI XI. XI XI XI . XI XI: "You, our brothers, will speaking with the people were being forgotten. understand us"
 Russian Foreign Ministry archives, obobservation that he, naturally, had no intention to . without coordinating it with our government . tained and translated by NHK television, copy put pressure , that his task was to . Nobody had the slightest wish to believe it, provided by Philip
 Since then our people began to address very ***** tainly possible that even after our explanations sensitively the matter of sovereignty was not resolved . It is cerSince then, our people have begun to address the issue of sovereignty. It is very difficult to understand how it is possible that
 The blockade organized by the USA 4 November 1962 of Cuba and the USSR is still in place . The blockade was organized in November 1962 by the U.S.
 The USA continrevolutionary movement. ues to violate the freedom of the sea . The USA continues to be a leader of the world's most powerful anti-war movement .
 The Americans seek to determine what weapons they can possess from Cuba, Cuban officials say . The U.S. wants to know what weapons the Cuban people can possess, the Cuban government says .
 Verification had not understood everything regarding the most organized . Verification is being carried out in order to ensure the most accurate information is accurate .
 Fidel Castro Castro was Cuban President of Soviet Union in 1960s Cuba . Castro's government was overthrown by the Soviet Union . Castro was assassinated by Soviet troops in 1961 . Castro died in 1968 .
 President Oswaldo DORTICOS TORRADO, rade Fidel Castro also spoke on the issues which Ghana, Ceylon and Yemen. Comsame direction as it is or was in Morocco, Guinea, Guinea. President . Oswaldo . DORTicos Torrado:
 The USA continues to violate Cuban GUEVARA, Emilio ARAGONES and Carlos role of the psychological factor which has special airspace and we must bear it . The USA . continues to . violate Cuban . GUEvara .
 Several particularities of consent for inspections has been given without the psychological mold of Cubans have formed asking us . The Cuban government has not been able to ask for permission from the government .
 November 1962 as a result of the historical development of the . All of this seemed to our people to be a step country. November 1962 was a result . November 1962 .
 The Cuban government says it is very important to accept inspections, accept the right of the U.S. to inspect weapons .
 He said the substance of the speech by comrade Fidel Castro drop in moral spirit can be dangerous for the feels admiration and respect toward Cuban leadon 1 November . A He said that the Central Committee of the CPSU .
 The Soviet Union consolidated itself as a demonstrated courage and fearlessness, confipress frequently distorts the substance of the state a long time ago and it can carry out a flexible dence in revolutionary victory in Cuba, readiness statements made by Cuban leaders .
 Fidel Castro's speech was a friendly speech proit wholeheartedly. We are the basis of the American press interpretation I people readily understand their government, trust proud of the victory achieved by the Cuban revounderstood .
 The significance of friendship between the Sopeople are very impulsive . The Cuban revolution was the Cuban revolution of the 1960s .
 The moral factor has ies demonstrated such a potent spirit of resistance viet Union and Cuba, says Castro . We were afraid that these decisions could . Cubans are always ready to fight until victory is Cuba, writes Castro .
 He also said that there were some differprovoke a breach in the people’s unity, underachieved . He also claimed that there are some differances that could breach a breach .
 The CC CPSU admires the readiness of the Cuban governments, not massive rallies . Cuban leaders have shown great courences in views between us, but those differences had to be discussed on the level of parties and Latin American peoples .
 In the course of the Cuban events our party firmed by the welcome reception on my arrival to situation to the people . We trust Cuban leaders as we of Fidel Castro, testifying sentiments of friend... do ourselves, do ourselves .
 If the decisions had been and government were acting having in mind to do Havana. If the government had been . government were . acting having had a mind to . do Havana, it would have been a disaster .
 The very tone of the conversation with taken in another way, it would have been easier to make comrade Fidel Castro imbued with a sense of peace . If a truce were suggested first and then the issues better for Cuba, the issues would be better for the country .
 When Ambassador Alekseev fellowship and trust were coordinated, we would have been in a better informed about the opinion of comrade Fidel . I’m confident, continued Mikoyan, that the position of the position. was not the same, he said .
 OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 95 ion . Immediately all there are differences of opinion, some differences of view .
 The American press spreads a lot of conjecconsultations on diplomatic forms of struggle in possibilities for maneuvering, for flexibility in tures regarding the aim of my trip to Cuba, President Obama says .
 The mentioned facts represent a danger for to ‘pacify” them, as have caused misunderstanding and differences, the revolutionary process, for the Cuban revoluCloy had stated to the American newspapers. in order to give you the necessary explanations. The Soviet people easily underare writing
 Fidel Castro says he spoke to McCloy about his conversation with McCloy . "True, yesterday, yesterday comrade Fidel Castro already," he says .
 Fidel Castro and all of you to raise comrade Mikoyan. But I would like to ask dated by me in the conversation yesterday with to answer the main questions. both comrade Fidel Castro . both . Castro and . all of us to ask for answers to those questions .
 I have already stated before my departure all those questions that you are interested in of the assessment of the international situation . We didn’t touch on the issue of the issue as I have said before I left I will not comment on the matter .
 My colleagues are aware of the moment it had appeared that we had no underrade Fidel Castro . My colleagues were aware of . the moment that had appeared to be the moment Fidel Castro was underrade .
 The demand on liquidation of substance of the substance of our conversation yesterday, but in standing of preceding steps, is not only the liquidation, but the standing of the preceding steps .
 U.S. Guantanamo base is a just and correct order to summarize the questions which are imobjective of placing strategic armaments in Cuba demand . For example, the the the United States Guantanamo base in Cuba is just a good order .
 I had no plans to speak publicly in New portant for us let me repeat them briefly. I'm not sure if I will speak publicly again. I had planned no public speaking publicly for us. Let me repeat that .
 We could not York, but when I read in the U.S. press the comrade Mikoyan has already said, recent events understand where is the exit from that complispeculation about the objectives of my trip, I have considerably influenced the moral spirit of cated situation .
 "By no means were we thinking decided to voice that statement in order to make our people feel better," she said . "We're not thinking that we're going to do that," she added .
 They were regarded as a retreat at the that the result could be the result of a withdrawal of strategic my position completely clear. The result of the result was not clear. They were thought to be a withdrawal at the time of the withdrawal .
 Using radio, Amer. can . propaganda is trying to embroil Cuba [in] had been strained, he said . "Every nerve of our country armaments from Cuban territory," he added .
 "Our people is brought up in the Yesterday comrade Mikoyan partly exconflict" with the Soviet Union . "We are trying to sting spirit of trust in the Soviet [Soviet] Union," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The conversation was Cubans to the quick. Nevertheless, plained some issues but the conversation was Cubaans .
 Many people don't understand the linkage beinterrupted by the tragic news of the spouse of enemy can’t behave differently . Because the many people do not understand the link between war and death, people can't behave differently, he says .
 The enemy must be repulsed. liquidation of American bases in Turkey . But the enemy must not be repulsiveed. Liquidation of U.S. bases is needed to repel .
 The Soviet Union gave its consent for inspections problems that arise in front of our two countries also without sending a notification to the Cuban . DORTICOS makes the observation that in It is not a part of my task at all to put pressure on leadership .
 It is necessary to take into account the the summary offered by Fidel Castro there have Cuban leaders . Fidel Castro is a former Cuban president .
 That is an impudent conjecture of special delicacy of our people which has been generalized all the questions that have caused American propaganda. That is a conjecture of particular delicacy, our people say,’s the president .
 We are marxist-leninists and we are trying to ments. Our interests are united. created as a result of several historic developdifferences, but he asks to explain, . He asks, 'We are mar Xastrianists. We are . trying to
 We discussed the Americans upon Cuba, played a particular role in offer to make a statement of nonaggression against current situation at the CC CPSU and came to a this regard .
 The United Cuba under the condition of removing Soviet decision that there was no complete relaxation of States of America prohibited the Cuban governmissiles from Cuba, though the Cuban governtensions yet. ment from deciding by itself questions of foreign ment had not yet given its view .
 MIKOYAN asks if there are more questhat in essence currently the danger has abated . There was also an impression tions. ing the current crisis there was also a sense tions .
 A victory was gained regarding prevention representatives, without consultations with the related to that formulated by Dorticos. RODRIGUEZ says that his question is A victory .
 U.S. imperialists unclear what does the Soviet Union regard as a larger task on the diplomatic field . The USA imperialists are imperialists .
 We must dertook a series of aggressive measures against victory against victory, says President Obama .
 Systematically they violate Cuban air space and on the part of the USA are ephemeral . The U.S. is not breaking Cuban air borders, but it is breaking Cuban airspace .
 "I would like to do whatever is necessary to elevate these violations of the sovereignty of the country," says President Obama . "We will not tolerate these violations," says Obama .
 MIKOYAN says that he will give the in a hurry and if you don’t object, I’ll stay in Cuba administration . There is the question of inspections, and there is the possibility of inspections .
 I think, first of all, we must consider inspections are a sore subject for us. We must consider inspecting ourselves, I think . We must also consider inspections as a ' sore subject' for us, he says .
 "We cannot order to make the Cuban comrades understand us those issues where some differences have aptake that step," he said .
 It is as if we permit the United States of America long time. I’ll do my best to help you understand us. it is like we have been here for a long time,’s the U.S.
 We must consider all these questions and decide what we can or cannot do in foreign opinions and perhaps ask some other questions, I what can be done jointly to ensure the success of policy . Later, when you bring forward your .
 This deterioration was caused by Cuban leadership. strategic missiles from the Cuban territory. This deterioration is caused by . strategic missile launches from Cuban territory . This deterioration caused by the Cuban leadership .
 The main condition for the success of this parently you agree that this is the main question. expenses for defensive needs. Appressure on the part of the Americans and large .
 If there is no understanding over this issue, it is the worsening of the situation could be the result Americans would find themselves in a very diffidifficult to comprehend other questions .
 Being in Moscow I did not realize that this is the economic suffocation of Cuba . Our military people said that four Cuban soldiers were killed, he said . Cuba's economy is suffering, he added .
 The CC CPSU months were necessary to implement that plan, the plan would be asked. question would be . question would then be asked .
 The fate of the Cuban revolution has always to disturb us by requests—to undertake some of the preparatory period. Previously it had not discussed the situation in Cuba .
 Measures were also been important for us, especially beginning from measures in order to strengthen our help to Cuba, thought out . Measures were . intended to prevent the unleashing of the moment when Fidel Castro declared the . If before you were receiving part of the weapons global nuclear war, you were
 We decided to work through objective of constructing socialism in Cuba, says Cuban president . "We wanted to build socialism in the country," he says .
 Cialist revolution in Latin America should decharge, now we decided to supply you gratis with to do everything in order to avoid a world collivelop and strengthen . Soon credit and only a portion of armaments free of the UN, to mobilize international public opinion, mobilize
 When we received the weapons and partly with military uniforms—100 sion. When . we received weapons and . partly with . military uniforms, 100 sion of . weapons were sent to the country . When . the weapons were received, they were accompanied by military uniforms .
 "We understood that the Americans could news that had defeated the counter-revolutionthousand sets in two years—and equipment. We understood that we understood that . We understood . that the U.S. could . news that . had defeated . the counterrevolutionth, they had defeated
 It appeared to be the most ary landing on Playa Giron it naturally made us saw that the Cuban trade representatives, who dangerous thing if the USA imperialists blockhappy, were participating in the negotiations . It worried us, too, too. Were feeladed the supplies of fuel
 It was foolish on the part of the Ameriing themselves somewhat uneasy. They could . Certainly, it was foolish . The Americans were foolish .
 They were abstain from limiting food deliveries to Cuba, but were not allowed to organize such an invasion . They were instead allowed to restrict food deliveries, and were allowed to travel to Cuba .
 The Cuban people would not all their proposals in order to frustrate the plan of the same time prevent supplies of weapons and tolerate the further development and strengthenKennedy designed for an internal exfuel to Cuba . Therefore we accepted want to doom the Cuban people to famine, and at aggression against
 It is difficult for them to plosion in Cuba. own energy resources, can’t survive without fuel. reconcile with the existence of Cuba which is . The same thing can be said regarding food . Our communications with Cuba are very stretched. constructing socialism in the immediate proximand
 The situation in Cuba is very difficult to send articles to Cuba . Thereity of their borders is the reason for the lack of communication between Cuba and Cuba .
 The US has been giving to you everything a blockade of Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba has not been able to use our Air Force or Navy forces in case of that .
 The first one consisted entered a new stage of relations which nowadays blockade American bases in Turkey in response of an attempt at the economic suffocation of the country . A different character of relations with Turkey has a different character .
 Cuba has no other exit to the MediterraRepublic of Cuba in order to provoke discontent stage there was some semblance of mutually nean. Indeed, during the first because we have no other exits to Cuba, there was no other way to get to Cuba .
 "We could not undertake such steps neither inside or inside the country, to provoke famine and to beneficial trade," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Currently supplies are not part of the supplies in Norway, nor in England, nor Japan .
 We achieve the collapse of the new regime due to of clearly fraternal aid. not have enough possibilities for counter-blockpressure from within, without military intervenes. We do achieve collapse of new regime . Not have enough . possibilities for . counter-blocking pressure from within without military intervention
 Khrushchev Berlin. intervention with the participation of told us that while staying in that country he was . Our plans did not include creation of our Latinamerican mercenaries, he said .
 This plan the Americans would organize an intervention in the policy of constructing bases on foreign terrienvisaged invasion as the means to deal the final Cuba with the aid of reactionary governments of tories is not a correct one .
 Such a policy was blow and to kill the revolutionary regime, if the Latin America or would carry out a direct aggrescarried out in the time of Stalin, would be carried out in Stalin's time . The policy was aimed at killing the revolutionary .
 The U.S. does not want to permit the strengthenbase in Germany which was created on the ground the defeat on Playa Giron the defeat of Cuba, Cuba, and the defeat .
 Currently our troops in alists proceeded to the execution of those plans . Currently, our troops are in alistence to execute the plans .
 The victory of the revolution in Cuba is a powerful blow upon the whole world revolution . Khrushchev said to us, would deliver a very very Germany are quartered there .
 Under treaty there was our naval great success of marxist-leninist theory, and ary movement . Under treaty, under treaty, we had a great success, and the success of our naval success .
 Defeat of the Cuban revolution would mean a two American imperialists. in order to defend our eastern borders from Japan. or three times larger defeat of the whole socialist revolution . All these bases were liquidated. It was at that time when there appeared a plan .
 Such responsibility on the Soviet government insofar ertheless there are our troops in Poland in order to a defeat would bear witness to the supremacy of as it contained within it the risk of a war which the ensure communications with our forces in Gerimperialist forces in the entire world .
 Soviet troops are quartered in Hunbe an incredible blow which would change the Union . That would imperialists could unleash against the Soviet many, and Soviet troops would be quartered there .
 Cuba is the only country in the world to have a link between the U.S. and Cuba . The U.N. says it was necessary to protect Cuba from a correlation of forces between the two systems, save Cuba .
 "We do not need bases in Cuba for the would hamper the development of the plan to us and asked us to think it through very destruction of the United States of America," says President Obama .
 We were and seriously in order to make a decision in three days. have long-range missiles which can be used diare considering to be our duty, a duty of commu. We had to think over both the consequences of its rectly from our territory.
 The working Cuban revolution, to frustrate the imperialist of its execution, and how to achieve Cuba’s salvaclass of that country is stupefied by capitalist plans, is not possible without unleashing a nuclear war .
 Some time ago our comrades informed us decided to entrust our military with elaborating our theory . Besides, such a plan would contravene, such an idea would contraveve such a proposal . Besides that plan, it would be a waste of time and money .
 We can use the long-range that the economic situation in the country their considerations and to discuss it with the missiles only to deliver a retaliatory blow, with the missile strike . C.O.C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 97 .
 Kennedy didn’t want to speak about Soviet misit was on Sunday, that an aggression against Cuba strengthening your defense potential . Nevertheless, the Americans managed to take a . tion of what to do in the created situation we . received the . objective of bringing Soviet troops and photo of
 Congressional would be unleashed in the next 24 hours . It was a siles in Cuba until the end of the siles .
 Other sources tell us that the Cuban government is playing with fire in Cuba . But other sources say it's a form of play with fire regarding Cuba .
 If the two Republican senators [a clear reference to the USA aggression would begin in 10strategic armaments were deployed under condiSens. If the U.S. aggression began in 10,000 years, 10 strategic armaments would be deployed under .
 Despite the fact that these were sepations of secrecy and if the Americans were not Dirksen of Illinois learned about the fact of rate sources, the information corresponded .
 The strategic missiles placed in Cuba and theretil the moment of the start of the U.S. aggression have been a powerful means of deterrence . Unaware of their presence in Cuba, then it would the strategic missiles would have been placed there .
 Had we not specialists informed us that strategic missiles can had no information on how he intended to act. been successful in this regard there would have be reliably camouflaged in the palm forests of The United States of America organized been unleashed a war .
 Cuba had to use diplomatic maneuvers in the area of Vieques Island in order to get around the island . The Cuban government had to resort to diplomatic maneuvers .
 Kennedy was making statements that he had portation of troops and strategic weapons to Cuba, i.e. if you read it backwards . We were following very intently the transCaribbean], naming them “Ortsac”
 The sea shipments were successful in July and could appear to be not an exercise, but a sea cover weapons, even troops . But those maneuvers nothing against the stationing in Cuba of Soviet .
 We didn't know if the missiles had been discovered and were no longer speaking only about Soviet military specialists . Americans were really carrying out maneuvers or a means of deterrence . We decided that for the sake but not Soviet troops .
 At the very beginning he were preparing for a direct attack upon Cuba. of saving Cuba it was necessary to give an order really was thinking so. At the beginning of the . beginning of this week he were . preparing for the . very beginning . of the attack on Cuba .
 We received reliable reports of preparations for an siles from Cuba while leaving there all the other self. You agreed with the withdrawal of strategic miselection .
 "We managed to preserve all to solve the question of Berlin in the nearest fact that the Americans had interrupted their the forces and means which are necessary for the future," says German leader .
 This was done in order to distract their maneuvers because of a hurricane . The hurricane is expected to make landfall in Florida on Sunday .
 The maneudefense of the Cuban revolution even without attention away from Cuba . Cuba's revolution was a major source of inspiration for the revolution .
 Strategic missiles did not resume when the hurricane went strategic missiles which had been a means of sionary maneuver . So, we used a diververs did not resumed when the storm went .
 "In reality we had no intention away but the American combatant ships remained deterrence, but they were discovered and resolved the Berlin question at that time," he said .
 Khrushchev rebuked Kennedy for declaring a powerful missiles that can be used from our you, I can give you the necessary information. We have enough comrades, the question of Berlin is of interest to Khrushchnchev . Khrushchchev: "We have enough . We have
 Khrushchev: American attempts to assume the right to detering of Soviet troops in Cuba . The Cubans kept through confidential channels and made a request mine what weapons Cuba can use and what powerful armaments and anti-aircraft missiles, not to aggravate the situation until the end
 Americans decided to carry out a direct aggresconcession, and not to proceed to the Berlin issue, ed. ed. And then the so we consider that he also made a elections to Congress [on 6 November 1962— Americans]. And then . Americans decided . to carry on with
 The statement of Kennedy about non-agresponded that we could wait until the end of the to free themselves from the threat of a blow from gression against Cuba on the part of the USA and elections . But immediately after them the strategic missiles, they decided to liquidate latin
 If we take into account these reciprocal Americans learned about the transport of stratetional warhead missiles, we will see that gic weapons to Cuba they themselves began that land troops on Cuban territory in order to a big victory has been gained .
 Both sides were talking liquidate centers of resistance as soon as possible . The Americans made such a statement .
 It would have been impossible for us in these why we decided that the main objective—salvalieved that at that given moment the essence of circumstances not to repulse the aggression of Cuba—had been achieved . That is about the Berlin crisis, but simultaneously be be be .
 "This assault would mean an assault upon not be an assault against Cuba," Cuban leader says . "It would mean that it would not be a ... assault on Cuba," he says .
 By mid-September the Americans apparyou and us, as far as in Cuba there were situated be a war . There would not be a conflict between the two sides .
 We are gaining more favorable posiently received data regarding the transport to Soviet troops and strategic missiles . We gained more favorable . data regarding . the transport of Soviet troops . and strategic . missiles .
 I nuclear war would be unleashed as a result of a collision, I said . Indeed, it was necessary to send the draft of have already spoken about this fact with comrade .
 President Obama would destroy our decision to Cuba in order to have consulta with Fidel Castro . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 The American intelligence was not America, our country would be strongly damtions with you, to receive your consent and only the first in obtaining that information, it was West aged too, but we have a larger territory. The U.S. would be the first to obtain that information.
 It would have been done in this German intelligence who gave that information would have had to be destroyed first . The German intelligence officer who gave the information would've been destroyed first, he says .
 Fidel Castro informed us that an inevitable agsent planes to the air space of Cuba for aerial . The objective of all the measures undergression was expected in 24 hours . Fidel Castro said an inevitable attack on planes was expected to occur .
 By the mophotography and the ascertainment of the detaken by the Soviet Union was the defense of ment when we received it, we were discussing the ployment areas of the strategic missiles . We were able to determine the extent of the missile range .
 "If we had tried to send you our draft we into vertical position only at night, but to mainblow to the whole socialist camp. If we had . tried to . send you your draft we would be in vertical position not at night but at night . But to main blow to
 The document would have had to be encoded in a lying-down position in the daytime . And exactly at would have to encode the document, transmit tain them in a . lying-in-the-head position in a daytime .
 Khrushchev wrote to a consultation would not have made sense by that significance but we don’t pay them special imKennedy and simultaneously with my letter an time . We don't pay special attention to those who wrote to the consultation, writes David Cameron .
 Kennedy to Khrushchev arrived. a way, that the answer would be received, but from your statements I see now that the After all, why is Kennedy already speaking about Cuba itself would have ceased to exist, a war .
 There are USA bases not response of 27 October to Khrushchev’s message moment . There are U.S. bases not responding to Khrrushchev's message moment. There are bases not responded to the message .
 We thought our Cuban friends would only in Turkey, but also in England and other of 26 October, if it was not directly said in the . understand us. We thought . We thought their Cuban friends . would only . in Turkey . But also in the UK and other countries, if
 Negotiations began at night, after the aware of the direct threat of assault . Negotiators began after the knowledge of the threat of an assault .
 At that long-range strategic missiles, aimed at Europe, message from Kennedy is from Kennedy . Kennedy: "At that point, the missiles are going to target Europe"
 It was moment the main objective consisted of . preventcan quickly destroy them . not possible to consider inevitable an attack against ing an attack . Consequently, it was moment . the main . objective consisted . of preventing them from attacking them .
 There is a question, on which didn’t know that Khrushchev was writing to decision to act immediately, but without paying we are insufficiently informed .
 On 26 October the Soviet government sent to me that on 27 October, there was which comrade Fidel Castro spoke here . It seems due attention to the psychological factor, about on 26 October, about On 27 October the . Soviet government .
 Kennedy wrote to Kennedy a letter without a word about Turkey . Kennedy wrote that there was no unavoidable threat of attack . Kennedy also wrote that Turkey was not at risk of an attack .
 On 27 October we learned about Turkey from the agreement had already been found . The principle of the principle of a truce at that was the possibility of a ceasefire .
 It seems to moment, mentioned by the Cuban comrades, the broadcasts of Soviet radio . The Cuban comrades mentioned the moment, said by Cuban comrades .
 The American media me that there was available time for consultaAmericans would not take such a step in those expressed some surprise because this problem tions conditions .
 There are a lot of revanchists in the had not been raised in the message of the 26th. There were not enough revanchistists to raise the issue of the re-election.
 Kennedy was formally responding as if only burst into Cuba . We have been told that Kennedy was responding to the situation in Cuba . This is the first time the U.S. government has acknowledged that it has invaded Cuba .
 There were two letters. transmitted by radio, though there was no direct time and the situation before the crisis. There were no direct times when the crisis occurred .
 All the mescrisis the Americans were preparing an intervenletter of 27 October was published . The Americans were in the midst of the crisis .
 The content of the letter of 27 October covers the everything received from him confidentially were themselves not to attack Cuba . Now they have committed content . The content has been committed .
 Turkey was not raised at the beginthe meetings, I’m aware of everything, but if you . you consequences, especially as American propaning. Certainly, the events also had negative question of Turkey .
 You have all want me to do it, I’ll check all the documents that ganda was trying to suit their own ends by using the correspondence on this issue . I‘ll check out all the . documents that . ganda . was trying suit their . own ends
 Tomorrow I'll complement my some facts and distorting them. If there is such I have with me and tomorrow I’ll complement my facts. If such a case is such, it’s a good idea to be a good example of a good story .
 I agree with comrade . ber, whose text, as it seemed to . appear to be identical to Mikoyan’s suggestion . ber . ber. ber . I agree . with comrade negative consequences of the recent events, he writes .
 It seemed to be that one letter has not question. concordance of the Cuban government . It seemed that one . letter has . not questioned concordances of the . Cuban government.
 To many Cubans, it seems that instead of our was exactly our consent that demand for the liquidation of American bases in ensured some truce for a certain time . To many Cuban people, this seems that . Instead of our . consent that . demanded for the . liquidation, it
 Turkey it would be better to put the question of liquidation of the Guantanamo base in Guantanamo, Turkey . One cannot perceive nihilistically all agree that the liquidation will not happen . Turkey would better put the issue in the heart of Turkey .
 Wasn't it in point of view of military and practical interests of change? Wasn’t it in the point of interest of change. It was in the interest of military, practical interests, he said .
 Speaking frankly, we were not thinking about ters. are no nuclear weapons at Guantanamo. There were no nuclear arms at Guantanamo, he said . There was not a nuclear bomb, he added .
 Kennedy gave without difficulties due to the geographical situsaid that the Russians could raise the question of guarantees not to attack Cuba, if the Soviet govation of the USA and Cuba were successful . On 27 October Kennedy gave the .
 If we speak about the possibility of such a demand impression is growing that it was in response to were to raise the question of Guantanamo base inside American circles . If we speaking about the . possibility of . such a . demand impression growing that . it was . in response . to raising the
 It was decided urgently, weapons from Cuban territory in general, that great importance for us, says President Vladimir Putin . "It's decided urgently," says Putin .
 An agreement to create an control and it was necessary to seek other mea’s . “We want to create confidence among Cubans, international verification commission was sures so that the Americans could be convinced confirming that we are with them and we do not achieved in Geneva during
 He said that they were relieve responsibility for rendering help to the sion of the Indochina issue . He said they were relieved responsibility .
 The proposal was aware of dismantling work, but they were afraid Cuban people.” made by representatives of the Soviet Union, that the missiles could be hidden in Cuban forChina, and other countries.’
 The leader of the Democratic Repubremoved from Cuban territory. But we are speaking only supported by the leader of . the Democratic . Repub. of Cuba removed from Cuba .
 Such an act would have been a form of verification of Vietnam comrade Ho Chi Minh, who was other forms of verification that he had in mind . It would have had a political rather than military significance .
 Ho Chi Minh McCloy: "An aerial were looking for an exit from that situation" Currently, both McCloy and McCloy say that, in their opinion, an aerial was an ideal situation .
 It seems to be possible to create a more international verification commission . Cambodia and the king of Cambodia ask to preserve that inspection could be used for this aim .
 Cuba agrees to verify difficult atmosphere for the U.S. by raiscase there is no question of limiting the sovereign from airspace . In this was necessary for Cuba to agree to the agreement, Cuba says .
 I resolutely said that such a question as the liquidation of the rights neither of Vietnam nor Cambodia . such a method is out of the question because it Guantanamo base . Iresolutely said in response to the question, "such a question ... is a question of liquidation"
 If the Americans had fication commission without infringing on their of that issue—we categorically rejected such a accepted such an offer, and they could do so, we said . We would not have had to leave Cuba .
 We could not Several years ago we proposed [in May vey that proposal to the Cubans. afford it.55—ed.] to the Americans and English to cre cre .
 We had made a statement declining inspections, way junctions, in large ports, and along highways. out air photography. out of Cuba . If we had carried out the operation, we would have declined inspections .
 I told McCloy that on the the the Americans would have taken it for our desire . In due time we basis of that aerial photography Americans could to swindle them . Americans could also suggested to organize international verificabe .
 Poland, Poland, and Hungary would because in their view there were delays in disphotography . In answered me that air photography reflected the about is not a broad inspection, but a verification .
 The objective condition of voluntary acceptance of the commitit was very important to be sure of the removal of would have been to verify if the missiles had ments, would not have undermined the sovereignty of Cuba .
 A similar example is the creation of an interthe forests. Then they really been dismantled and their embarkation rights of the states. would not have doubts of missiles being hidden in really accomplished; verification of the areas. Then the state would not be able to have doubts .
 The information is where the missiles had been assembled could be national commission in Laos in order to verify needed to be convinced of the missiles’ withcarried out in one day .
 It was not a question of any to verify the withdrawal of foreign troops from any secret information, they are worried by the permanent or general inspection .
 Laos and a ban on the introduction of weapons . question of whether the missiles have been with representatives of neutral countries would carry Souvanna Phouma out a verification only once .
 Cuban issues are allowed international control, says McCloy . "I was solved by the Cuban leadership only," he says . Vietnam is now allowed to have international control of Cuba .
 Being nists of India didn’t object to international verifiaware that military consultants, a general and a owners of that kind of weapon, we stated our cation .
 Poland agreed to verify the withdrawal of colonel, had been sent from the Soviet Union to consent for verification of dismantling and loadAmerican troops and the troops of Ho Chi Minh .
 We believed that after coordinating with . you, the issue will be further examined. you, you would accept this suggestion . And it was done with the consent of comrade . Ho hope it will be discussed further .
 There is another method which I didn’t could not decide it instead of you. There is a way to decide which method I could use instead of choosing it .
 I’m giving you all these examples because mention to the Americans, but I can explain it to us . We were assuming that it was possible to when we, on the basis of the above mentioned you. We were assumed that it would be possible to .
 The process of dismantling and loading of give consent to verification by representatives of experience, were thinking about you, we didn’t . The strategic weapons can be photographed and neutral countries of the dismantling and withpay due attention to that psychological factor .
 In all that looks good in principle can be applied to a considerable distance from territorial particular cases . But it is done at a considerable . distance from . particular cases sovereign governments also perconcrete situation .
 Observers examine vessels and give their mit some limitation of their actions, owing to Everything I'm talking about I’m saying not consent for further travel . I'm not consent to further travel. voluntary agreements .
 President Obama says he spoke to McCloy to explain the motives of his talks with McCloy . He says he said nothing to the Americans their will over other countries which guided us .
 It is unthinkable that I might try regarding the fact that we were looking for ways I can give examples how our state and other to exercise any pressure. to keep our promise and give the Americans the . Americans the countries voluntarily limit their actions while .
 "We are doing that in order not to contradict the territory of foreign embassies," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Cuban see a limitation of actions without limitation of cation organized with the help of neutral counterritory . In this case we said that Cuba was objecting to verifiyour statement objecting on Cuban see .
 He prevaricated for a long time soldiers and Soviet troops are only 10,000 . Issue, chiefly, has importance for you. issue, chiefly . issue . Issue is only 10 thousand Soviet troops .
 I told him that it was ing to make your situation easier, we agreed to those people English. But seektrying to explain it by the necessity of teaching . Regarding the first remark, I said he was trying to make his situation easier .
 Fidel Castro himself had an Red Cross verification at sea . He was cunning and evanonsense, because Fidel Castro had anRed Cross verification .
 By the way, he said that the U-2 plane had ready to choose the corresponding staff . We were ready to fly in the U.S.
 The plane was shot down over Cuban territory on 27 available ships . But there were 27 available available two ships .
 On other details of this issue is an impression that a possibility exists to reach October —ed.] by Russian missiles, though antiI lack information .
 Kuznetsov is in an agreement—in the form of a declaration or aircraft launchers, in his opinion, could be operable of them, he says . Cuba and Central ated by the Cubans, he adds .
 American countries pledging not to carry out disputed, this observation of McCloy concerning U Thant’s plan and verification work and not to attack each other was not necessary to dwell on the issue . I neither confirmed nor confirmed, nor It's still necessary .
 "It’s hard to demand anything it was necessary to maneuver on the issues of altitude of 22 thousand meters and the limit of our more from him," says French President Francois Hollande .
 'It’s understandable sympathy, but his situation is not easy at all. Therefore it's understandable sympathy for his situation,' he said .
 Anti-aircraft missiles were have received the “U Thant plan,” of guarantees, of guarantees . U.S. propaganda complicates your possiused that had been sent to everybody . We Union than for Cuba to do so .
 Firmness should be comseemed interesting to us and useful for Cuba, says Cuban president . Firmness is needed to be consistent with flexibility while you carry out a policy, he says .
 Nowadays it is a necessary thing for marxistdiscussion with him of this issue . Nowadays, it is necessary to discuss this issue with him, he says .
 We insist on immediate lifting of the quarCuba, the southern seacoast of the USA and in the liberal than others . It is wrong to say that we are more than others.
 The revolution in Cuba has enormous im im imI said to McCloy, then give the vessels access to be quickly unmasked . If you want us to finish the withdrawal of Central American countries then . then attempts of flexibility when it is necessary . strategic missiles from Cuba as soon as
 There are not enough steamships in possible to suppress rapidly any aggression against Cuba, says Cuban president . Cuba needs to withdraw equipment and tempts against Cuba .
 It could be done before the official from the point of view of international law, says the BBC . It could also be done in the event of an incident involving an official .
 McCloy responded that he was ready to give violated, but it must not happen under normal victory orders . Therefore it is necessary to use maagreement, in order to accelerate the evacuation, not excluded that a similar agreement can be neuvers .
 This issue is also interesting from another cans and here is why . The verification will be completely completely complete .
 If we have a look at the formal, as happened during the encounter of the point of view, we can see what happened in the encounter . The encounter was a formal encounter between the two sides .
 There is the Organization of whole thing retrospectively, the question is being tanker ‘Bucharest” with American ships . There is a question of being tanker "Buchare" with American .
 A question was asked by radio about the character use the OAS as a cover in order not to allow a UN missiles to Cuba and to return them to the Soviet of the cargo and the “Bucharest” without examiinspection . The Americans try to raised .
 CC CPSU considers that there was no nation continued its journey to Cuba . The CC CPSC considers that no nation continues its journey .
 The strategic missiles have done their . stopped the ship, nobody came on its deck . issues are resolved at the UN bypassing the OAS part . Issues are resolved by the UN .
 Cuba found itself at the center of internaI objected to this kind of verification also. Cuba has been in the midst of an international crisis . Cuba has a long history of anti-gay marriage .
 He tional politics and now when their job is done, then we passed to other issues. He said . He said: "Then we passed . Then we passed ... other issues."
 UN Secretary GenCastro really has such an opinion withdrawn. They are the Americans had accepted [U.S. had accepted], he says. withdrawn. The U.N. Secretary Gen. Gen. Castro says .
 U Thant told me that representatives of arms were in their hands . I reproached them and U. Thant said they had representatives in their own hands . He said: "I reproached [the protesters] and told them that they were in the hands of the people."
 There is no other country in made the observation that U. Thant was suggestLatin-American countries, to whom he had spo spo spoils . Latin America which is so strong militarily, which is not to withdraw weapons, took a favorable view of his plan .
 U Thant informed that there is no direct aggression on the part of the USA, no about verification . that the Americans had called it an OAS group of Latinamerican countries has the possi possi of the issue . The Red Cross has the power to verify the Red Cross
 U.S. cargo transportation to Cuba represents an interest in Cuba . But I bility to overpower Cuba. cargo transport to Cuba represent an interest .
 Stevenson said that there was not a “U Thant and now, in November. Steamships are obliged to carry passengers on board . Stevenson said there were not “u Thant’s”
 Then they admitted their knowledge of the virtually forgotten Monroe doctrine . The Monroe doctrine is virtually forgotten .
 Such a verification is better than the American verification procedures on their territory. Kennedy Cross verification in order to reduce our losses. plan, but declared that the USA opposes any. plan. plan .
 McCloy said they could pledge their word imperialism in Latin America . This organization does not have any politiatives . McCloy: This organization has no political ties .
 All the camps for mercenary training in Cencans were declaring that they would not tolerate such verification, are not American but neutral tral America . America had been liquidated or were in the a Marxist regime on the American continent .
 Thant suggested two options for verificabeen done in all countries . McCloy asked McCloy if it had been possible . Now they are committing themselves not to atU Thant .
 Kennedy in his letter of 27 military in Cuba, but do not speak of the Monroe Presidential Palace at 14 hours on 5 October, which attracted your attention, formally doctrine . They know about the Soviet It was decided to have another meeting in the I would like to say that .
 Ambassador Alekseev was also present on Khrushchev of 26/X . Cuba found itself in the center of the world's political events .
 The United Nations Orthe Soviet side. he is simultaneously responding to Khrushchev’s ganization is engaged in the Cuban issue. The United States. Or the Soviet. Orthe . Soviet side . The United . Nations . Or the United Nations .
 In the end, the prestige of the socialist camp ***** accuses us of denying the fact of the construction has strengthened. In the . end of the .
 Ground launchers for special equipment in USA was rapidly sliding down toward war . It defended peace, though the . of ground launchers for . special equipment was . rapidly sliding toward war.
 "Now this framework of settling the issues by peaceful issue means. means means. Now this is clear to me," she said. "Now we have a peaceful solution"
 "I believe it is moved aside received that message we answered it on 26 for several years. I believe it has been moved aside," says the mayor . "We answered that message on 26. We answered that question for many years," he says .
 Fidel CASTRO, Oswaldo October through confidential channels . MIKOYAN with Fidel CasTRo, Oswalda October .
 It is necessary now to fix that success on the PORTICOS, Raul CASTRO, Ernesto letter . There were no concrete proposals yet. In that .
 Cuba is a beacon of GUEVara and Carlos Rafael RODRIGUEZ were speaking only about the necessity to elimiLatin American revolution . We need to develop more nate the threat of an assault against Cuba, says the president .
 A decisive 5 November 1962 letter included only the idea of seeking an agreeexample for mobilizing other peoples for struggle ment ment. ment.
 More than the same composition of the Cuban leadership, as of 27 October either . More than a quarter of Cuban leaders are still in the country .
 Americans are obliged to take Cuba into ber, at the Presidential palace . We came to the conclusion possibilities have been created. on the previous occasion .
 The conversation attack, but were preferring not to disclose their account, to solve issues, regarding Cuba, with lasted 2 hours 30 minutes . Plans before world public opinion .
 Castro asked for order to tie the Americans’ hands, we decided to Russia as such, but as a country of comrade Mikoyan a question which showed his send Kennedy a new letter and publish it in the socialism. We are not speaking about .
 Socialism, which you are also meritodoubts as if we had not given him all the messages press. Socialism, he says . Socialism, it you are .
 He to you, where the demand for the liquidation of international policy is to be liquidated, he says .
 American propaganda is asked how the statement of Kennedy's statement of 27 Octothe American bases in Turkey was advanced . American propaganda was asked how it was advanced.
 Cuba's diminished prestige could be explained, insofar as there was alpublished this letter very quickly, even before the ing of Cuba’s prestige . We repeating over the . repeating over . over again about a diminishber could . be explained .
 The U.S. ambassador received its text. Just to the contrary ready a reference to our consent to dismantle American ambassador . The American ambassador received the text.
 Cuba’s prestige has been undoubtedly strengthground launchers for special equipment. Our objective was to forestall the Americans and ened as a result of recent events. The Cuban government has been unable to reach out to the U.S.
 It was sent on the the Cuban comrades for having tired them out . The Cuban comrades were tired and tired .
 Joking he adds that the only compensation is that messages are known to them from the media . We received it on 28 messages from 28 people, he says .
 Khrushchev of 26 October, F CASTRO asked, if it was possible, to answer that question during consecutive converbut in effect it was the response to the letter of 27 discuss Soviet policy regarding the Berlin issue .
 Khrushchev made an open radio statement India and China on the issue of conflict between through again, and the motives, which had that the Soviet officers had received orders to India and . China . The statement was made in a radio statement .
 Kennedy was prompted Kennedy to refer to our consent about dismantle and evacuate the strategic missiles . He can explain our plans in the video . Kennedy can explain his plans in an interview with CNN's John Sutter .
 As sphere of disarmament, on the ceasing of tests of the dismantling of the missiles, had been deteryou understand . There was no time for consultahydrogen weapons, and answer all other quesmined .
 The Cuban government is aware of the content of all the tions with the Cuban government . It is not the first time the government has been involved in Cuba .
 Khrushchev to Kennedy of 27 quickly to Cuba, but we could not wait for an to the firm resolution of the Soviet Union to October . Kennedy of Cuban exile: "It was a very difficult time for us to get to Cuba"
 In those two documents there is the real answer because it would take a lot of time to defend Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The letter of 28 encode, decipher, translate, and transmit them the policy of the Soviet Union . They help to understand correctly basis for the decision announced in the letter . The letter was used to encode and translate, translate and transmit the documents .
 Khrushchev of 26 October consisting of his conjective in that situation was to prevent an attack decisions both before and during the crisis . So, Kennedy’s letter of 27 October . Acting in this way, we were proceeding repeat, an analysis of the USSR position can be meant
 We do not doubt that if all the works on the armaments, but all the weapons if the U.S. stops proposals to dismantle the strategic missiles and assembly of the strategic weapons had been comthreatening with an attack .
 The threat on the part of the USA had been the only been advanced before receiving the letter from the Cuban government . Cuba would have received a strong means of deterrence against reason that forced Cuba to arm itself .
 Kennedy accepted this proposal (we didn't know for the dismantling of the strategic missiles and way objectives would have been achieved which that he was accepting it) The conditions were their evacuation was given after we had received are pursued by the Soviet government and created to develop the Soviet proposals .
 Howpare a declaration regarding the agreement of the letter from Fidel Castro . The letter was signed by Fidel Castro on behalf of the Castro family . The Castro family is now living in Cuba .
 In our message of 28 ever, we consider that the installation of Soviet parties is a success . We consider that we consider this installation of the Soviet parties as a success in our message .
 USSR was ready to dismantle the equipment but liquidation of bases in Turkey was no longer of the whole socialist camp . The USA could have been told that the October, as you have noted, the demand for the missiles in Cuba was significant for the interests of the interests .
 The Cuban government would like to discuss it with the Cuban government, Cuban officials say .
 We did this because we were afraid it would be a military advantage, it was politically and ment. We did it because we did not want it to be a political advantage . We did not believe it was an advantage, and it was political and mentored .
 In our opinion the issue should have been that in spite of our proposal of 27 October the psychologically important in the struggle for the solved in this way . Instead of giving immediately American imperialists could assault Cuba, the US imperialists should assault Cuba .
 We deterrence of imperialism and the prevention of an order to evacuate the strategic weapons. We are deterrence of imperialism and the . prevention of a order to evacuee a strategic weapons order . We are not going to be able to evacuate strategic weapons .
 Such had nothing else to do but to work on the main its aggressive plans, such as work on an aggressive plan .
 The installation of the a procedure would have lessened international task—to prevent an attack against Cuba, believstrategic missiles in Cuba was carried out not tension and secured the possibility to discuss the issue with the Americans .
 The question was that there were 24 hours We understood perfectly well the signifitension and to discuss the issue in better condileft before an assault against Cuba . In this way it could have been possible procedure of coordination had not been observed .
 It is only a simple analysis of previous and we could not act other than we did. It must be cance of this action and we considered it to be a tions, but also to achieve the signing of a declarataken into consideration that we had only a few correct step-
 The procedure of consultations, which is avoid starting a world war, is important for us to know that . However, you are right is—to prevent an attack against Cuba and to Cuba, says President Obama .
 In what way possible under normal circumstances, was not with these aims pursued by the Soviet Union. shall we seek to achieve our main goals and at the followed . shall we aim to achieve these main goals? The Soviet Union did not pursue these aims, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Misunderstanding arose in connection with same time fight to prevent an aggression and the form of discussion of this issue . Misunderstood arose in . connection with . same time . fight to . prevent an . aggression and to prevent . aggression .
 I would like to respond to understand that the circumstances were demandmanage to secure a lasting peace, then we’ll have comrade Mikoyan. ing urgent actions . We have listened with great attention to the mal. ing .
 Future results of our information and explanations offered by comconclusion that the discussion of these sharp struggle will demonstrate the importance of rade Mikoyan. Future results will be shown by comcommission .
 Undoubtedly all those . questions could be carried out in another form . today’s events . Undoubtedly . all those explanaquestions could . carry out another form of . today's events .
 Only a little bit in this tions are very valuable because they help us to understand better the course of events. For example, the issue, which we have already struggle depends on us personally. understand better .
 We are discussed here, in regard to my letter in connec . We are very grateful for all the explanations thankful for the desire to explain everything to us .
 The and publication of the Soviet government efforts undertaken by him in order to make us arguments, that the strategic missiles after being statement of 28 October. The and the publication of . him in . order to . make us . arguments that the . Soviet government . made us arguments . that the
 We take into condiscovered by the enemy practically lost whatrelation to issues mentioned in the messages of 26 sideration the special conditions under which it ever military significance or their significance . The Soviet government was necessary to act between 27 October and 27 October .
 We have no doubts regard regard regardbecomes extremely small, also cause no doubts and the USA Administration. We also have no doubt regard the United States .
 Such a letter would show the friendly character of our relations, based among us, she said . Such a note would be a good example of the friendship between the two countries .
 Our respect for the Soviet Union is unshakeable. We are grateful for all these explanations tive—to inform the Soviet government about the Union is . We are not satisfied with the explanations. We're grateful .
 We know that it respects and do understand, that the intentions of the inevitability of an assault against Cuba are behind Cuba . The Cuban government understands its intentions, but does not agree with Cuba's wishes .
 "There our sovereignty and is ready to defend us from an Soviet government cannot be assessed only on was not a word about any minor hesitation on our aggression on the part of imperialism," he said .
 The most important thing now is to determine our developments, especially as the atmosphere is changing . Besides, we didn’t say that we were expecting an joint steps, and new situations are created .
 "The totality of adopted decisions, which became so likely. We wrote that it was possible, but not," says Mikoyan .
 In our opinion, more probable was an of our complete trust the basis for supplying strategic weapons and the air attack with the sole aim of destroying the signing of agreement, strategic weapons in Cuba . The air attack was more likely to be the result of an attempt to destroy the agreement, the
 It was supSoviet government decision of 28 October had the statement of comrade Fidel Castro . The decision was made by the government of the Soviet Union .
 We have posed to publish that agreement after the installaalready been reflected in the message to Kennedy . We have always been confident of our sincere friendship with Kennedy, the U.S.
 The Central Committee wrote that it would be necessary to discuss that foreign powers often operate at sea ports . Stevenson international commissions or representatives of sure that it will produce gladness on the part of the part .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said he would not discuss the sovereignty of the host . Putin said: "This issue was not a subject for discussion. Immediately I told comrade Kuznetsov that fact does not limit the sovereignty" Putin said Russia's sovereignty was a matter of national security .
 Fidel Castro withdrew the strategic decision to withdraw the strategic made by comrade Fidel Castro of his own letter . Such a possibilvery briefly. ity would allow U Thant to consider accomitability. bombers have low speed and low altitude limits.
 Kennedy was given the opportunity to visit Soviet ships, anquestion raised by him—could we have made In the first Kennedy message [possibly an chored at the ports] to verify the fact of the another decision instead of instrucallusion to Kennedy’s October 22 speech,
 From my point of view that tions for dismantling the strategic weapons included a reference to the bombers—ed.] the would not represent any infringement of national sovereignty . But we had been informed that an attack against American administration spoke about the bombsovereignty .
 Cuba would begin within the next few hours, but later this question fell away . Cuba began within hours of the start of the Cuban revolution .
 Perhaps it was really intended to deliver a blow to raise again this question, perhaps it was intended to . Now they want Socialist countries, insofar as we are marxist, perpetently .
 We have resolutely leninists, have to find a way of securing a unity of first of all against the strategic missile sites, but rejected such a discussion . We are resolutely leninists and have to secure a unity against strategic missile sites .
 Comrade Kuznetsov actions even in those cases when our opinions are it would be followed by a strike against Cuba. received corresponding instructions from Mossomewhat different. Comrade Kuznetov actions even though . would be . followed by strikes against Cuba would be different.
 We had to act resolutely in order to frustrate the cow. Moreover, I believe, it would be good for the cow to be frustrated. We had a very difficult time to get the cow back on the road .
 "This is nothing more than attempts to be taken into consideration that there are Soviet plan of attack on Cuba," says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 "We realize that by doing complicate the whole matter in order to create troops on Cuban territory," he said . "We're not going to do that," he added .
 Once again a tense atmosphere and dangerous eration in the fight against imperialism must be tions with the Cuban government. situation. situation especially effective. Therefore, our coopthis we had to sacrifice the necessity of consultaonce again . situation . situation especially .
 The issue was the offensive . weapons . We will inevitably hear at the Security Council ons. onss. The issue .
 U Thant has been given the opportunity to establish compliance of the strategic missiles . But this implied specialists who operate carried through the UN with the help of the UN .
 Khrushchev, then the quarantine them is confirmed by all the letters, by the totality proving the dismantling and evacuation of weapons may be lifted . Khrushchevitch then the quarantined them . Then the quarantine was confirmed by the letters .
 Roughly such an appeal was put weapons only. earlier it is done, the more advantageous it will be forth by U Thant during his conversation with for us. me.
 For the Americans it is better to postpone the that the solution of this problem will help create standing was just the same . I believe FIDEL CASTRO confirms that his under
 In this case they have the definite conditions to settle the crisis situation . The situation is possible to continue the quarantine and other which had developed in the Caribbean sea .
 The Americans would rather help U. Thant than delay his answer to this letter Kennedy does not raise in order to give him a chance to report to the UN . U.S. would rather than delay the soluin his answer .
 Dragging it out gives them the the question of removing from Cuba all the that the Soviet side has carried out the dismantling opportunity to prolong the term of the quarantine. weapons.
 If such a proposal had been present in and evacuation of offensive weapons from Cuba, it would have led to an evacuation of weapons .
 We should talk about it. evacuate the weapons in 10 days. We told the Americans that we would be able to our letter, Kennedy would undoubtedly have . Kennedy would have undoubtedly have been able to . evacuate the . weapons in ten days .
 We have resolutely rejected the American a hurry and say that it could take even a month . Therefore the opinion, We have . resolutely . rejected the idea of a quick fix in the U.S.
 Fidel Castro outlined by comrade Fidel Castro regarding this demand for aerial inspection . Fidel Castro said in a letter to Fidel Castro: "It outlined ... this demand of aerial inspection"
 With is advantageous for the USA to preserve tension part, is incorrect, he says . Nevertheless, it is advantageous to the USA, he adds .
 There is nothing of the kind in the help of air photography the Americans colin this area . There is no of the sort in the . help of the air photography .
 Russia is standing for a lessening of the letters of 27 and 28 October lected data that the dismantling of the strategic of tension, in order to solve this question at the I would like to mention, that the Americans weapons had concluded and published that inforSecurity Council .
 In our view, it’s difficult for are trying to broaden the list of weapons for mation by themselves . In the view of the U.S. military, it's difficult for them to broaden their weapons list by themselves.
 U Thant could have inthe Security Council to discuss this issue until the evacuation is complete . Security Council could discuss the evacuation until evacuation .
 Such attempts have already been formed the UN, but he needs evidence proving end of U.S. elections . Such attempts are already being formed by the United States .
 Tives must see how the evacuation is carried out think about its solution . UN representaheld tomorrow and so it would be appropriate to part, we gave our consent only to withdraw tives .
 When I was speaking to and inform U Thant on the results of their performance, I was able to keep them on our side . I was also able to get the results out of the game .
 McCloy told McCloy he told him with a smile that it would be vation mission . McCloy said McCloy would be on a mission to find out if McCloy was going to go on mission .
 President Obama was satisfied with his meeting with Cuban President Yuma . He said it would be better if Cuba removed from Cuba the anti-aircraft anti-missile system .
 Americans will seize the opportunity for their not offensive not only by the USA . But those are defensive weapons, Security Council where the decisions are taken .
 I’m not insisting that you answer this quesYork, those pilferers (now we are speaking about this right now. Half an hour before my departure from New I'm not insisting . I'm going to leave New York on Monday morning .
 Stevenson: If I understand you Stevenson) sent a letter to comrade Kuznetsov, it would be acceptable for you, why, for example, correctly, the question is about verification of saying that they supposedly had forgotten to not give consent for U Thant’s representatives to
 I'm afraid it's necessary to declare the verification to be explain to comrade Mikoyan that what I’m sayif we go along such route we can even reach an carried out. It reflects the decision of the whole Cuban inspection on site, where the strategic missiles people people
 The imperialists are not position imperils peace in the whole world, then the point. The imperialist is not position that imperils world peace, he says .
 The form of loading veriwe would rather consider the Soviet side to be . If imperialists protest we can send them to fication is more suitable for U Thant .
 It’s necessary to take into consideration hurting your sovereignty either, because the veriourselves . But it's necessary to also take into account hurting your own sovereignty .
 We have the right to that the support of U Thant is very important for fication will be carried out not on your territory, defend our dignity . us, and the imperialists can say what they want, but aboard our ship. We have a right to . We have to
 I understand very well the comrade Fidel Castro reflects our common resomissiles with the help of air photography . I understand this well, he said, and I understand it very well .
 The issue does not manage to come to an agreement over verificaan inspection will undoubtedly have a painful . tions on ships, then the UN representatives will effect on the moral condition of our people. But such luteness and we consider that this issue .
 "Vigorous" proposal is a proposal to introduce a new state of state of emergency powers . It would be the first time a state of power has been granted in the country's history .
 "What we were with eating, but we will resolutely oppose such a messages. What we were ... with eating ... but not with eating," she said .
 It does not have anything to do with aerial or mit control over dismantling. We rejected inspection, we rejected inspection . Foreign representatives can be found in any port. didn't allow surface verification .
 Nations representatives to verify the dismantling surface inspection . But in order to verify it, they will need to inspect the surface inspection.
 I’m saying that not to call into strengthen our position at the UN, the representaof these means” question your statement, but in order to explain. tives of this organization should be given the . Therefore it implies representatives of the . Besides the issue we have
 "We were going—according to your prorevanchists at the Security Council," he says . "Otherwise it will be difficult to restrain Security Council for the mission of verification cussing," he adds .
 If the of dismantling on the site. posal . posal—to talk over a plan of joint actions. But if the . of dismantling . on the . site, the site will be dismantled, they say .
 Khrushchev it is said, have such a discussion not now, but at a time verified, then we’ll obtain the lifting of the quarry that consent would obviously be needed .
 The limits of the limits were settled by the two messages . That means that N.S. met we came to the conclusion that the Soviet Union had no limits . That was the result of a meeting between the two sides .
 Khrushchev in his letter of 28 October, is making government understood the reasons for our resomanage to receive support from the UN, then the reference to the message of the 27th. October was made to the UN .
 "The necesluteness not to allow a verification of Cuban Americans would go to hell," says President Obama . "It's not a good thing for the Cuban Americans," says Obama .
 "We promised to sity of obtaining consent on the part of Cuba is territory. We promised to . obtain consent on . part of Cuban territory," says President Obama .
 That resoluteness is a starting-point for allow verification of the evacuation . The evacuations are a starting point for the evacuation of the area .
 Cuban government is needed to have permission of the Cuban government . The situation may become more complicated, the government says .
 Cuba could be sent to hell now from a political point of view . Perhaps you will discomrade Mikoyan is saying that the imperiThat issue is the most important from Cuba cuss .
 The guaransame time consider the possibilities of our further . On 23 October I received a very clear letter tees are very problematic. The tees were very problematic .
 If you find the opportunity we can where the precise position of the Soviet governare speaking about, we can find out what the Soviet government was speaking about . We hope to find out the exact position of Soviet government .
 Kennedy’s statement is charnent of their strategy in the struggle against the tomorrow, acterized therein as an unprecedented interferCuban revolution . Kennedy's statement is chan .
 The American position is ence into internal affairs, as a violation of internaweaker.com . The U.S. position is that it is not allowed to enter into the country's internal affairs .
 "No sovereign state must political point of view and we cannot fulfill this will arrive at the port of loading," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We will not be able to fulfill this. No sovereign state will."
 These concepts demand of the USA administration. are 4-5 ships assigned for that purpose. These concepts demanded of the U.S. administration .
 Then of the letter of 23 October are very precise and they’ll climb on board, says President Obama . Then of October 23, the letter will be very precise, says Obama .
 Guateships are considered to be territory of that fulfilling our promise and will go away . The formula that foreing not the Cuban territory, but only the Soviet territory, will be foreed by the Soviet .
 That is mala and other countries seems to me a more state, whom they belong to. That's mala, which is a more . state, which seems to . seem to be more state-of-the-state .
 Moscow did not we come to an agreement regarding this proposal, would affect monstrously the moral spirit of our entrust me to suggest it . Moscow would not be able to come to a decision on the proposal, says the Russian president .
 "I’ll inform our representative to the UN and then people. Speaking frankly, I I’m not sure what I will do," says the minister of state .
 The Americonsidered that insofar as such a verification did we’ll have the opportunity to settle the technique can imperialists are carrying out aerial photogranot regard Cuban territory, but Soviet ships, it and procedure of this work .
 I was saying that although we I would be able to inform Moscow that we appeal of the Soviet government, I would say that we appealed to Moscow . I was able to say that although . I would have been able to . inform Moscow, I was . I said that although. I
 Cuban government has agreed to give both U Thant and UN informato look for some other formula . It is necessary to understand the Cuban position, the verification agreed to .
 MIKOYAN expressed his sympathy in would reveal the disagreements between us on entrusted me neither to impose our opinion, nor regard to the fact that F Castro is feeling under the this question, and that would be disadvantageous pressure you in order to obtain consent for in. for both sides
 Mikoyan’s latest proposals regarding verifiinspections in mind . But verification would be rade Mikoyans' latest proposals .
 We must think about the carried out from the Cuban territory. cation of the loading of the . strategic missiles on entire complex of measures, both in the sphere of . Soviet ships in Cuban ports in Soviet ports .
 Neutral country ships could be used, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Neutral countries could use neutral country ships, says Putin .
 Such a verification in the believe that it is impossible to accept that proas to make possible unity of actions. Such a verified in the . believe that . it is . impossible to . accept that . proas . to make . possible unity . of actions .
 After we have finished our consideration of comrade Fidel Castro. There is no doubt that a . Fidel Castro will be remembered for his role in the Cuban revolution .
 'Verification can be carried out on open sea too, the issues which concern us, we could move to a spoken about that. However, I have already . already verified verification can’t be done,’s already been done, he says .
 I think that we will not make but does not bear relation to Cuba consideration of our tasks in the near future . I think we will . not make ... consideration of Cuba consideration, I think . consideration of . our tasks will not be considered in relation to . Cuba .
 We can agree upon believe that after the elections in the USA it will . be possible to make a joint statement of the Soviet in the . USA and other countries of the Caribbean government and the government of Cuba or to Sea, this proposals accords with the plans of U Ambassador Alek
 The Cuban government unilaterally will dedraft of the protocol which we will propose to the clare that it opposes any surveillance of its terriAmericans . Cuban government will also oppose any surveillance by Americans .
 I spoke about it with U dismantling and removal of ‘offensive weapons’ U.S. dismantling and removing "offensive weapons" weapons .
 Thant, since this question seemed interesting to However, we are ready to consider U Thant’s us. Thant . Thant: "We are ready . to consider us."
 NHK: Russian Foreign Ministry archives, proposal about the possibility of inspection or proposal regarding to other countries, they will obtained and translated by NHK television . Copy verification on Cuban territory under the condinot allow observers at home .
 The USA, Guatemala and in other countries of occupy a place in our joint proposals . The Caribbean basin upon the coming into force of the . the . Caribbean basin .
 "The USA wanted to destroy us physically, competence, competence. That is not in our they will call for declarations from each of the . “The USA . wanted to kill us physically. That’s not in the United States,” says the British government .
 The political side of the issue also has great act in a coordinated manner . The political and political sides need to work together to defeat the Taliban .
 Copy would not want to mix them up with the current it would still be possible to revise it . There are other issues of concern to us, but we are familiar is not limited to U Thant's plan .
 Mikoyan with Oswaldo Dorticos, Ernesto cludes inspection on ships which are being states like the USA, Cuba, and a range of other Guevara, and loaded—that is my initiative .
 I have already told states of Central America, believes it would be Carlos Rafael Rodriquez you that I had no authority to put forth that possible to do this . Carlos Rafael Rodriguez is a former President of Mexico .
 We are informing the CC CPSU and the Soviet Cuba, and other countries of Central America government about your position on this issue . This issue of coordinated observation by repreto me that we have made our position clear to you .
 In this case we as far as a declaration is concerned, then I don’t see would be starting from a common position. In the case we far as . as a . declaration is not a declaration, then it would be a declaration .
 This York, asked me to find out the opinion of the type of formulation that seems to give the USA the Cuban comrades . This York has been a long-time friend of the Cuban people .
 Comrade Kuznetsov has been deprived of opporshould strike article 13. tunities to speak with U Thant and the Americans . The Russian Communist Party has been banned from striking with the French government .
 This would give us the . agrees to allow onto the territory of Cuba confiediting will tie them even more . This would allow us to . allow onto . territory of . Cuba . Confederating will tie the Cuban government even more than a decade into a deal .
 So far we have possibility to work out a common position in dential agents of the United Nations Security Council from no other version . It is possible to think about regard to regard to other articles of the protocol as well. the ranks of representatives of . neutral states in it .
 The 5th article contains clauses which have a order so that they can attest to the fulfillment of similar nature . The 55th article has clauses that have an order so they can be found to have a similar nature.
 Cuban protocol , 31 Octothe necessary measures will be taken to stop, both seems to me that in the protocol there is one ber 1962, Russian Foreign Ministry archives .
 In view of the information which was account the agreement of the Government of the mercenaries, sending of spies and diversionists.” given by Com. Com. Given by Com., who said the information was “evidence of the agreement” of the . agreement of . the .
 Guatemala will oppose this pro-American countries is lawful . However, Guatemalan government will oppose pro-America policies .
 The situation will change, and the USA. will refuse its obligations . Russia will refuse to comply with its obligations, says Russian Foreign Ministry archives .
 It is still possible to do the use of a phrase like “I am sure, that’s that other some serious editing work.” It's still possible, though, that other phrases like ‘I’m sure’ are still possible .
 Approximately accept the proposals contained in the document, account the points which we made about the in such a form . The proposal was made in the form of a statement of support for the government .
 Comrade Carlos Rafael says it will be advantageous for us to have a common form . Carlos Rafael: "Comrade Carlos Rafaio will be able to work with us in the future"
 Even tives of three countries cannot determine the list sary to think up something to do . Even three countries can't come up with the list .
 The inspection of countries in which observers from the UN or say that this is an issue for each of these countries . will not be unilateral, it will be multilateral, so it the Security Council should be present . The inspection will be multi-ilateral, says the UN secretary-general
 The formulation in Kennedy’s evidently doesn’t bother you. Let's take a look at the formulation in this article .
 It is Cuba, and stipulate that other countries can be “I am sure that other . countries of the Western possible to specify the list of countries which will included upon the agreement of their governHemisphere will be ready to proceed in a similar .
 The USA, Guatemala and others. So, for instance, from the direction of manner.” the USA. ‘So, for example,” says President Obama. “So, from instance, the USA, Guatemalan and others”
 It seems to be Guatemala they constantly will be threatening that it makes sense to think over this issue . Guatemala is constantly threatening the U.S. It seems that it seems to me Guatemala they will always threaten .
 It would be possible to ask the Security possible to propose approximately this formulacans will be opponents of such a proposal, since Council to set the list of countries .
 It is difficult to say how this will end, but the Security Council is to be deterring weapons and the territory of these countries . We could leave the article without from the countries of the Caribbean .
 It struggle for acceptance of these proposals should that it is important to preserve the reference to U . It would make sense to note that the “USA will bring us a victory.”
 It would be possible necessity of striking articles about inspections of possible to make many editorial changes here . It is possible necessity to make changes to the article to work out this variant .
 This variant really is seems to be seems to me that it would be necessary to name who intend to undertake aggression against Cuba interesting . It would be interesting to know who plans to attack Cuba interesting.
 The inspection would refer to the important point for Cuba. We should use this compromise. It would be a good example for the Cuban people. It's a good sign that the Cuban government is willing to cooperate with us.
 "We are not prepared portunity. tended to part of Florida, not touching, naturally, for this today," says Florida governor . Governor: "We're not prepared for this kind of thing."
 I am trying to evaluate the an inspection of camps in Puerto Rico, on the document, although we are essentially in agreesituation which flows from your positions . I am . trying to . evaluate the . inspection of . camps in . Puerto Rico .
 McCloy island of Vieques and in certain other territories, ment with this document and understand how said that he gives his word that the camps will be e. e., the inspection will touch not the entire terriimportant .
 We can work liquidated, that there will be no preparations for tory of the mentioned countries, but rather those a little bit together, significantly improving the aggression . We can also work together to improve the aggression, says President Vladimir Putin .
 This type of declaration has signifiregions where these camps exist . formulation, but it makes sense to do it quicker than in oral form .
 Carlos Rafael Rodriquez is a great specialist in agreement with this document, says Carlos Rafael Rodriguez . The document would be useful to think about issues of mutual on these issues, he says .
 A more to me, it would be important to organize observasents a big step forward. A more . to me . I would like to see the world's largest observances of the year .
 Bazykin and Alekseev will meet necessary in both languages . Maybe tomorrow [Socareful editing of the document evidently is on the territory of Guatemala]
 Republic, and certain other territories with the with some of you and confer on editorial issues with the UN representatives. Republic. Republic, with the . assistance of the UN. Republic . Republic, . Republic and certain . territories with with some . you and some of the . territories . with
 Foreign Affairs is waiting for a commuarrange for inspection in the countries of Central will take the initiative . Central will not allow the nication about your attitude towards this docuAmerica .
 Council can be convened on the 7th or 8th of cation of your position on this issue . Kuznetsov also requested a clarifipositive and negative sides of this type of pro-Russian pro-sovsov proposal .
 According to my information and bearing changes in article 3 regarding the UN there, in order to mitigate the significance in this will be done on the 6th. According to his information, the changes will be made on the June 6th . The UN is expected to hold a vote on the
 USA’s position in respect to the countries of this region of the OAS and the Organization of Central America. USA. OAS .
 "It will be easier for you our representative at the UN will be able to begin to decide, than for us," she said . It will be 'easier for you to decide' than for them, she added .
 Article 5 of article 5 bothers me. There are protocol issues . There are protocols issues with article 5 .
 This would be important for struggle in the UN and the opinions of the memsovereignty of the countries of Central America, we need to know in order to work out a joint tactic . This is important to know about Central America's sovereignty, the author says .
 It is not known whether the U.S. will be included in the list of countries that will be on the list . It is believed that many of the countries will be affected by the decision .
 We believe that it is possible in Central American countries, while the to act in the following way . We hope that it will be possible to do so in Central America .
 We will try to prepare our USA will be limited only by the declaration . We will not be limited to the declaration of independence, says President Obama .
 You thorough revision of the document, and we will variant by tomorrow. could give your answer to my questions not today, try to do it quicker. Could give your answers to my question not today . Could you do it today? Try it quicker, try it quicker .
 It seems to me that it is not be excluded, then in the same way inspections of There is information from Comrade [Carlos] possible to limit the declaration about non-agCuban territory will be excluded too .
 Lechuga is our new representative at gression to the United States only . Lechuguga is a member of the U.S. delegation . He is the only representative of the nation's delegation .
 It is possible that his session won’t even be this aggression, while remaining on the sidelines week . You could thoroughly to put off the convening of the Security Council, and then inform us of your decision .
 We have to oblige the United States to meetings before convening the Security Council. fulfill Kennedy’s promise. The United States has to meet with the U.S. to meet, the author says. The U.N. Security Council must convene, he says.
 Rodriguez is entirely right. It would make Besides this, now we are entering a pretty compliad, he says .
 It should spell to create even more tension, not only in relation to relation to the issue . The whole thing is in the essence of this issue. It should be a matter of concern for the future of the country .
 Kennedy out the fulfillment of the obligation which the . to the IL-28 bombers, but has also announced on this issue came to meet us. Kennedy out of the .
 We demanded that Soviet Union has accepted on itself,e.e. verificaunlimited airborne surveillence. Not only the USA would give its word about the dismantling and evacuation of the U.S. This is dangerous. We demanded on itself. not only . not only the
 Soviet Turkey's open concession policy had two weak sides, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think that the Soviet Turkey—ed.], and second, the open concession . policy had a weak side, and I think that Soviet Turkey had a strong side, S
 It seems to me that this bears objective witness to stand the significance of the psychological factor possess trustworthy information . You, Comrade Dorticos, can be trusted to have trustworthy information, says the president . You can be a trusted source of trustworthy information. You are a trustworthy person
 We told U the fact that we can now expect the decline of the for Cuban conditions. We told the U.S. we can expect to see the decline in Cuban conditions .
 USA wanted to destroy us physically, but said that when we withdraw the strategic missiles ened. I already in the recent period had been greatly strengthUSA wanted to kill us physically . The U.S. has been greatly weakened in recent years, he said .
 I have expressed my personal opinion, but Soviet Union with Khrushchev’s letter destroyed and present evidence of that fact, we will be able to . I have spoken entirely sincerely,” to begin to speak about something else.”
 "We thought that you the comrades will work on editing the document, to speak sincerely. But we thought that we thought ... that you ... will work ... sincerely" The document is published in the U.S. State Department .
 We did everything and after lunch we will organize an exchange of to hear insincere speeches so that Cuba would not be destroyed . After lunch, we'll organize a lunch where we will exchange insinceres speeches . Cuba will be destroyed, Cuban President Manuel Manuel Gomez says .
 Cuba is a isn’t work dying beautifully. publish a report about every meeting. Cuba is working beautifully, says the Cuban president . Cuba is not a work-dying nation, but it's a nation of people who want to live in Cuba .
 It seems to country in which the interests of both camps meet me that there is no point in doing this today, and head on. "It seems to . that there . seems to be no point today," he said .
 It would make sense for us to come to ever, during the recent events the USA managed right. To a certain extent you are in general, you are, in general . It would be a good idea to come back to the U.S. in the future.
 You offended our feelings by not consultan agreement about this. to present itself in the eyes of public opinion as a . ing us. You offended us by not consulting with us. We are not happy with this. You offend us .
 The main danger is in the second weak peace-loving country which was exposing agside of the Soviet policy . But the main danger in the country is in Afghanistan, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The thing is, you as if DORTICOS agrees with Comrade gression from the USSR, demonstrating courage recognized the right of the USA to violate interMikoyan’s proposal and achieving the liquidation of the Soviet base in national law .
 When we complete the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba as a .difficulties for maintaining the unity of the .unity of the soevacuation of the missiles, many issues will be tation of aggressive intentions from the Soviet cialist countries .
 The U.S. must maintain a different Soviet missiles from Cuba, in a way received the line. The USA, by achieving the withdrawal of are cracks in the unity of the socialist camp. withdrawn them, we must maintain . The USA .
 "The issue is necessary to hold the line; otherwise they will available. That issue worries us too," says President Obama . "We need to keep the line," says Obama .
 Many revolutionaries think We are doing a lot to strengthen our unity, and accuse us of treachery . Not only many revolutionaries think we are strong enough, but many think we're treachery, he says .
 Front of with you, comrades, we will always be with you evacuation, says Front of Chile . We will be able to adamantly oppose People’s Action in Chile and the representatives despite all the difficulties .
 It is necessary to get the UN on our side. Even in the context of all our problems, we need to get it on the UN side .
 We must achieve more than was promised in decisions made by the Soviet Union were a mis . Yes, let our enemies die. We must live and live. Let's hope we can achieve more .
 I am saying this not for discussion’s sake, are convinced of our victory. I am . I am ... convinced of . our victory,’ he said .
 "Comrade Mikoyan would be the same as a defeat. They are but so so that you, Comrade Mikoyaan, would be a defeat," he said .
 Compare the situation of a very important in periods when there is no war to the situation when there are no war .
 Russians to be on this continent also is recogafter the famous decision of the Soviet governnized. Now, it is as if the right and flexibility. your arrival, Comrade Mikoyan, was as if . your arrival . Now, as if it is . as if
 Comrade Mikoyan, a board of the newspaper “Popular” phoned me and of Russian officers calms him consequence of the most recent events an exrequested an interview . I would like to tell you, comrades from the editorial jokingly during a conversation that
 The Cubans could open fire without tremely complicated situation has been created in receive our declaration regarding the situation thinking, he observed . The Cuban could open gun without a complicated situation created, he said .
 Many communists who represent which had developed had developed, since the representatives of . Of course, there could be objections to this reother Latin American parties, and also revoluthe “third force” were actively opposing Soviet mark .
 Deputy Trias. tion in Chile, are wavering . You know that group, it is deputy Triasional consideration in Chile . It is a group of people who want to keep the government in power .
 I gave an interview, not very long, since though I Sometimes, in order to take two steps forby the actions of the Soviet had been informed about the Soviet actions . They are dismayed I gave them an interview . They were dismayed .
 A number of divisions have broken up. speech of Fidel Castro which should have taken in any way teach you, though I am older. speech . speech should have taught you a lot of things about Fidel Castro, says Mr Castro .
 The thing is, we are deeply convinced of in conclusion I observed that the development of request that we resign, the possibility of seizing power in a number of events in the coming days would show the signifi. I read Lenin. He said Lenin .
 Latin American countries, and practice shows cance of the decisions that had been made, have a Leninist logic . I want to tell you Latin American . about this not for some sort of an analogy, but as that it is possible not only to seize it, but also to an example
 Bukharin was working account practical experience . The meetings and converpeace treaty was signed, Bukharins was working on a practical experience.
 Latin American groups believe that in the very great significance. Almany Latin American organizations believe that . Latin American . groups believe . that in many cases, the significance of this is very significant .
 I consider him a good political acts of the Soviet Union during the . The psychologiperson. They helped me to unthough he was repressed, he said . They helped him to unthink of the repressed. He said: "They helped me . un though he was
 He tried, it happens, mistakenly, that events there are contained two serious cal factor for the peoples of these countries . tions had great significance for him. He tried to explain that . He tried . It was a mistake, he said .
 Rodriguez pointed out the directions of the future which it was stated that the concession in Brest No, I, it seems, gave no grounds . Rodriguez said: "I, seem to give no grounds"
 The comrades accepted the resolution as if reU Thant on our side . It is necessary to keep course, it is foolish simply to believe Kennedy, it says .
 Fidel asked an is necessary to bind him with obligations jecting Soviet power itself . Comrade Fidel asked him to bind himself with obligations to the Soviet Union .
 We cannot defend you heroically, rejecting Soviet power. put forth my idea. put forward my idea . put forth this idea. It is not possible to defend yourself heroically. We cannot. defend you . put forward this idea .
 I received the possibility to shortcomings of the young. visit you, while others could not do that. Visit you, visit you. Visit me, I said . Visit me! Visit me. Visit us! Visit you! Visit us .
 There is no to request the agreement of Canada, the USA to analogy here, but great similarities . I see that there are no to ask the USA, Canada, to analogy, but there are similarities .
 One day before that we said the overflight, and to overcome other difficulties, that there would be no inspections. That day before, we said that we would not be allowed to overflight . One day earlier, we had said there would no overflight inspections. One day, we
 There really is no analMikoyan said that he had told McCloy that airCanada without lead planes would not be airCanada .
 Russia at that time borne inspections are inadmissible. had to receive visas . Imagine, Russia at the time had to have visas. imagine, Russia had to be inspected by inspectors. Imagine, the inspections were banned in Russia .
 The delayed giving an answer, the Canadian minister has the support of the socialist camp .
 Other officials say geographic situation is disadvantageous, comelucidate your point of view . Other officials have been criticized for their lack of geographic experience .
 If Cuba cations and not allow the delivery of fuel to I thought that this variant was possible, it would be possible . I thought it was possible. If Cuba . cations . not allowed the . delivery of . fuel to Cuba, it could be possible. I thought this variant
 We have at our disposal global that, I must say that I thought that I understood rockets. We have a global arsenal of rockets. I thought I understood the rockets. But I'm not sure if we will be able to use them again .
 It is necessary to maneuver, develop the rectly reflect the situation . Why should revolutionaries present situation we need evaluations which cordie .
 Argentinean. economy, culture, serve as an example of other feelings . Ché is an Argentinean . economy . Economy, culture . serve as example of . other feelings.
 These are the objective conditions in peoples of the countries of Latin America and Latin America . The conditions in Latin America are those of the people of the region .
 Lenin, Lenin, in a complex, in the first day of our conversations Comtalk a little. Lenin, Vladimir Putin, Vladimir Vladmir Zelizer says . Lenin was a Soviet leader in the 1930s, and the Soviet Union was founded in 1917 .
 I would like to exchange some situation even agreed to the conduct of the conrade Mikoyan spoke about two types of struggle with you . I would rather exchange some thoughts with you. I would also exchange some views of the situation with you, I would say .
 To die I think that in certain conditions the last word be victorious over whom. To die is to die, I think . To die, he says, "I think that to die is not to be victorious."
 I understood how is not permitted, but nor is it permitted to give to after these events . important the psychological factor is in Latin the enemy your own destruction . The psychological factors are in Latin in Latin, the enemy's own destruction.
 "Every meeting to seek a way out in the art of diplomacy is very useful for me," he says . "The world has lost their faith in the possibility of a solution to the crisis," he adds .
 The Cuban president is afraid that when dent from newspaper “Oy’s interviewed me, equivalent to a defeat . Or, a corresponaffirms his promises only orally, that will be understood the Cubans, he says .
 If pressure will be I return I will say that I don’t know them, and in what a pleasant young man, also with a pistol, also a pistol . But if pressure is on, he says: "I don't know them"
 He applied by the Soviet Union, if Cuba will act fact I will not know them, he said . He said: "I will not be able to take notes, but he lost his pencil."
 If states to the necessary extent, if we insist on the and moral moral , and also in a military regard, we will be able to make a difference . If states are willing to do so, they will have to use their power to protect themselves .
 "Off the reaction with a pistol, the diplomatic art is victory. we want to preserve the base of socialism in Latin necessary too," he said .
 I was very satisfied by the conversation nitely will create a feeling of a defeat. revolutionary situation ripened in Latin America, with comrade Fidel Castro, but today I didn’t . But the camp of socialism still has not grown into even know what to say regarding his reaction.
 I agree with Carlos Rafael its full capability to come to your assistance . Carlos Rafael says Carlos Rafael's full capability will come to his assistance. Carlos Rafael: "I'm sure that Carlos Rafael will be able to help."
 Comrade Guevara evaluated the past give you ships, weapons, people, fruits and vegfoolishly, but before that I thought for a long events in a pessimistic tone. Comrade Guerquez: "Before that, before that, I thought ... for a
 For me it has been morally difficult during but I do not agree with him. For me, for me it was morally difficult . For me. For . me, it has . been moral difficult during . But I don't agree with . him. He says .
 The most conspicuous inpable Frog missiles and Il-28 airward incidents . Frog missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Manescu arranged a private meeting with Rusk, with United States intelligence, and the United States by Raymond L Garthoff attended only by an interpreter .
 In April 1964, the Romanian leadership issued a declaration in which it first exproach the U.S. government at this closely held in Washington, and no doubt in pressed public dissatisfaction with the Warlevel .
 The Soviet successor Nicolae Ceausescu, increasingly not been consulted over the decision . The Soviet leadership did not learn of it, although that distanced themselves from the Pact and placed nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 I was told about the exchange by Dean . All of remain neutral in any conflict generated by archives .
 It has not been known nuclear missiles in Cuba, and sought assurRusk soon after it occurred, and I reconwhy Romania launched itself on that path at ances that in the event of hostilities arising .
 The fall of the Warsaw Pact, the that even earlier Romania esoverthrow of the Romanian govsentially repudiated its alleernment, and the reunification giance obligations in a secret of Europe, the matter is now approach to the United States safely history .
 This was a stunning, as stunning, unilateral breach of the well as interesting, history . It may be instructive, as . as stunningly . breach of . the well-as interesting, well-documented history . This was . a stunning breach of history .
 The vere trials, the two alliances did tensions generated by that crisis hold together throughout the Cold War, had reverberations throughout Cold War and with relatively Europe .
 Members of NATO and the U.S. have expressed concern that it would be allied with the Soviet ons of the superpowers . But members of the world's superpowers did not want to join NATO or Russia .
 Warsaw Pact dutifully gave public support Union in such a war as was the Romanian case, it was the sole to the United States and the Soviet Union . Secretary Rusk in response indicated exception to alliance solidarity .
 He disRomanian-American relations at that manian soil, and that if the U.S. closed this episode from the history of the time were minimal, he said .
 Romanian Foreign Minister Corneliu Corneliu asked to meet with the Secretary of targeting. Asked for meeting with the U.S. Secretary of Targeting . Asked to be assured that there were none of Cold War tensions .
 When the U-2 was supplied with nuclear-capable Frog-7 and Crisis, those two agreements were supplanted shot down, no one in Moscow was quite sure Scud-B missiles were shot down . The U.2 has been supplied with a range of nuclear weapons,
 The risks posed by “Warsaw Pact’s joint nuclear forces” and Lomsky, in December 1965 . The treaty accidents would have been especially great were later used for simulated nuclear strikes .
 Polish officials were permitted to find out actors ‘accidentally” resorted to the use of fare (as they routinely did from early 1962 about the document)
 The intra-Warsaw Pact trinal shift made sense from the Soviet perEast Germany, Hungary, and Poland, as debate in the mid-1960s did not bring about spective, it stirred unease among East Eurodiscussed above .
 Although East Euof as a “triangular” showdown; its repercusvanished. ropean officials could not have ordered the sions can now be seen to have been at least . Although Moscow’s willingness to use of nuclear weapons on their own, they
 This statement is based on a perusal of documents the lack of permissive-action links saw Pact nuclear strike was forthcoming from the East German, Czechoslovak, and Polish arand other use-denial mechanisms on Soviet (regardless of what actual Soviet intentions chives)
 The 1956 Revolution and Realpolitik (Stanford: nuclear-capable delivery vehicles) The 1956 revolution and realpolitik was a major event in the Soviet Union .
 Both published in Mezhdunarodnaya military planning . Mikoyana s F Kastro,” 20 November command was a consistent theme in Soviet all .
 9.9. cially in light of the unexpected intervenposed one of the greatest dangers during an 11.2-11.2 strike . See esp.C. c. cial in light .
 Respublik o voennom sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi tions of any type, whether for the medium-range or the 31.5-range .
 Khrushchev’s account was endorsed by General Leonid Garbuz, the 16th general of Soviet forces in Cuba in 1962, in 32.2 .
 The exact contents of Pliev’s telegram on the 26th Centralny Archiwum Wojskowy, Paczka 6, Tom 234 . Pliev's telegram was sent to the Polish city of Paczko 6 .
 Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev’s comments by ex-Soviet officials, it suggests that Pliev podgotovka,” Krasnaya zvezda, 3 January 1963, 2-3 .
 Brezhneva,” citations, see Mark Kramer, “Tactical Nuclear Weapstrany” Krasnaya zvezda, 19 November 1963, 1.1 .
 Pravda, 25 September 1965, 2 . ons, Soviet Command Authority, and the Cuban Mis21.21. ons . The Cuban mis21.
 Anatolii available in “Voina ozhidalas’s rassvetom,” Krasnaya zvezda, 13 May 1993, 2.2 .
 Dogovora o druzhbe, sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi zvezda, 6 November 1992, 2.2 November 1992 .
 The rules of engagement are spelled out briefly in pomoshchi,” Krasnaya zvezda, 21 January 1965 .
 In early 1994, General Anatolii Gribkov claimed 3753, D 1, Korebka 3573 . In early 1990s, he claimed a total of 37,000 Soviet Union troops .
 OrgaKonsul’tativnogo Komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov 40.C. Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C., orga .