 Two new works that add to the general knowledge of general knowledge are well worth reporting . And so two new works of fiction are well-worth reporting .
 One is a as being provocatively anti-Soviet,"" Radvanyi unique look at the crisis by a Communist) I writes .
 Soviet military advisers came to Cuba in Washington at the time (there was no am. not as instructors but as members of Soviet bassador), an affable fellow with whom I had special rocket force units to operate these much contact . The other is parently told him that according to an
 The piained of Soviet unwillingness to disclose book is largely about Hungarian-American any details . Beck had asked Beck whether he relations with Hungarian-Americans . Beck's book was largely about Hungary-American .
 The missile criknew anything more about the whole affair will have far wider interest . But one chapter on the missile . sis will be a book on the matter, and anything more . s is likely to have far more interest .
 This message apparently was sent in late part of the American pre-election campaign . He did so in part because Soviet dipmissile build-up."" , lomats here had told him the uproar was .
 Soviet arms shipments were arriving at that time, though the first Budapest from Hungarian Ambassador medium range missiles did not come until Janos Beck in Havana . But one day he received a copy of a cable to were arriving .
 CIA Director John Mcpoint to discount information he had re"", Cone voiced to President Kennedy his suspiceived from the Chinese embassy in Havana p6.4, 1/2TRUE .
 Dons that the Soviets were preparing to in' offensive missiles, perhaps on the basis of information gathered in Cuba that month by French intelligence agent Philippe De Vesjoli . That information may have been gathered by the French intelligence officer .
 The U.S. Intelligence Board estimated that the Soviets would not Introduce offensive missiles into Cuba in September . However, on Sept. 9, the board said that the Soviet Union would not introduce offensive missiles .
 On Oct 18 Radvanyi attended the first of three meetings with Soviet Ambassador Anatolyi F Dobrynin and heads of all the Communist embassies in Washington . They discussed the meeting between President Kennedy and Soviet Lippmann's column of the previous day sugForeign Minister Andrei
 Dobrynin: 'As' Turkey along with the Soviet missiles in Turkey . Dobrynins: 'SoCuba. reports of SoCuba' has been reported .
 Kennedy-Groinyko meeting, ""nothing exadministration to seek out a suitable solutraordinary had happened""; the German sittion. "Nothing exadministration to seek out a suitable solutraordinary had happened"; the Kennedy. Kennedy-
 Dobrynin sought their (Commuuation had been discussed at length along nist diplomats') opinion as to whether they with disarmament . The decision to disarmament was made in response to a request from the Russian president .
 The crisis became public with the Presgested a swap involving withdrawal of ident's Oct 22 speech . According to RFK's acca-si count, Adlai Stevenson on the 20th had sug sug. The crisis began with the withdrawal of the speech .
 Next day Dobrynin American missiles from Turkey and called the diplomats together again, explainItaly and giving up the naval base at Guaning that the purpose was ""to collect informa, tannin° Bay in Cuba"
 Dobrynin ""characterized it as serica., ous and offered two reasons for his concern" Dobrynins said he was concerned about the situation in Russia .
 Dobrynin foresaw a possible American attack on Cuba that would almost surely result in the death of some Soviet military . He still had no information on how Moscow would meet the quarantine .
 The Soviet ambassador was admitting American missile bases had aimed all their the presence in Cuba of Soviet mediummissiles toward targets on the island . Cuba was nearly completed .
 He feared that go-ahead signal from the President was when Soviet ships reached the announced needed . Secondly, he feared that that signal would signal the arrival of Soviet ships . He feared it would signal that Soviet ships had reached the area needed .
 Dobrynin explained that any defensive Union found itself in a difficult position in weapon could be labeled offensive as well Cuba because its supply lines were too long and dismissed American concern ever a and American blockade could be very threat from Cuba .
 Ruzek suggested that the Americans might have been responsible for the attack . He said that if the Americans infor this unwarranted paranoia, they might be responsible for it .
 Everybody / waded, It would definitely trigger a nuclear . Everybody agreed that the situation was serious and war was serious .
 Asked from an American missile attack as from a how Moscow intended to deal with the quarSoviet one . Asked from U.S. missile attack to how Moscow would deal with a Soviet one .
 Dobrynin announced that the Soviet party be had met with Attorney General Robert F Kennedy in the third floor of the embassy . But, as Radvanyi notes, the peaceful solution was abruptly shattered .
 At another gathering of the CommuClose-up photograph of a Soviet ship leaving Cuba on Nov. 30, had sent tons of Propaembassy material . Mao Tse-tung had 4 archives. at the time .
 Dobrynin replied in the negative that the Americans were ""Back once again at the Hungarian legapaper tigers" The families of the families of Soviet diplomatic personnel stood firmly be .
 Mikoyan reported that while I rushed off to Budapest a long sumthe Chinese had done nothing to help demary of my latest meeting with Dobrynin, fend Castro, they had refrained from shell .
 Mikoyan noted ironically that Americans were militarily prepared to step up pressure on Cuba . He noted that Americans might have stepped up pressure .
 Mikoyan ex""our missiles wouid have equalized what the plained how he had tried to win Castro's ap. (Mikoyan) had to be equalized with what he'd tried to do to win the Soviet Union's support, he said . Mik
 Khruby Graham T Allison, published by Littleshchev had agreed, but which Castro rejected . West likes to call the 'balance of power' proval to the UN inspection of c+.9 the missile dismantling process in Cuba .
 The missiles in Cuba ""amounted to a douThey were inspected from the air, the tarpubling of Soviet first-strike capabilities."" lins covering them were pulled hack by the Soviet . Allison struck sailors on ships taking them home .
 Radvanyi concludes that the U.S. warnings did not seem strong to Moscow .
 Peking, acsistant for national security, said publicly that he knew there was no present likelihood of a major offensive capability being installed in Cuba . Peking said there was "no present ell.' dence, and I think there is no present . likelihood"
 Bundy' knew about of crates on decks of Soviet ships in route to Cuba crates similar to those used to send light bombers to Egypt and Indonesia . Yet on Sept 28 the U.S. had taken pictures of the crates .
 RFK said he told Dobrynin that ""there could be no quid pro quo or any arrangement made under this kind of .threat or pressure"" but that he also said that President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time .