 Ho Jerry had loaned me a copy of his book, "One Hell of a Gamble,"" that he loaned to me . Ho Jerry said it is a fine and an important work .
 The onitj. mql^r I've added to the .age on which Jerry has a few is the highlighting of what 1.1th. said .
 The Untold Story of the °uba Missile Crisis I add that it bad reached this qnplaysis and had expressed it twice the Wednesday before the solution was formulated and announced .
 Those to whom I had expressed it where the WxPost's foreign editor whose mime I recall was 'i’hornbury' (l had customers in the Post newsroom and delivered there on Wednesdays ) find Bob iiogers, then manager of tho//ational
 I'd loned tliat^ csraroh and other analyses to Howard Hoflfman for a college thesi3 that lie changed and later made into a book . I'd been loned .
 X thought it was obvious but I suppose what is obvious is too simple for bigshots with big reputations to maintain and jobs to justify .
 ONE HELL OF A GAMBLE cussed Biryuzov and Rashidov’s important trip. One hell of a gamble cussed the pair . One HELL OF a GAMBLE. I’m not happy with the decision .
 Khrushchev stood up and gave a farewell speech to the delegation . The former Soviet Union leader stood down and said goodbye to the delegates .
 He revealed that his decision was founded upon an expectation of John Kennedy’s reaction . John Kennedy's reaction to the decision was based on expectation of reaction .
 Khrushchev believed it very important that the Soviet scheme not be disclosed before November 6, the day of the congressional elections in the U.S. in the United States. The scheme was not disclosed until November 6 .
 After the election period, he intended to visit the U.S. to inform Kennedy himself .
 Faced with this fail accompli, Kennedy would have no alternative to accepting the missiles . Kennedy had no choice but to accept missiles, he says .
 Khrushchev intended to visit Cuba, where he would sign a treaty with Castro . Later, between November 25 and 27, he planned to sign a peace treaty with Cuba .
 On Monday, May 28, the delegation left for Havana on a TU-1 14 transport plane by way of Conakry, Guinea . The delegation left Cuba on May 28 .
 Washington did not detect the purpose of this special mission . Thanks to the security' measures that were taken, the mission was not detected .
 Agatha Christie’s popular mystery Murder on the Orient Express . The detective Hercule Poirot encounters a train full of individuals who had motive and opportunity to kill an American found dead in luxury compartment .
 Students of the Cuban missile crisis have suggested a series of plausible explanations for Khrushchev’s decision in 1962 to station nuclear weapons outside of Eurasia .
 Some people have claimed that Khrushchev did this to paper over the USSR’s strategic inferiority by doubling at a stroke the number of Soviet missiles that could hit the U.S.
 Khrushchev thought only a battery of mediumand intermediate-range missiles could deter Kennedy . Another explanation, especially popular in the 1980s, was that Khrrushchev was genuinely concerned about the likelihood of an American invasion .
 It has also been suggested that anger at the American decision to station Jupiter missiles in Turkey provoked the impulsive Khrushchev .