 Even though the Soviets kept tight control of their own media, Naftali said, they understood the difference between American journalists and their own .
 In October 1962, both superpowers paid much attention to the media, but for different reasons . In those tense weeks, the media was paying much attention .
 The Soviets hungered for information on how the administration would respond to the missile challenge . The Soviets were hungry for information about the administration's response to the challenge .
 In the White House, Kennedy and his aides were concerned about managing the news . In the 1960s, Kennedy was worried about managing his administration .
 Kennedy declared the U.S. had unmistakable evidence that the Soviets were building offensive missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy made the claim in a televised speech to the nation on Oct. 9, 1962 .
 Kennedy urged Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to eliminate this clandestine, reckless and provocative threat to world peace . Kennedy: "I want the Soviets to stop this clandestine and reckless threat of world peace"
 Another account of the crisis, The Kennedy Tapes, provides the text of the president's secretly recorded discussions with his top advisers . The Tapes provides a transcript of the conversations .
 The White House strategy group planned how to sell the administrations plan to Congress and the media . In addition to discussing options, the White House discussed how to pitch the administration's plan to the media and Congress .
 The morning after Kennedys speech, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara told the group he had given an off-the-record briefing to reporters the previous evening, and I think we need more than that . Defense Secretary McNamara gave the group a briefing the night before .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball met with columnists James Reston and Stewart Alop . Ball said he met with Reston, Alop, and met with Alop and Reston .
 The Soviets went to great lengths to make contacts with reporters they had cultivated over the years . The Soviets sought to use their contacts to make contact with journalists they'd cultivated .
 Johnny Prokov, a bartender at the National Press Club and emigre from Lithuania, voiced strongly anti-Soviet views . Prokov is an emigree from Lithuania .
 Prokov overheard one journalist tell another that he was going to fly south to cover the operation to capture Cuba . Naftali and his co-author, Aleksandr Fursenko, a Russian historian, wrote that he overheard the conversation .
 Prokov passed that information on to Anatoly Gorsky, who was a KGB officer . Gorsky was a correspondent for the Soviet news agency Tass, who also was an ex-KGB officer . Prokov and Gorsky passed on the information to Gorsky who was also a
 Prokov overheard a discussion of a Pentagon list of reporters who would be taken along if the decision was to invade . Naftali and Fursenko wrote, what they heard was a discussion .
 It opened Friday after an earlier debut at the National Archives in Washington, D.C., on Friday .
 U.S. and Soviet Union were in a nuclear standoff during 13 days in October 1962 . It depicts President John F Kennedy and his advisers in deliberations in deliberations .
 Listening stations with tapes with tapes of Kennedy's National Security Council meetings are the centerpiece of the Kennedy memorial . The memorial will be dedicated to Kennedy's legacy .
 A recreated fallout shelter and one of the first aerial reconnaissance photos of Soviet missile sites under construction in Cuba are also part of the presentation . The presentation also includes a recreated Soviet missile site .
 Central Intelligence Agency did personality studies on Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro . There are also personality studies that were done on Soviet leaders . The CIA also conducted personality tests on Fidel Castro and Nikita Khan .
 Chicago-born Elmer L Anderson, a civil defense expert, was ordered to Washington to confer on the emergency if Russian bombs were to rain down . My thenboss, the governor of Minnesota, Minnesota, was an expert in the civil defense .
 President Barack Obama was rushed to the White House by the end of the day . He was bundled into a military plane and hustled to the Oval Office .
 1,500 Cuban exiles trained in the U.S. trained in Cuba at a patch on Cuba's south coast known as Bahia de Cochinos_the Bay of Pigs . It was caused by an earlier JFK botch on April 16, 1961, a landing by 1,
 Fidel Castro's troops struck back and Kennedy canceled air cover, leaving brave warriors high-dry . Kennedy's supposed grace under stress wilte after Fidel Castro forces struck back .
 More than 1,000 were captured, going to prison, from which many never returned . Many never returned to their homeland .
 Kennedy complained that he had been blindsided by inept advisers . Kennedy complained he had to escape guilt for the most disastrous expedition ever formented by a president .
 Dean Acheson, President Harry S Truman's secretary of state, asked Kennedy how many troops Castro could muster to repel the invasion . Informed early, President Kennedy asked for the number of troops he could muster .
 Douglas Dillon, JFK's Treasury secretary, told Kennedy confidentially that rumor of invasion was rife on the streets of Havana . Dillon was President Dwight D Eisenhower's undersecretary of state . Dillon, Kennedy's Treasury Secretary, told JFK confidentially .
 "Once the president has made up his mind, we support him and keep our mouths shut. Once that's decided, we keep quiet. We support him," he says .
 The Bay of Pigs was followed two months later by a stammering performance at a Vienna summit meeting with Nikita Khrushchev on June 3 . Kennedy's performance at the Vienna summit was followed by an incompetent performance .
 Khrushchev's impression of JFK as a man of little substance, one easy to cajole . JFK was an easy-cajole, one of the world's most powerful statesmen, says JFK .
 Reeves writes that the men who sat behind Kennedy at the meeting were shocked at the president's ineptitude . He writes that they were shocked that Kennedy had been inept .
 Khrushchev tied him in a superficial web of communist cant, humiliating JFK by treating him as a callow incompetent . JFK was humiliated by being humiliated by a Communist Party leader, says JFK .
 Kennedy told Reston Reston, "We have to see what we can do that will restore a feeling in Moscow that we will defend our national interest" Kennedy said he wants to restore the feeling that Russia will defend its interests .
 The missile crisis that threatened the world led to the escalation in Vietnam . Thus the missile crisis in Vietnam led to an escalation in the country .
 On April 16, as the fighting, dying and betrayal raged at the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy mingled with White House guests . Kennedy was mingling and sipping champagne with guests at the White House .
 The cause was prostate cancer, said Samuel Butler, the presiding partner in the law firm of Cravath, Swain and Moore . Mr Gilpatric, who was born in Brooklyn, became a partner in 1940 .
 His clients included CBS, General Dynamics, Olin and Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp. He was chairman of Fairchild from 1975 to 1977 .
 He was deputy secretary of defense under President John F Kennedy and, briefly, under President Lyndon B Johnson, from 1961 to 1964 . He was briefly in office briefly under President Johnson .
 The missile crisis came about after the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to array ballistic missiles in Cuba and began shipping them in July 1962 . The crisis came after the Soviets began shipping missiles to Cuba .
 By mid-October, the Kennedy administration had learned through U-2 surveillance flights that sites for launching mediumand intermediate-range missiles were being built on the island .
 The options Kennedy faced were a naval blockade of the island, an air strike or invasion, or a negotiated settlement through the United Nations . Kennedy faced a range of options, including a blockade or air strike .
 At a National Security Council meeting, McNamara argued for a blockade . McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser, put the case for an air strike .
 Sorensen: "Gilpatric, who was normally a man of few words in meetings with the president when the defense secretary was present, spoke up"
 Robert Kennedy valued Mr Gilpatric's views because he respected his calm judgment . Robert Kennedy wrote that President Kennedy valued him because of his calm judgement . President Kennedy said he respected him for calm judgment and respected him .
 Two days later, Soviet vessels taking missiles to Cuba reversed course . Two days after, Soviet ships carrying missiles to the island reversed course and went to Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles and tear down the launching sites . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Mr Gilpatric played active roles in Kennedy's efforts to increase military spending and reorganize the defense establishment .
 President Kennedy recruited Rusk back to Washington in 1961 . President Kennedy sought out the ""best and brightest" of his generation . Rusk worked for the State Department in the 1940s and '50s .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and McGeorge Bundy, assistant for national security. Among the others were Defense Secretary McNamara . McNamara was Defense Secretary Bob McNamara; Bundy was national security adviser .
 After Kennedy's assassination, President Lyndon Johnson insisted that Rusk stay on . Rusk was the first secretary of the White House .
 He remained until the end of Johnson's administration in 1969, despite criticism over his advocacy of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War .
 His son Richard was among those who criticized him as an ""architect"" of the war . He was criticized by his son Richard for his role in the conflict .
 Rusk never apologized for his role in the conflict, which killed 57,000 Americans and 1 million Vietnamese . Rusk was killed in the Vietnam War, but never apologized .
 Vietnam was one of four major global events Rusk helped preside over as secretary of state . Vietnam is one of the world's most important global events, Rusk says .
 The botched Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961, the 1962 Cuban missile crisis and the signing of a nuclear nonproliferation treaty with the Soviet Union in 1968 . The others were the failed Bay of the Pigs invasion in 1961 and the 1962 missile crisis in Cuba in 1962 .
 Henry Kissinger: "He was a great American and a great human being" Henry Kissinger, secretary of state under President Nixon, says he was a "great American"
 In 1962, Kennedy ordered the Soviets to dismantle sites in Cuba where missile were aimed at the U.S. The world held its breath as Kennedy ordered them to dismantle . Kennedy ordered that the sites were dismantled in Cuba .
 He was assistant secretary for Far Eastern affairs when the North Koreans invaded South Korea . He played a part in the United States decision to intervene in the Korean crisis .
 Rusk left the State Department in 1952 to become president of the Rockefeller Foundation . He then left Washington for good when he returned to academia in 1969 . Rusk was president of Rockefeller Foundation in 1952 .
 Survivors include his wife, Virginia; two sons; a daughter; and six grandchildren . Survivors include two sons, two daughters, six grandchildren and two sons .
 It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed-door academic conference on the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, had been broadcast in public .
 Castro said younger people had been brought into the leadership of the country . Castro: "Young people have been brought in into leadership"
 Castro denied the crisis had caused any serious divisions in the government he led . Castro denied that the crisis has caused serious divisions .
 He rejected views widely held by many Western analysts that Cuba had followed orders from the Soviet Union in supporting revolutionary movements and left-wing governments .
 Castro appeared to rule out any future Cuban large-scale military interventions abroad . Castro said that times had changed, saying that times were changed .
 The Cuban missile crisis took place during the Cuban Missile Crisis . The terrifying prospect of leveled cities, mass casualties and general chaos loomed .
 How that crisis unfolded in October 1962 was dictated largely by how World War II had ended . How the crisis unfolded was dictated by how the war ended in 1962 .
 The U.S. dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 . conventional wars fought by armies in the field suddenly seemed obsolete . The United States dropped the bombs in 1945, and conventional wars were no longer possible .
 The fact that a nation's leaders could lay waste to an enemy simply by pushing a button forever altered the way leaders could broker conflicts . "The button" was the key to ending a war in the U.S.
 Proxy wars ignited in global hot spots, such as Korea in the early 1950s, as the freedomloving West sought to oppose communist expansion worldwide . Proxy wars began in the 1950s as the West fought communist expansion .
 Cuba, 90 miles off the coast of Florida, became the seat of a communist government in 1959 . The U.S. was alarmed when Cuba became Cuba's seat of the communist government .
 The United States attempted to unseat the Cuban government through covert operations such as the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . The U.S. attempted to topple the government of Cuba using covert operations .
 The Soviet Union was helping the Cubans build secret bases for missiles capable of reaching the U.S. The bases are believed to be capable of delivering missiles to the United States . The bases were built in Cuba to build bases capable of launching missiles .
 Every 'duck-and-cover' exercise and air-raid drill seemed like the prelude to a horrifying reality .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev each attempted to stare down the other . The standoff was the tensest standoff in modern history .
 Kennedy ordered a blockade of Cuba to prevent any more offensive weapons from going in and demanded that the missiles there be dismantled and removed . Kennedy also ordered that the Cuban government remove the missiles .
 From then on, a situation known as mutually assured destruction prevailed between the two global superpowers . Perhaps ""subsided"" would be a more accurate word because of the situation .
 Missile silos were filled with enough nuclear warheads to bury both sides in rubble many times over . The silos contained enough warheads for both sides of the warring line .
 Neither side dared to press that button a first strike certainly would bring enough retaliatory firepower to make the attempt completely foolhardy . A first strike would make a strike completely foolproof .
 Reagan stepped up the arms race enough to make it financially unsustainable for the Soviets . That changed under President Reagan, who stepped up arms race .
 He conceived of a missile defense that would shoot down any incoming Soviet missiles . He also conceived of an anti-Soviet missile defense .
 Funding for Reagan's dream continued after he left office, and the Cold War ended . Funding for the project continued after Reagan's presidency left office .
 Today we have the technological capability to protect ourselves from certain missiles fired at U.S. territory or allies . But the system isn't as comprehensive as what we would need to ensure that the potential missile threat posed by Iran, for example, can be shut down .
 In fact, President Obama has undercut missile defense since taking office . Obama has undermined missile defense in the past, says CNN.com .
 We need a shield that will intercept missiles during all three stages of flight . We need to be able to intercept missiles at all three levels of flight, says President Obama .
 It's especially important to pursue a space-based component, which would enable us to shoot down missiles earlier in their flight, when they're moving more slowly . "It would be especially important for us to pursue this," says President Obama .
 Fifty years ago, the world stood on the brink and lived to tell the tale . World stood on brink and survived the tale, 50 years ago .
 Let's build the kind of missile defense that will make us impervious to threats and keep World War III at bay . Let's spend the money to keep the U.S. out of World War II at bay.
 The recent seizure of a North Korean freighter carrying Cuban, nuclear-capable SA-2 missile components has resurrected the spectre of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis .
 Until now, there has not been extensive military cooperation between Cuba and North Korea . North Korea has not had extensive cooperation between the two countries .
 A high-level North Korean delegation recently visited Cuba, possibly resulting in a deal for Cuba to send military equipment to North Korea for refurbishment in exchange for barter payment with some 10,000 tons of sugar that was declared as the cargo .
 The missile components, however, were undeclared, resulting in the Panamanian seizure . The seizure reportedly was prompted by a tip of drugs being on board the ship . The missile component was found in the ship's cargo .
 The shipment was part of a Cuban-North Korean military cooperation effort to upgrade each country’s SA-2s with advanced tracking electronics . Fisher said the shipment was the result of a joint effort to improve the SA-1s .
 EMP attack would knock out the Eastern U.S. grid system and all unprotected electronics and automated control systems, sources say . Such an attack would hit the Eastern United States grid system, which together form the backbone of the technology-based infrastructure of the country .
 SA-2 downed an American U-2 on May 1, 1960, while undertaking a high-altitude reconnaissance over the then Soviet Union . The plane was carrying a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union when it was downed .
 Powers, who was employed by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency at the time, was aware that Soviet aircraft were not capable of reaching the altitude at which the U-2 could fly .
 The CIA was unaware that the Soviets had developed the SA-2 or its high-altitude capabilities . The CIA, however, was unaware of its capabilities .
 Because the Soviet radar system remains in use, the U.S. and other countries have come up with the ability to jam its radar . The United States and others have been able to jam the radar .
 Counter-electronic measures have been fitted to later, post-Soviet models of this radar, Hardy said . The radar has been modified over the years to undertake “countercounter-electronics measures,” Hardy said.
 Pry today is executive director of the Task Force on National and Homeland Security . Pry: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to make it happen" Pry: The U.S. needs to be on the forefront of national security .
 The ceiling of the SA-2 is up to 35 kilometers, which goes beyond the minimum optimal height for an EMP burst . Pry pointed out that the ceiling is 35 kilometers above the optimal height of an EMP blast .
 The Nation’s missile defense system, Pry said, would not be able to intercept the SA-2 if it were launched from a ship . The flight time to altitude is so short, he said, since the flight time is short .
 The SA-2 travels at a speed of Mach 3.5, or three times the speed of sound . The plane's speed is three times that of sound, and it travels at Mach 3 .5 .
 Pry joined former CIA Director R James Woolsey in writing an article for The Wall Street Journal outlining how North Korea could cripple the U.S. with an EMP attack . Pry says the North Korea threat could be crippling the United States .
 EMP effects could be even “more powerful and more catastrophic by using an Enhanced Radiation Warhead,” the authors wrote . They said .
 A September 2007 study by The Sage Policy Group estimated that the financial cost of an EMP event just from Baltimore, Md., Washington, D.C., to Richmond, VA, would approach $800 billion .
 Get “A Nation Forsaken” by Michael Maloof and become part of the solution to the problem . Get ‘A Nation of Destiny’ and become the solution .
 Members of the media who would like to interview Michael Maloof should contact media@wnd.com .
 Therein lie lessons that might well be read in Washington, Baghdad and Pyongyang . Therein lies lessons for both Washington and North Korea, say experts .
 The Soviet Union was deploying nuclear-tipped missiles to Cuba, 90 miles from U.S. territory . Cuba was 90 miles away from the United States territory .
 Iraq and North Korea have acquired nuclear arms; both also have chemical and biological weapons . Iraq is seeking nuclear arms, North Korea has acquired chemical, biological weapons, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba and preparations for air strikes and ground invasion of Cuba . President Kennedy also ordered an air strike on Cuba and a ground invasion .
 President Bush has ordered land, sea, and air forces to deploy around the Persian Gulf . Bush also has called 150,000 reserves to active duty .
 President Kennedy was not bluffing then, and President Bush is now bluffing now . President Kennedy not bluffed now, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Soviet Union had massive conventional forces poised to invade Western Europe . Soviet Union forces were poised for invasion of Western Europe in 1980s .
 Iraq and North Korea appear to be coordinating their strategy . North Korea appears to be turning defiance of the United States into one conflict on two fronts .
 President Bush has tried to shove the dispute with North Korea into the future . North Koreans have refused to be ignored and have only increased the belligerence of their diplomacy by diatribe .
 The administration has sought to have its adversary disarm by applying political pressure even as it has prepared for battle . Then, as now, the administration in Washington has tried to have the adversary disarm .
 President Kennedy had the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, make a compelling case to the U.N. Security Council of the imminent threat from the Soviet Union . Stevenson's case was made to the UN Security Council .
 President Bush sent Secretary of State Colin Powell to the Security Council to make a case against Iraq . Colin Powell's case was only slightly less compelling than that of President George W. Bush's .
 The dispute with North Korea was headed for the same council last week . Last week, the dispute with the North Korean government was headed toward the same issue .
 Then, as now, miscalculation is the most severe threat to resolving the quarrel . Miscalculation was then the most serious threat to resolve the quarrel, then and now, it says .
 The current confrontation is even more complicated than the crisis of 1962, says David Cameron . The same can be said of the current confrontation, he says .
 Prime Minister Tony Blair has followed that precedent with no known deviation . Tony Blair's predecessor Tony Blair was David Cameron, who was in charge of the White House .
 France allied itself with the U.S. in 1962; it has joined with Russia now . It has joined Russia to oppose the United States now . France allied with Russia in 1962, but now it has allied with France now .
 The missile crisis blew up and was over in 13 days; the confrontation with Iraq and North Korea has been brewing for many months . The confrontation is brewing for months, and the missile crisis has lasted 13 days .
 President Bush has made pre-emptive strikes an option against any potential adversary . President Bush made the move in advance of any potential threat to the nation .
 Iraq and North Korea to give up their weapons of mass destruction . Force Iraq and N. Korea to . give up weapons of . mass destruction. Force . Iraq and . North Korea .
 Saddam Hussein of Iraq and Kim Jong-Il of North Korea must go, perhaps to a safe haven in an Arab nation for Saddam or into retirement in Russia or China for Kim, has been left in ambiguity . But whether his objectives go beyond that is far from clear, notably .
 President Kennedy gave the Soviets a way out that did not humiliate them . In the end, President Kennedy's strategy worked and the Soviet leader backed down .
 Chairman Khrushchev, to his credit, came to understand that he had underestimated Americans and thus pulled the missiles out of Cuba . The missiles were pulled out of the country .
 President Bush is eyeball to eyeball with Saddam Hussein and Kim Jong-Il . Nobody seems to have blinked yet, but nobody seems to be blinking yet .
 How the Cuban missile crisis forced a rendezvous with reality: PHILIP STEPHENS: October 25, 2002 | Financial Times . Forty years on, the crisis can still take us to the edge of our seats .
 The cold war is over, the mighty Soviet Union is one of history's closed chapters . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful countries in the world . The Cold War is over and the Soviet Union has been left behind .
 The story of the 13 days in October when the world peered over the nuclear abyss is as compelling, and as chilling, as it has ever been . But the story of those 13 days is still as chilling as it was ever been, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 We worry now about keeping the world safe from terrorists and rogue states, about Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, says CNN's John Sutter . "We worry now," he says .
 The fear in October 1962 was whether there would be anything left to keep safe . The fear was that there would not be enough to be kept safe .
 It was little wonder that queues began to form outside confessionals in confessionals . It is little wonder how many people are queuing up outside church confessionals.
 On the screen, Kennedy warned of a difficult and dangerous effort to face down the Soviets and force the withdrawal from Cuba of their secretly deployed missiles . Kennedy: The effort was a "difficult and dangerous" effort to confront the Soviets .
 U.S. military strikes against Cuba would be followed by a Soviet seizure of Berlin . Soviet invasion of Berlin followed by the seizure of the city .
 Kennedy installed a tape recorder, preserving for posterity the intense debates within his inner circle . Kennedy installed the tape recorder in order to preserve the intense debate .
 The passage of time has shown that the world was closer to the brink than even the president realised . The world has been on the brink of war for more than a decade .
 The hawks were unaware that Soviet troops in Cuba were equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons . They were unaware of the fact that Soviet forces in Cuba had battlefield nuclear arms .
 The commanders on the ground were authorised to use them against an invading force . They were authorised by the commanders of the ground in the country .
 If the nuclear threshold had been breached, the chain reaction would have been unstoppable . The nuclear threshold would have meant a nuclear chain reaction was unstoppable .
 The submarine was trapped on the ocean floor under bombardment from United States depth charges . It was trapped under U.S. depth charges from the United States submarine .
 The captain, fearing its destruction, decided to take the enemy with it . The captain feared the destruction of the enemy and decided to leave it behind .
 President Obama drew parallels with Barack Obama's presidency when he was in charge of the White House . Obama has been in office since 2008, but has not been in the same position since then .
 Mr Bush suggests that Kennedy's grit in forcing Khrushchev to back down finds a mirror in his own resolve to see off Mr Hussein . Mr Bush says Kennedy was the man who saw off Mr. Hussein .
 The Cuban crisis did mark a watershed in the world's understanding of nuclear weapons . Cuban crisis marked a 'watershed' moment in the nuclear arms race .
 For 15 years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, politicians and generals had seen these bombs and missiles as instruments of war . The Hiroshima bombs were seen as weapons of war for 15 years . They were seen in Japan as a weapon of war, but were never seen again .
 The atom bomb, even the H-bomb, were ""war-fighting weapons"" that could, and probably would, be used . The atom bombs were 'war-fighters' that could be used, says author .
 The 1950s became an era of deep nuclear shelters, of elaborate civil defence programmes . Children were taught to cower under their classroom desks at the sound of the nuclear sirens .
 U.S. generals urged pre-emptive strikes against Moscow or Beijing . All the while, American generals urged strikes against Russia or China .
 The crisis was followed by a year later by the first of many arms control agreements . The then nuclear three signed a first, partial, testban treaty . A year later, the then-nuke three signed an arms control treaty .
 This was followed by a panoply of multilateral and bilateral agreements and treaties that eventually froze the balance of terror between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union and the United States were involved in the Cold War .
 Mutually Assured Destruction codified the essential truth that Kennedy had grasped . Mutually assured destruction codified what Kennedy said .
 Those who seek to draw lessons from the present from the crisis could do worse than start from here . Those seeking lessons from here could do better than start with the present .
 The newest nuclear powers have yet to understand this pretty obvious truth . The new nuclear powers are yet to grasp the concept of nuclear weapons .
 Pakistan's nuclear arsenal is in effect under the control of that nation's armed forces . Pakistan has no nuclear weapons in place under control of its armed forces.
 Those who are really concerned about weapons of mass destruction worry a lot more about Pakistan than Iraq, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Mr Bush eschews multilateralism that halted the US-Soviet nuclear arms race and slowed the pace of proliferation . Mr Bush, meanwhile, eschews the multilateralistism that stopped the arms race .
 The United States has jettisoned its parallel obligations under the comprehensive test-ban treaty . The U.S. remains a signatory to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, but it has dropped the test ban .
 Other accords have been pushed to one side as relics of the cold war, tearing the fabric of mutual interest in non-proliferation .
 For nations in the Middle and Near East it now seems as logical that they should seek to acquire the bomb as it would be illogical for them ever to contemplate using it .
 The crisis revealed the president as a man of judgment, a leader ready to look beyond tomorrow to the day after . But the crisis also revealed the strength of the president to deal with the crisis .
 He understood that to avoid war you have to leave your enemy an option other than complete humiliation . He understood he had to leave his enemy a chance of being humiliated .
 This column appears every Friday at The Financial Time s Ltd. philip.stephens@ft.com .
 The film portrays the Cuban missile crisis the film portrays . Costner's ""Thirteen Days" is based on the film's portrayal of the crisis in Cuba .
 None of Costner's films had been officially released until this week . It was time for a little fresh air, a dose of Cuban street reality .
 The 46-year-old star signed scraps of paper, posed for a dozen snapshots and basked in the unexpected warmth .
 The film cost more than $70 million and grossed just half that in the United States . The film will probably break even worldwide, although it will probably make even money worldwide .
 The visit was licensed by the U.S. Treasury Department as a cultural exchange . It was officially approved by the Cuban government only a week before the visit .
 Costner said the trip, which couldn't possibly earn him a dime, was merely meant to share his critically acclaimed film . Costner's film reconstructs through the eyes of the Kennedy White House the two weeks in 1962 when the United States and Russia came to the brink of nuclear war
 Costner spoke passionately about the hundreds of thousands of Cuban exiles in the U.S. who haven't been home in 40 years . Costner walked Obispo Street in honor of those who have never been home .
 Fidel Castro was a durable Communist whose 1959 revolution drove many Cubans away . But he did the same about the vitality and acumen of Castro, the durable Communist . Castro's 1959 revolution led many of those Cubans to leave Cuba .
 An animated Castro sat a few feet from Costner throughout Monday's midnight palace debut . Castro often passed footnotes, anecdotes, corrections and reactions to the actor through a translator seated between them .
 Chinese President Jiang Zemin is scheduled to arrive in Havana later in the week for a three-day state visit . Castro says the visit will be a state visit by the Chinese president .
 The world was at the abyss of thermonuclear war, so close to self-destruction that one could almost hear the countdown, minute by minute . "The world was almost at the brink of nuclear war, and the countdown was on the way to self destruction," says CNN's
 The missile crisis became an early -and to our great good fortune, successful -example of crisis management . The missile . crisis became a . early example of crisis . management .
 The United States trumped the Soviets, though not without spending a few green stamps . The U.S. beat the Soviet Union in the post-war era .
 We agreed to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey as part of a deal to get Soviet nuclear missiles out of Cuba . The deal was part of the deal to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 The quid pro quo that headed off a nuclear showdown has been known for 20 years . It was known for years that the nuclear deal was made with the U.S. government .
 President John F Kennedy managed the crisis in the 1960s . What has not been known until recently is the extent of how he managed the situation .
 Thirty-five years ago, there were plenty of people in the White House, in Congress and in the Pentagon who were ready to have it out with the Soviets .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Kennedy to order air strikes against Soviet missiles in Cuba . Joint Chiefs were urging Kennedy to strike against Soviet intermediate-range missiles already in place in Cuba.
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara talked darkly of a ''full invasion'' of the island . Defense Secretary McNamara said the invasion would be a 'full invasion' of the country .
 The tapes show a young, inexperienced president taking charge of his team of seasoned advisers with no ifs, ands or buts - he would make the decisions, alone if necessary . The tapes were taken by President George W. Bush in 1992 .
 The United States lost nothing of strategic value in removing its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. lost nothing in removing the missiles, the U.N. says .
 The Soviet Union lost its land-based nuclear toehold in the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. lost control of most of the world's most populous nations .
 The year before, he had come off second best in his Vienna summit meeting with Khrushchev . The year after the meeting, he came off second-best in Vienna summit .
 This time, with the very fate of the world in the balance, it was John Kennedy who triumphed . John Kennedy was the man who won the election in 1964 .
 Had he possessed a lesser profile in courage, the fires of man-made suns may well have marked his failure . Had he . possessed a less profile in . courage, he may have marked him failure, he said .
 The statement was written by Dean Rusk, then secretary of state; Robert McNamara, secretary of defense; Robert W Ball, undersecretary of state . McGeorge Bundy, adviser on national security affairs .
 The Cuban missile crisis, 13 days in October 1962, started when a U2 spy plane took photographs of nuclear missiles being installed by the Soviet Union in Cuba . The U.S. U2 plane took photos of the Soviet missile installation .
 Kennedy imposed a naval blockade, and then-Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced six days later the missiles would be dismantled . Six days later, the missiles were dismantled . Kennedy imposed an international naval blockade of the Soviet Union, ending the blockade .
 The statement contends that the crisis ""could and should have been avoided"
 The Cuban crisis is over, but it was espionage that won the day, says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. Embassy in Cuba has been accused of espionage in the past .
 The secrets the Colonel Oleg Penkovsky passed on to the Englishman Greville Wynne were considered ""pure gold" in intelligence circles . President Kennedy was very soon made aware of them .
 Kennedy, in negotiations with Khrushchev, had the upper hand and knew it . Kennedy had been negotiating with the Soviet leader . Kennedy, who was in talks with the Soviets, knew he was going to win the deal .
 Kennedy's decision to remove his missiles was merely to prevent the Russian premier losing face . Kennedy removed the missiles to prevent Russia from losing face in the wake of the crisis .
 Wynne received a sentence of eight years, serving one before being exchanged for the Russian spy Gordon Lonsdale . As for the real heroes of the crisis, Wynne received an eight year sentence .
 Penkovsky was shot, although some in intelligence circles believe he was cremated alive . Penkovski was shot and believed to have been killed by a bomb .