 RFK was shot multiple times as he passed through the pantry of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles in 1968 .
 The official account maintains that he was taken out by a lone, demented gunman, Sirhan Sirhan, a Palestinian who had written, “RFK must die!”, over and over in a notebook .
 Sirhan, like Lee Harvey Oswald, was the patsy in plots that involved many more . Sirhan Sirhan is accused of assassinating his brother, JFK, but the evidence contradicts what the government has told us, where both murders appear to have been products of conspiracies .
 A portal to online video clips related to the JFK, MLK, and RFK assassinations . The MFF's own unique productions .
 As more and more of the witnesses’ testimony is taken into account, the strength of support for the identifications by Ayers and Smith becomes increasingly stronger and the evidence against them is weaker .
 Shane O’Sullivan, who uncovered the evidence that the three officials of the CIA were at the Ambassador, concluded that at least two of them were Bulova Watch Company employees . Ironically, Shane O'Sullvan was largely responsible for uncovering the evidence .
 The only mistake that he appears to have made was drawing the conclusion that he had initially been wrong . That inference is substantially overridden by the weight of the evidence, however, however .
 Three prominent CIA officials — George Joannides, David Sanchez Morales Morales, and Gordon Campbell — had been identified as present at the Ambassador .
 Bradley Ayers, an Army captain assigned to the CIA at JM/Wave in Miami from May 1963 to December 1964, had met all three and ID’d two of them in a video from the Ambassador . Ayers had met Morales and Campbell in the video from Ambassador.
 Gordon Campbell had even been Ayers’ case officer while he was working for the agency . Campbell was even his case officer when he was at the time .
 When he viewed the same footage as Ayers, he immediately recognized Morales . Morales was arrested on suspicion of drug possession in 2010 .
 He subsequently told me over several conversations that he had seen him intermittently at JM/WAVE in professional matters and only later learned his name . He later told me that he'd seen him briefly at JMWAVE .
 "He was quite certain about his identification of Campbell, whom he knew extremely well," he said . "He knew very well. He knew very much of Campbell," he added .
 When I wrote in “JFK and RFK, RFK” that “Bradley Ayers, an Army captain assigned to the CIA at JM/Wave in Miami from May 1963 to December 1964, had met all three and identified them in film footage from the Ambassador
 One reason I wanted to publish this sequel, therefore, is to clarify this point but also to explain how much more evidence we have supporting his and Smith’s identifications . One reason for the sequel to this article is to explain the more evidence that we have .
 Gordon Campbell served as Brad Ayers’ case officer from 1963-1964 . Campbell died September 19, 1962, which is very peculiar, since he served as Ayers' case officer .
 Former CIA official Rudy Enders, a retired CIA official, claims to have been present at the time of Campbell's death . They even post an alleged ‘death certificate’ and quote one of them as a witness .
 Photograph of 'alleged' Gordon Campbell from the Ambassador Hotel side-by-side with a copy of Campbell’s death certificate .
 According to Talbot and Morley, he was “not the deputy station chief in the CIA’s Miami operation,” as O’Sullivan reported .
 He could not have been at Bobby’s assassination because he was, according to them, already dead . Bobby was already dead, they said . Bobby could not be at Bobby's assassination because of his death .
 O’Sullivan’s suggestion that the CIA might have used his name for another agent is common practice by the agency . They provide no photo of “Gordon Campbell” and offer no response to the suggestion that he was used as an alias .
 The likelihood of Ayers being wrong about the identity of his own case officer at JM/WAVE is extremely low . forging documents is among the CIA’s principal pastimes . The likelihood that Ayers was wrong about his case officer is extremely high .
 Faking a death certificate for some ‘Gordon Campbell’ would probably have been simpler than any other technique for coping with Ayers’ identification . Ayers' death certificate was probably the easiest way to cope with his identification .
 Brad has one of the best memories for detail of anyone I have ever known, and my guess is that it’s a fake . Brad has a memory for detail that could be fake, he says .
 Talbot and Morley claim they have disproven the identifications made by Brad Ayers and Wayne Smith . Their ‘disproof’ of Brad’s identification of Campbell does not inspire confidence . Other “disproofs” have been made by Wayne Smith and
 Talbot and Morley did not know Morales, Campbell or Joannides personally . Unlike Ayres and Smith, neither Talbot nor Morley knew Morales or Campbell personally .
 They were dependent on information they were given by various sources, whose credibility they do not seem to have seriously assessed . They were therefore dependent on the information they had been given by different sources .
 Morley and Talbot’s article minimize the number of persons who identified Morales, Joannides, and Campbell . The article is one of the most glaring inadequacies of Morley, Talbot's article, they say .
 Four sources identified exactly one of the three men in the footage from the Ambassador . They mention exactly four sources for these identifications .
 Wayne Smith identified one of them as David Morales . David Rabern personally observed Campbell interacting with Morales, even though he did not know either man by name . Brad Ayers identified the same person as Morales .
 Shane noticed three others — presumably, subordinates — who were interacting with them . Shane noticed them interacting with each other . Shane also noticed three other people interacting with the men .
 Brad Ayers identified another man as David Morales Rabern observed Morales interacting with Campbell . Footage shows Campbell interacting with Joannides . Rabern told Shane that he had also observed Campbell in and around the LA Police Department .
 Dan Hardway identified one of them as George Joannides . Tom Polgar had been CIA station chief in Saigon . Hardway and Lopez were congressional investigators for the House Select Committee .
 After initially confirming his identity, Polgar later decided he had been wrong, Talbot says . Talbot: Polgar initially confirmed his identity to Talbot, then decided he was wrong .
 Given how well Polgar knew Joannides, it is difficult to imagine why he would have withdrawn his identification . Polgar is believed to have been pressured to withdraw his identification from Joannide .
 Talbot discounts Polgar in a note to O’Sullivan, but his identification seems more credible than his denial . Talbot says Polgar's identification seems credible .
 Joannides’ daughters were asked if their father was in the videos, they responded with, “No comment!” which suggests that they, too, recognized their father . The daughters responded with no comment .
 Bradley Ayers, who got to know Carbajal well in the course of his investigations, also believed he knew far more than he was telling . Ayers: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure there's a lot more"
 Shane also interviews “Chilo” Borja who confirmed the identity of George Joannides . In his video, “RFK Must Die!”, Shane interviews Borja .
 The evidence to the contrary appears to be much weaker than others have claimed . Morales, Joannides, Campbell, and Campbell were at the Ambassador at the time . DiEugenio’s defense may be stronger than Talbot and Morely acknowledged .
 Jim DiEugenio, who with Lisa Pease co-edited The Assassinations, advances various arguments intended to support Talbot and Morley . He says the reliability of photographic identifications and the plausibility of the presence of CIA officials at the hotel are among the issues .
 Unless you have a very good close up shot, you would rather stay away from them . Close up shots are needed for height and weight comparisons . Close-up shots are essential for close-ups and full shots .
 E Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, Charles Harrelson, Lucien Conein, and Joseph Milteer are examples that he assumes demonstrate false identifications based upon photographs .
 At least three of the five IDs appear to have been correct, when the evidence is pursued far enough . But at least three are not correct, according to the evidence .
 Lucien Conein's credentials bolstered by means of a faux plaque given to him for appearing in a photograph in Dealey Plaza . Robert Adams' credentials were bolstered by . means of . being given to . him for . appearing in an image in a photo .
 The weight of the evidence shifts perceptibly when you discover that the arguments for one candidate are shoddy, while those for the other are not . It's not the only time that the weight of evidence shifts when you find that the evidence is shoddy .
 CIA documents proving that Conein was not in town at the time to provide an alibi are easy to produce . CIA documents prove that he wasn't in town to provide a . alibi .
 Even in cases like those DiEugenio cites, it may be possible to sort things out . Even in those cases, the case may be able to be resolved, he says .
 We are not dealing with staged photographs here but with videotape, which shows the parties in question moving, talking, and interacting, where their images were only discovered after extended study . We are dealing with a videotape of the parties involved in the photographs .
 Ayers and Smith knew each other personally over extended periods of time . The situation is not comparable to the situation Summers described described in the interview .
 DiEugenio claims that eight persons said it was not David Morales in the video from the Ambassador without taking into account whether they might have had motives for denying the identity . The role of the families was also not considered .
 He cites Luis Fernandez and Manuel Chavez, who worked with Morales, but are also not credible . Morales' career has spanned more than 30 years .
 Fernandez, for example, says “definitely that is not Dave Morales” when many others who knew him well have said the opposite . Fernandez: “Definitely that’s not that. That is definitely not that,” says Fernandez .
 DiEugenio and O’Sullivan did not know Morales and were not in position to know . The disadvantage of those who knew Morales was Morales is that they didn't know him well .
 Shane Shane observes about Clines, who tries to minimize Ayers’ competence on the ground that he wasn’t at JM/WAVE ‘very long,” when he was there for more than a year and a half, he says . Ed Wilson, who
 DiEugenio also buys O’Sullivan’s report that the person Brad identified as Campbell was actually “Michael Roman” and that Joannides was “Frank Owens” The Bulova Watch executives were supposed to have been mistaken for CIA officials .
 When shown images from the Ambassador, however, the Roman family was actually quite equivocal .
 Bulova executives' interest in hanging around after the assassination is not behavior that we would expect from Bulova execs, says CNN's John Sutter . Bulova is a well-known Russian-born businessman and philanthropist .
 DiEugenio also suggests that, in an operation like this, “you would not have CIA higher ups in plain view of still cameras and motion picture cameras . The plausibility of their presence is plausible .
 The CIA specializes in plausible deniability, which can be implemented effortlessly by the creation of fake documents and phony records . The CIA, after all, has a reputation for its ability to create fake documents .
 Jim DiEugenio would so naively accept an easily fabricated CIA alibi like this . It is extremely painful to read that DiEugeneio would accept such a false alibi, he writes .
 Bobby's co-editor Lisa Pease said she could not believe the CIA would send those who were involved in his brother’s murder to assassinate Bobby .
 Bobby Kennedy had said he intended to reopen the JFK investigation . But since that, their self-interest would have been great, it was great for Bobby to reopen .
 In response to Brad’s Ambassador identifications, she suggests that he has been seeing things that he wants to see in his desire to solve the case .
 I cannot think of anyone I have ever known I regard as less gullible than Brad Ayers . But, as someone who has known Brad for 15 years, he says . Ayers is known for his gullible nature .
 Lisa might want to consider that from their point of view as agents of assassination who harbored a visceral hatred for Bobby, they would have wanted to be there . Lisa might . consider that, from . point of . view, the agents of . assassination would have been there. Lisa might
 Like the “familiar faces” at the corner of Houston and Main on 22 November 1963, these men find events like these self-affirming — not unlike the adrenaline rush that they may have experienced as their targets were taken out .
 Amoral killers such as David Morales took pride in their work at a brute, animalistic level . David Morales was one of the most prolific killers in the world .
 They were there to guarantee nothing went wrong with their plan to kill a man who threatened them . They planned to kill the man who had threatened them, police say .
 The kind of priori thought about evidence displayed by DiEugenio, especially, has shaken his confidence in his ability to think things through . Black Op Radio Photo: Weighing the evidence .
 No one would think those responsible for framing Lee Oswald would plant a weapon that could not have fired the bullets that killed JFK, either . The weapon was planted by those who framed Lee Oswald, but could not be fired by Oswald .
 We have to follow the evidence where it leads, not confine ourselves to our own subjective expectations . We must follow the facts where they lead, not our subjective expectations, we must follow them where it goes .
 Shane O'Sullivan concludes the men identified as ‘Gordon Campbell’ and ‘George Joannides’ were salesmen for Bulova Watch Company . O’Sullivan appears to be deceiving himself based upon flimsy evidence, he says .
 He visited the family of one of those men but simply takes their word for identification of the other . He visits family of another man but takes it for the identification .
 DiEugenio’s agency has yet to reveal the identity of his client . That would be child's play for the agency, yet it appears to be a possibility .
 The son and daughter weren’t sure the man at the Ambassador was their father . The family was shocked to discover the man was the Ambassador .
 Shane's son and one of his daughters are unsure whether they are their father . Shane says the probability that this really was their father is low . Shane: "If there was this much uncertainty from his son ... the probability"
 The weight of the evidence favors Ayers and Smith’s identifications . Conclusions in a case of this kind are going to be probable rather than definitive, but the evidence is overwhelming .
 As in the case of Lucien Conien, the evidence supporting them is strong, while that for Robert Adams is weak . The evidence supporting the prosecution for Adams is strong .
 The probability has to be extremely low, especially when you consider that Morales was interacting with Campbell and that Campbell in turn was talking with Joannides . The probability is extremely low .
 James Richards, who is an expert on the CIA, observed during a conversation that those three were most likely to be present if an assassination had been in the works . Richards: Those three were the ones most likely .
 It is unsurprising that they would be there, but the arrogance of the agency is such that it doesn't seem to care who knows, as long as the general public does not catch on . It is not only unsurprising .
 A group of CIA officials was captured in photographs at the intersection of Main and Houston during the assassination of JFK in Dealey Plaza .
 If you exercise nearly absolute control over law enforcement authorities, the fear of exposure is nil . The fear is nil if you exercise complete control over police, the Secret Service, the FBI, and even the FBI .
 If we weigh the evidence using likelihood measures, where the likelihood of an hypothesis h is equal to the probability of the evidence e, then the likelihood that those who were present at the Ambassador were Morales, Campbell, and Joannides appears to be very high .
 The likelihood they were actually Bulova executives who happened to resemble them is extremely low . The likelihood of them actually being Bulova execs being mistaken for each other is low .
 Those with the least axes to grind support the identifications, while those with the most at stake deny them . The identifications are supported by those who have the least at stake .
 Jim DiEugenio and Lisa Pease have done good work, especially in authoring many of the articles they brought together in The Assassinations . The Assassination Project is now on PBS .
 They were far too willing to engage in a priori reasoning, where their intuitions are unreliable and unworthy of belief . They were too keen on engaging in pre-reasoning, where they were wrong to believe .
 DiEugeio and Pease would do better to track the evidence more closely and follow it where it leads, they say .
 Shane O’Sullivan, I think, was simply overwhelmed by the criticism he received for his efforts to expose the truth . Shane O'Sullivan was overwhelmed by criticism for exposing the truth, writes O'Shelton .
 He confronted the kind of retaliation that many of us have encountered, many have encountered . Powerful mechanisms are in place to suppress the truth, especially in a situation with the potential of this one — within our visually-oriented culture — to expose CIA complicity .
 Shane takes to be the most persuasive indication that his counterpart at the Ambassador was not Morales . Shane says the description of alleged differences between Morales and the Ambassador man from Luis Fernandez is not the case .
 Like Jefferson Morley and David Talbot, Shane O'Sullivan did not know any of them . Shane O’Sullivan didn't know all of them, but he did know them .
 The weight of the evidence from those who weren’t shading their testimony strongly suggests that he was being misled, says CNN.com .
 He fumbled the ball over “Roman” and “Owens,” it's difficult to deny . That he fumbled it over ‘Roman’ and ‘OWens’, it’s hard to deny that .
 At 1:03, ‘Morales’ is observed comparing notes with someone who looks like a plainclothes detective . No police were present at the time RFK was shot, according to the LAPD .
 If Joannides, Campbell and Morales were Bulova executives, they did not act as if they were executives . They acted like Bulova bosses, not Bulova execs, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Morales' IDs are supported by many others, including even by Morales himself, where the evidence against them is weak . These IDs, as I have explained, are backed by those of many others . The evidence against these IDs is weak.
 The CIA had the motive, the means, and the opportunity to remove a threat it feared — and it took it . The CIA has the motive and means to remove the threat it fears .
 O’Sullivan has written to me that he remains convinced that ‘Gordon Campbell’ was in fact Michael D Roman, in spite of the points I made about the family’s equivocal identifications .
 If Shane is right, logic requires that Campbell and Roman are one and the same, where his life as a Bulova Watch Company executive was his cover, where even he acknowledges that that may have been his cover .
 The conduct of David Talbot and Jefferson Morley, by comparison, appears to be far more serious . Talbot's conduct of Talbot, Morley and Morley appears to have been more serious than that of the two men .
 "They have repeatedly minimized both the strength and variety of the evidence supporting these identifications," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 They have exaggerated the weight of the evidence against them, even including the claim to have disproven them, when they did no such thing . They have exaggerated the evidence, even though they did not disprove them .
 They did not even attempt to identify those whom they claimed had been mistaken for them .
 Such doubts as they have raised, in my opinion, are overcome by the weight of the evidence, he says . Their cavalier treatment of Brad's identification of Campbell was especially egregious and irresponsible .
 There is nothing about their performance that warrants any pats upon their backs. But there are nothing about them that warrants a pats on their backs .
 Joannides was brought out of retirement to coordinate interaction between the CIA and the HSCA when it took up the case in 1977-78 . As most students of JFK are aware of the JFK case, he was brought into the CIA to coordinate the case .
 The agency has refused to grant access to his files even when the ARRB was entitled to have them . The ARRB has refused access to the files even though the agency is entitled to them .
 The conduct of Talbot and Morley has been inexcusable to the extent that one could reasonably infer that they were suppressing evidence . In his view, the conduct of the Talbot/Morley conduct has been .
 The most appropriate response they could make to offset that impression would be to acknowledge that, given the evidence presented here, they were clearly wrong, and thus remove the cloud of uncertainty that obfuscates the truth .
 The most probable killer, Thane Eugene Cesar, had worked with companies that also had links to the agency . The most likely killer, Cesar had worked for companies that were also linked to the government .
 The hypnotist, William Joseph Bryan, was on the radio suggesting that the assassin was probably “mind controlled” even before Sirhan had been identified as a suspect .
 Bryan later boasted to several hookers that he worked for the CIA and had hypnotized him . He later boasted that he was hypnotized by the CIA .
 Robert F Kennedy with Cesar Chavez . "If they're going to shoot, they'll shoot," he said . The Robert Kennedy Assassination .
 Robert F Kennedy had made many enemies during his time on the Washington scene . He was well aware of the dangers he faced in trying to reclaim the Presidency lost in 1963 when his brother was killed .
 Fate befell him just after midnight on June 5, 1968 . Moments after declaring victory in the California Democratic primary, he declared victory .
 RFK was assailed by Palestinian Sirhan Sirhan firing a .22 pistol . RFK had to be escorted through a kitchen pantry in the Ambassador Hotel . Sirhan fired a pistol at RFK .
 Kennedy was shot multiple times, and five others were wounded by gunfire . Kennedy was wounded in the shooting . Kennedy is the son of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Kennedy collapsed in a pool of blood after Sirhan Sirhan shot wildly at Kennedy . Sirhan continued to shoot wildly as bodyguards wrestled with him .
 In the assassinations of President Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr., the evidence tying the alleged assassins to the case was circumstantial and almost too neat . President Kennedy was assassinated by a single gunman in 1968 .
 Sirhan Sirhan was apprehended on the scene firing a gun within a couple of feet of Kennedy . Sirhan fired a gun at Kennedy within a few feet of the scene .
 The RFK assassination has the starkest physical and eyewitness evidence indicating a conspiracy involving Sirhan and at least one additional gunman . Ironically, the evidence suggests that Sirhan may have been involved in the assassination .
 Sirhan Bishara Sirhan's diaries were an early indication that there might be more than meets the eye in this case . Sirhan is believed to have been involved in the death of Sirhan .
 Sirhan Bishara Sirhan was born in Jerusalem in 1944 . He moved with his family to the United States when he was 12 . Sirhan moved to the U.S. at the age of 12 .
 He had been employed exercising horses at the Santa Anita racetrack until an accident in 1966 . He had worked at the track until he was killed in a car accident .
 He was obsessed with mystical powers, apparently believing that he was learning to control events with his mind . He was fascinated with hypnosis and hypnosis, and believed he could control events .
 Psychiatrists determined that he was highly susceptible to hypnosis, and may have produced his strange writings while in a trance . Psychiatrists said he may have been highly susceptible .
 Sirhan has continually maintained that he has no memory of writing in his notebook, nor of the events that night at the Ambassador Hotel . Sirhan says he does not remember the events in the hotel .
 Many believe he may have been programmed to shoot RFK and then fail to recall who put him up to it . This has led many to believe that he may be a real ""Manchurian Candidate,""
 The Polka-Dotted Dress Girl Sirhan was seen in the hotel including in the pantry itself in the company of a girl wearing a polka-dotted dress .
 The girl and another male companion were seen running from the pantry after the shooting . The girl was shot in the head with a shotgun blast .
 RFK campaign worker Sandy Serrano, taking a break out on a balcony, saw them run from the hotel . The woman gleefully shouted, "We shot him. We shot him"
 LAPD officer Paul Sharaga was told the same thing by an elderly couple in the parking lot behind the hotel . The LAPD officer was also told the elderly couple's behavior was corroborated .
 There were many other witnesses to the polka-dotted dress girl, in the hotel and in the company of Sirhan in the weeks prior to the assassination .
 Marcus McBoom saw a man with a partially-concealed pistol in his hand, running from the pantry . Marcus McBooom saw the man with the gun running from a pantry, running with him .
 LAPD officers measuring apparent bullet hole in doorframe . Freed's account in fact matches Robert Kennedy's autopsy report . LAPD officers measured bullet hole, with closeup from photo closeup .
 Coroner Thomas Naguchi determined RFK had been shot three times, all from the rear at a steep upward angle . Powder burns indicated that the fatal shot was fired from 1 or 2 inches away, Naguchi said .
 One of the three bullets to strike RFK grazed him and was determined by LAPD to have gone into the ceiling . LAPD never recovered the bullet, though it was never recovered . RFK was hit by three bullets, one of which hit him .
 RFK's party entered the pantry, but bullet holes are not accounted for . RFK party had entered pantry; bullet holes were found in pantry doorframe .
 Photographs taken by the FBI, LAPD, and AP show apparent bullet holes, which have been circled and initialed . The FBI and LAPD are investigating the incident .
 Two police officers depicted in the photos told author Vincent Bugliosi that they had observed an actual bullet embedded in the wood of the center door frame . Two officers said they saw a bullet embedded inside the wood .
 Hotel waiter Martin Patrusky said that police officers told him that they had dug two bullets out of the center divider . Hotel waiter said police officers said they dug out two bullets from the divider in a hotel room .
 FBI agent William Bailey said he could see the base of the bullet in the center divider . Bailey was in the pantry within hours of the shooting .
 Other confirmation comes from photographers and even a carpenter who assisted in removal of the door frame for police evidence .
 The files of their investigation, released twenty years after the assassination, show that evidence was ignored, and in some cases actively countered . The files show that the evidence of the assassination was ignored .
 The LAPD set up a Special Unit Senator group to handle the investigation . Some of the tactics of some of its members have been called into question .
 Enrique Hernandez, who conducted polygraph exams for SUS, was among the most aggressive . Enrique Hernandez was one of SUS's most aggressive polygraphs .
 Sandy Serrano, one of the prime witnesses to the girl in the polka-dotted dress and a male companion, was browbeaten by Hernandez into retracting her story . Serrano said she was forced to retract her story by Hernandez .
 Hernandez: "I think you owe it to Senator Kennedy, the late senator Kennedy, to come forth, to be a woman about this" Hernandez: ""I think . I think you owes it to . Senator Kennedy," says Hernandez .
 If he's a witness right now in this room watching what we're doing in here. If he, and you don't know and I don't . know whether he, or not, he, is a witness . If he is, he may be a witness, he could be
 The fact that Serrano had made up the story was apparently used to discredit other corroborating witnesses, who generally didn't know that their story was being repeated by others .
 The pattern of isolation and intimidation recurs repeatedly in transcripts and tapes of interviews . Many of whom retracted statements under pressure, many retracted statements, many of them under pressure .
 In other cases, the interviews in the record do not contain information that the witness has later stated he or she told the police, and it is not always clear where the truth lies . In some cases, like Evan Freed, the interview record does not contain the information later stated by the
 The door frames, which according to witnesses had bullets embedded in them, were destroyed by the LAPD after Sirhan Sirhan's trial .
 Other evidence, including photos taken in the pantry by a teenager named Scott Enyart, never saw the light of day .
 Even the autopsy report, whose conclusion of point-blank shots from the rear would seemingly exonerate Sirhan of RFK's actual murder, was not given to the defense until they had already stipulated Sirhan's guilt .
 The defense early on decide to pursue a ""diminished capacity"" defense, and the autopsy report didn't change that strategy . The autopsy report did not change that .
 Neither side had anything to gain by bringing in evidence of conspiracy . Neither side was likely to gain anything from bringing in any evidence .
 For the prosecution, it would simply muddle what otherwise seemed to be a simple case . The prosecution, for the sake, would muddle the case . For the defense, the prosecution would just muddle their case .
 The defense says conspiracy implies pre-meditation, and thus knowing guilt . And for the defense, conspiracy implies knowing guilt, the defense says . The jury was acquitted in November .
 Introducing evidence of accomplices would not be helpful to their client, lawyer says . Introduce evidence would not help the client, he says, but it would be helpful .
 Sirhan Sirhan was his own worst enemy at the trial, using it as a platform for expressing anti-Semitic political views and touting the Arab cause . Sirhan used the trial to express anti-Semitism and touting Arab causes .
 Whether these issues were really motivation for the shooting he claims not to remember executing remains a mystery . The suspect says he doesn't remember executing the shooting .
 Sirhan's later attorney Lawrence Teeter uncovered evidence that Grant Cooper's lead trial lawyer, Grant Cooper, was compromised . Finally, Teeter found evidence that Cooper's trial lawyer Grant Cooper was compromised.
 Cooper was on one of the defense teams in the Friar's Club scandal case . Grand jury papers were found on Cooper's desk at counsel table, possibly planted there by Johnny Roselli .
 Cooper faced a potential indictment over this incident, which could be grounds for disbarment, and the matter was left pending for the duration of the Sirhan trial . Cooper faced potential indictment .
 Sirhan Bishara Sirhan was found guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced to death . Sirhan has been sentenced to the death for his role in the murder of Sirhan .
 While he was on death row, California abolished the death penalty, and commuted his sentence to life in prison . He remains in prison in California .
 Attorney Lawrence Teeter was fighting for a retrial at the time of his own death in 2005 . Teeter died in 2005 at the age of his wife's death .
 Ted Charach produced a documentary entitled ""The Second Gun" in 1970 . Questions continued to grow around the RFK case in the early 1970s .
 Criminalistics professor Herbert MacDonnell had signed an affidavit in 1973 stating that a bullet removed from RFK's neck, exhibit #47, could not have been fired from Sirhan's gun .
 Based on the differing number of cannelures, it could not have been fired from the same gun as exhibit #54, a bullet removed from victim William Weisel . He further stated that, based on . the differing . number of . cannelure , it could . not have
 In a 1974 public hearing, California state crime lab veteran Lowell Bradford concurred . In 1974, he testified before the California legislature .
 Paul Schrade, one of the victims, and Congressman Allard Lowenstein pursued the RFK case for many years . Lowenstein is the son of RFK's widow .
 In 1975, a court-appointed panel of seven ballistics experts was convened . The panel was convened by the court in 1975 .
 A panel of experts ruled out the idea of a second gun theory . The results of the panel's work were more subtle than the headlines .
 There is circumstantial evidence for a switch of crime scene bullets and even of the Sirhan gun with a test gun . There is also evidence for the switch of bullets from crime scene .
 LAPD criminologist DeWayne Wolfer had introduced into evidence at Sirhan's trial the test gun . Wolfer represented it as the murder weapon, despite the different serial numbers . Sirhan Sirhan was convicted of murdering himself in 2012 .
 The 1975 panel discovered that two bullets allegedly removed from Sirhan's car contained traces of wood on both the base and tip of the bullets . The panel also discovered that the bullets were found to contain wood on the base of the bullet tip .
 In 2004, a tape recording which featured the gunfire in the pantry surfaced . The tape recording was recorded in 2004 .
 The tape was made by Polish freelance journalist Stanislaw Pruszynski . It was analyzed by a team led by Philip Van Praag . The team announced that the tape revealed thirteen shots fired in the space of five seconds .
 As in the JFK acoustics evidence, this finding is the subject of debate . This finding is a matter of debate, but it's not clear whether it supports the claim .
 Witnesses to Sirhan Sirhan's accomplices are hard to refute, despite attempts to do so . But the dismissive treatment of witnesses to his accomplices is hard to refute . Sirhan has been sentenced to life behind bars for his role in the murder of Sirhan .
 There were pre-assassination sightings of Sirhan in the company of a woman whose description matches the polka-dotted dress girl . These sightings indicate that they were stalking Robert Kennedy .
 Restaurant manager Albert LaBeau of Robbie's Restaurant in Pomona encountered a man with a coat thrown over his arm in the company of a young woman . The incident occurred on May 20, May 20 .
 RFK would be climbing over a stair railing in one of multiple attempts to gain access to a lunchroom . RFK was in the lunchroom at the time . The pair were aggressively trying to get access to the lunch room .
 LaBeau picked Sirhan's photo out of a set of 25 pictures of young dark-skinned males . Sirhan is one of the most prominent black men in the world to be photographed .
 Campaign worker Laverne Botting was approached by a young woman and two men trying to get a copy of Robert Kennedy's schedule . Ten days later, a campaign worker was approached . Botting says she was approached with a group of young women, two men .
 Dean Pack was hiking with his son in the Santa Ana mountains when they came upon a young man who resembled Sirhan, shooting a pistol in the company of a girl and another man . Dean Pack says he saw the young man shoot a pistol on June 1 .
 Witnesses saw a similar-looking girl, in a polka-dotted dress, in the Ambassador Hotel on the night of the primary .
 Irene Gizzi saw three people, matching the trio seen by others, and noted that they didn't seem to fit in with the exuberant crowd . Irene said they seemed to fit into the crowd, but did not fit in .
 Owen himself went to authorities shortly after the assassination, with the story that he had happened to give Sirhan and another man a lift, and had subsequently gone to the Ambassador Hotel to collect $300 for a horse he was going to sell to Sirhan . Owen said he had gone to
 LAPD determined Owen's background of criminal violations included a conviction for arson in conjunction with a church building . The LAPD determined that Owen was telling a tale . Owen was convicted of arson, but the LAPD determined he was telling the tale .
 Authors Bill Turner and Jonn Christian researched the Owen story and interviewed Bill Powers . Powers was a cowboy who ran Wild Bill's Stables less than a mile from Owen's home .
 Powers told them that Owen had told him, before the assassination, about a horse trainer named Sirhan . Powers said he had seen Sirhan in the back seat of Owen's car during a visit where Owen flashed large bills to pay off a pickup truck Powers had sold him . Sirhan
 Sirhan Sirhan was in the pantry firing a gun that night at Robert Kennedy, with intent to kill . Sirhan fired the gun at Kennedy, killing him in the first place in the U.S.
 The evidence is strong that Sirhan was stalking Kennedy in the company of a young blond girl and another male companion . Furthermore, the evidence is that Kennedy was stalked by Sirhan Sirhan .
 At least one witness claimed to see a different gunman to the rear of Kennedy firing the fatal shots . Kennedy was shot to death by a gunman in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The girl in the polka-dotted dress was never found . LAPD insisted that campaign worker Valerie Schulte was the girl seen by some . Despite differences in her appearance and clothing, the LAPD insisted she was seen .
 There was another man, Michael Wayne, who was seen running from the pantry and subsequently tackled and taken away for questioning . Michael Wayne was tackled by police after he ran from pantry .
 Wayne had similarity in appearance to one of the individuals reported to have been seen in the company of Sirhan Sirhan . Wayne had in his possession the business card of radical Minuteman Keith Duane Gilbert .
 Sirhan Sirhan may be lying when he claims to have no memory of the assassination . John and Robert Kennedy were assassinated in 1968 . Sirhan says he is not sure if he has any memory of John Kennedy's assassination .
 Sirhan may be lying about his lack of memory . It is also possible that he and his accomplices did stalk RFK, but that the highly suggestible Sirhan had been hypnotically programmed to block memory of the shooting .
 Sirhan's sometimes-stated contention that he killed Kennedy for political reasons doesn't hold up well under analysis . Sirhan: RFK's support for Israel, in particular, is not a political motive .
 Sirhan wrote on May 18 that "RFK must die" over and over in his notebook . But it was not the first time he had written that he had been in contact with the team .
 Political views related to the Arab-Israeli conflict may have motivated Sirhan Sirhan . Sirhan may have been motivated by his views on the conflict .
 His motivation was not necessarily that of his accomplices, whoever they were . But that motivation may not necessarily be that of those accomplices .
 The tenuous conspiracy leads that exist, including Jerry Owen and perhaps Michael Wayne, point toward right-wing religious extremists . There is not enough to go on to make any definitive statement, but there are many possibilities .
 The giddy behavior of the polka-dotted dress girl and her companion seem hardly that of professional killers . The giddiness of the dress girl seems hardly as giddy as a professional killer .
 Robert Kennedy had accumulated many powerful enemies during his career . CIA officers, organized crime bosses, Vietnam war hawks, ardent segregationists among them .
 Given the fear that Kennedy's achieving the Presidency could induce in them, it is not at all clear who the ultimate sponsors of Sirhan and his accomplices might have been .
 He was wounded by three of the bullets with the fourth bullet going through his jacket . He was shot by four of the shots .
 The location was the kitchen pantry of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . It was located in the Ambassador's kitchen panty .
 The next day, June 6, 1968, was the day the United States died . I was only a 10-year-old boy back then, but I somehow knew the day Bobby Kennedy died .
 If this assassination of Bobby Kennedy didn't happen, he would have been the Democratic presidential nominee in 1968 . He would have faced the Republican presidential nominee, Richard Milhouse Nixon, in the November election .
 Bobby most likely would have won and been the next President of the United States. Bobby's best friend says he would have been a better candidate .
 Since Bobby was opposed to the Viet Nam War, this would have put an end to it in 1969 instead of 1975 . Bobby was against the Vietnam War . This would have ended the war in 1969 .
 The assassination of Robert Kennedy on June 5, 1968, has never attracted the same level of public fascination and passion as the 1963 assassination of his brother, President John F Kennedy . Robert Kennedy's brother was assassinated in 1968 .
 Bobby, as many affectionately called him, may have impacted our country in a more significant manner . But, the passing of Bobby may have affected our country more significant .
 Robert Kennedy was unique in American politics; he reached out to the poor and disenfranchised . Kennedy reached out the very classes of people most politicians of that time ignored . Kennedy's outreach to those most politicians ignored .
 "He came from a place of privilege and money, yet passionately spoke for the victimized and the oppressed," he said . He came from the place where he came from, "yet passionately spoke"
 Robert Kennedy embodied an attitude and idealism that is rare for any generation . Robert Kennedy's idealism was rare for anyone in any generation to come up with it .
 By leading with an inspiring call to action he asked the American people to support racial and educational equality, to accept environmental responsibility and to negotiate for peace in a war ravaged world .
 RFK asked Americans to believe that as individuals they could make a difference in the world . RFK understood that America's real greatness came from empowering citizens through equal opportunities to secure a better life .
 June 5, 2008 marks the 40th anniversary of Sen. Bob Moran's death . Sen. Moran's office is located in Washington, D.C.
 He had just won the California Democratic primary, giving him a strong chance to win the party's presidential nomination . His brother John F Kennedy was assassinated less than five years before .
 The assassination of Bobby Kennedy plunged the U.S. into deep trauma . Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Tet offensive came in the wake of the devastating Tet offensive against U.S. and South Vietnamese troops in Vietnam . It showed the United States was not winning the war and forced then-president Lyndon Johnson, also a Democrat, to concede that he was too weak to seek the White
 It followed by two months the April 4 assassination of civil rights leader Martin Luther King in Memphis, Tennessee, which sparked riots across the country .
 Johnson's decision to bow out from the race opened the door to Kennedy to jump in the battle against liberal anti-war hero, senator Eugene McCarthy, and conservative vice president Hubert Humphrey .
 The primary in California was key . Kennedy came out of it with a big advance, putting him ahead of McCarthy and with the possibility of catching up with Humphrey .
 Sirhan Sirhan pulled out a pistol and at close range shot Bobby several times, including once in the head . As he entered the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel to thank supporters he pulled out the pistol and shot Bobby .
 Kennedy died the next day, leaving behind wife Ethel, 10 children and an 11th soon to be born . The nation was shocked at yet another Kennedy tragedy .
 The photograph of a young assistant chef, holding up the candidate's bloodied head as he lay on the floor, was seen around the world . The photograph was taken by the assistant chef who held up his head .
 Boris Yaro, then working for the Los Angeles Times, recalled in 1998 that he went not on assignment but as a fan to take pictures . Yaro: "I'm not going to work for the paper, I'm just taking pictures. I'm going to take photos of the
 As his victory became apparent, suddenly ""there were a couple of explosions that seemed to light up the entire room,"" Yaro recalled .
 In the struggle to subdue Sirhan, Yaro himself grabbed at the gun before someone else took it away .
 The desire for another ""Camelot"" has filled supporters of Illinois Senator Barack Obama . Obama has been likened to the Kennedy brothers by some from the Massachusetts clan .
 In January both John F Kennedy's brother Senator Edward Kennedy and the slain president's daughter Caroline suggested Obama was his spiritual heir .
 Hillary Clinton in May made reference to their close-quarters battle and the fact that the 1968 race changed radically when Bobby Kennedy was assassinated . But also in what came to be seen as an ugly comparison, Obama's now-vanquished rival Hillary Clinton made reference .
 The reference provoked outrage that Clinton was suggesting something nefarious, and she quickly apologized . Clinton quickly apologized for the reference .
 Sirhan, a Christian-born Palestinian, was given a life sentence in a California prison, where he remains today . Sirhan first said he killed Kennedy over his support for Israel, but his sanity was later questioned .
 The RFK Assassination Audio Test is a sound recording of Robert F Kennedy's assassination, lost to the world for 39 years, is found and examined . Discovery Channel Program now online .
 Hear the actual sounds of the Bobby Kennedy shooting as DISCOVERY TIMES CHANNEL broadcasts this important, previously-unknown recording for the first time . Listen to the original recording of the shooting at Kennedy's home in 1963 .
 New book by David Talbot: ""Brothers"" begins on the shattering afternoon of November 22, 1963, as a grief-stricken Robert Kennedy demands answers about the assassination of his brother .
 Bobby's suspicions immediately focus on the nest of CIA spies, gangsters, and Cuban exiles that had long been plotting a violent regime change in Cuba . Bobby's suspicion is that the CIA spies and gangsters were plotting to overthrow the Cuban government .
 RFK intuitively had the right answer, its just taken 40 plus years to find and document what he knew in his gut on that Friday afternoon . RFK knew he had the answer, but it took 40 years to get it right .
 Sadly, black Americans who fought against racial inequality were often victims of violence . Sadly, they often faced racial inequality often faced violence .
 As Attorney General, Robert Kennedy actively enforced civil right laws . Robert Kennedy was Attorney General of the late 1960s . Kennedy fought for civil rights .
 RFK compared the domestic struggle for civil rights to the Free World's fight against communism . RFK: In that speech, RFK said that the fight against the Soviet Union was similar to that of the U.S.
 "We must recognize the full human equality of all our people before God, before the law, and in the councils of government," says President Obama . Obama: We must recognize full equality before God before God and before law .
 We must do this not because it is economically advantageous although it is; not because the laws of God and man command it although they do command it . Not because people in other lands wish it so. Not because it's economically advantageous, but because of the laws and man . We must
 President Kennedy acted as a meeting facilitator and as an unquestioned confidante to President Kennedy . He acted as the president's confidante and was a key member of the Kennedy administration .
 President could not be present at all the EX-COMM meetings, he assigned Robert Kennedy the task of facilitating the discussions . Robert Kennedy was assigned to facilitate the meetings .
 Bobby Kennedy proved an excellent leader by guiding the discussions and asking complex questions . As such, Bobby Kennedy was a good leader . Bobby Kennedy's legacy will be remembered for his role in the Kennedy administration .
 Robert Kennedy quickly exhibited his ability to analyze the situation and recognize how decisions would impact the future of the world . Robert Kennedy's second major contribution was his secret contact with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 RFK was able to convey President Kennedy's position and generate a secret deal . RFK: "RFK's position was that of President Kennedy and President Kennedy" RFK's secret deal was made public .
 In Khrushchev's memoirs there is a section devoted to the crisis and Robert Kennedy's communications with Ambassador Dobrynin . The crisis was the height of the Cold War in the 1960s .
 In 1968, Robert Kennedy seemed likely to follow his brother, John, into the White House . Robert Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 Shane O'Sullivan says he has evidence implicating three CIA agents in the murder . The Guardian.com says it is an open-and-shut case .
 On June 5 1968, Robert Kennedy wins the California Democratic primary and is set to challenge Richard Nixon for the White House . Kennedy won the Democratic primary in California .
 Sirhan Sirhan, 24, steps down from tray-stacker with a ""sick, villainous smile"" on his face and starts firing at Kennedy with an eight-shot revolver .
 As Kennedy lies dying on the pantry floor, Sirhan is arrested as the lone assassin . Sirhan was arrested after the assassination .
 He carries the motive in his shirt-pocket and notebooks at his house seem to incriminate him, police say . The motive in the case is not known, but he carries a notebook with him .
 Autopsy report suggests Sirhan Sirhan could not have fired the shots that killed Kennedy . Sirhan's autopsy report suggests he did not fire the shots . Kennedy was killed by a single bullet shot to the head .
 Witnesses place Sirhan's gun several feet in front of Kennedy, but the fatal bullet is fired from one inch behind . Witnesses say Sirhan fired the gun from several feet away from Kennedy .
 More bullet holes are found in the pantry than Sirhan's gun can hold, suggesting a second gunman is involved . More bullet-holes found in pantry suggest second gunman was involved in shooting .
 Sirhan's notebooks show a bizarre series of ""automatic writing"" ""RFK must die RFK must be killed" and even under hypnosis, he has never been able to remember shooting Kennedy .
 He recalls ""being led into a dark place by a girl who wanted coffee"", then being choked by an angry mob . He recalls how he was taken hostage by a group of angry mob members .
 Defence psychiatrists conclude he was in a trance at the time of the shooting . Leading psychiatrists suggest he may have been a hypnotically programmed assassin .
 New video and photographic evidence suggests that three senior CIA operatives were behind the killing . CIA operatives are believed to have been involved in the killing, the author says .
 I did not buy the official ending that Sirhan acted alone, and started dipping into the nether-world of ""assassination research" Sirhan crossed paths with David Sanchez Morales, a fearsome Yaqui Indian, crossing paths .
 According to close associate Tom Clines, if you saw Morales walking down the street in a Latin American capital, you knew a coup was about to happen . Clines: If you saw him walking down a street in the street you knew it was going to happen. Clines says Morales
 "From this line grew my odyssey into the spook world of the 60s and the secrets behind the death of Bobby Kennedy," says author . "The truth behind Bobby Kennedy's death is that he was murdered in the early '60s."
 The man the Cubans called El Gordo The Fat One was assassinated in 1959 . He was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 in Moscow, Russia, in 1968 .
 Fifteen minutes in, there he was, standing at the back of the ballroom, in the moments between the end of Kennedy's speech and the shooting . He was standing in the moment of the shooting, standing 15 minutes in .
 Thirty minutes later, there he was again, casually floating around the darkened ballroom while an associate with a pencil moustache took notes .
 The source of early research on Morales was Bradley Ayers, a retired U.S. army captain . Ayers was seconded to JM-Wave, the CIA's Miami base in 1963, to work closely with chief of operations Morales on training Cuban exiles to run sabotage raids on
 Stills of Morales and another guy I found suspicious a man who is pictured entering the ballroom from the direction of the pantry moments after the shooting, clutching a small container to his body . Ayers tracked Ayers down to a small town in Wisconsin and emailed him stills of
 Gordon Campbell worked with Morales at JM-Wave in 1963 and was Ayers' case officer shortly before JFK assassination . He was 95% sure that first figure was Morales and equally sure that the other man was Campbell, who worked alongside Morales .
 I put my script aside and flew to the U.S. to interview key witnesses for a documentary on the unfolding story . I put his script aside to interview witnesses in the United States to interview .
 In person, Ayers positively identified Morales and Campbell and introduced them to David Rabern, a freelance operative . Rabern was part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force in 1961 and was at the Ambassador hotel that night .
 He did not know Morales and Campbell by name but saw them talking to each other out in the lobby before the shooting . He assumed they were Kennedy's security people and assumed they would be his security people .
 Robert Kennedy saw Campbell around police stations three or four times in the year before he was shot . Robert Kennedy was shot in 1968 . He says he saw Campbell at police stations before the shooting .
 Morales was stationed in Laos in 1968 . The CIA had no domestic jurisdiction . Morales was in charge of the CIA in Laos .
 With no secret service protection for presidential candidates in those days, Kennedy was guarded by unarmed Olympic decathlete champion Rafer Johnson and football tackler Rosey Grier .
 Trawling through microfilm of the police investigation, I found further photographs of Campbell with a third figure, standing centre-stage in the Ambassador hotel hours before the shooting . The photographs show Campbell with the third figure in the hotel .
 He looked Greek, and I suspected he might be George Joannides, chief of psychological warfare operations at JM-Wave . He looked at him as he spoke to him, and he looked like he was a Greek .
 Joannides was called out of retirement in 1978 to act as the CIA liaison to the House Select Committee on Assassinations investigating the death of John F Kennedy . He was called to testify before the committee .
 He is 99% sure it is Joannides, says the Greek author . He says he is '99% sure' it is his .
 Wayne Smith, a state department official for 25 years, knew Morales well at the U.S. embassy in Havana in 1959-60 . Smith is Morales' former State Department official . Smith: Morales' relationship with the United States Embassy in Havana was a "miracle"
 He remembers Morales at a cocktail party in Buenos Aires in 1975, saying Kennedy got what he was coming to him . He says Kennedy got the most of what he deserved .
 Morales is the last person you would want to protect Bobby Kennedy, he says . Morales says he's not sure if Morales would be the person to protect Kennedy . Morales: "I'm not sure what I would do if I were to protect him"
 He hated the Kennedys, blaming their lack of air support for the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . He also hated the Kennedy administration for not supporting the failed invasion .
 He does not want to go on camera and brings a friend, which is a little unnerving . He brings his friend with him to the camera .
 To me, the guy in the video does walk with a slouch and his tie is down, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "To me, I do not believe the video is a hoax," he says .
 Clines says he knew Joannides and Campbell and it's not them either . Clines fondly remembers Ayers bringing snakes into JM-Wave to scare the secretaries . He seems disturbed at Smith's identification of Morales .
 He does not discourage our investigation and suggests others who might be able to help . He suggests others in the area who might have helped .
 A seasoned journalist cautions that he would expect Clines ""to blow smoke"", and yet it seems his honest opinion . Clines has been accused of blowing smoke .
 As we leave Los Angeles, I tell the immigration officer that I am doing a story on Bobby Kennedy . "As we leave L.A. I'm going to do a story about Bobby Kennedy," she tells the officer .
 She has seen the ads for the new Emilio Estevez movie about the assassination, Bobby . She has also seen the advertisements for the movie about Bobby Bobby .
 CIA and Los Angeles Police Department need to explain what they were doing there . CIA and L.A. police need to answer questions about what they did there .
 Lopez believes the CIA should call in and interview everybody who knew them, disclose whether they were on a CIA operation and, if not, why they were there that night . Lopez: The CIA should interview everyone who knew the victims .
 Sirhan the accused and legally convicted killer of Robert Kennedy filed legal documents in Federal Court in Los Angeles this week . If dark forces were behind his elimination, it needs to be investigated . Sirhan Sirhan is accused of killing Robert Kennedy .
 His attorney, William F Pepper, alleges that his client had been subjected to hypnosis and mind control and had been ‘handled’ at the murder scene by an unidentified woman .
 Pepper’s filing include significant references to witness statements and forensic reports that were systematically suppressed during the investigation . Pepper's filing includes references to evidence that the investigation was systematically suppressed .
 Pepper alleges that Sirhan Sirhan is innocent and that Kennedy was murdered as part of a conspiracy in which his client was involved as a “patsy”
 Sirhan was taken to the Ambassador Hotel by handlers . This is what was learned about Sirhan being taken there by the team .
 Witnesses say he was given a tap on his shoulder by a woman who ran from the building taking credit for the murder . The woman, for some reason forgotten by the investigation, was given the man's name .
 Sirhan reported that he found himself at a pistol range, holding a gun he had never seen before . Sirhan: "I found myself at a gun range, with a gun I never saw before"
 Interviews revealed that Sirhan had a deep sexual obsession with the woman . Sirhan was obsessed with her and had a sexual obsession .
 In fact, interviews tend to establish that Sirhan himself didn’t know how he came to know her or the basis for his strong feelings . Sirhan: “I’m not sure how I feel about her or why I feel so strongly about her .
 Sirhan also has no conscious knowledge of visiting the pistol range that his reported “hypnotic delusion” placed him at during the Kennedy shooting . Sirhan has no memory of shooting at the range where he was found .
 John Hinckley Jr., shot President Ronald Reagan outside the Washington Hilton Hotel . Hinckleys Jr. shot President Reagan in the head outside the Hilton Hotel in Washington, D.C. John Hincksley Jr. Jr.
 Hinckley’s “sexual obsession” with actress Jody Foster was reported to be the reason for his death . The reported reason was Hinckleys’ "sexual obsession" with Foster .
 The Sirhan Sirhan “sexual obsession” aspect of the Kennedy assassination was known to authorities and members of the press . No connection was ever made between Sirhan and the assassination .
 Hinckley, a Mormon, belonged to a family closely aligned with the Bush family . He was married to President Bush, who died in 2003 .
 Bush, a former CIA Director, had been named by the Warren Report as a person of interest . The Warren Report said there was no other ‘George Bush of Texas’ that moved in CIA and political circles .
 Reports from close associations of President Reagan tell of his total distrust of Bush and deep resentment at having Bush on the ticket with him . Reagan now distrusts Bush and has deep resentment of having Bush with him.
 Insiders report that Bush was ‘frozen out’ of all White House and national security functions . Insiders say he was “frozen’ out of the White House’s national security function . Bush was not allowed to participate in any White House or national
 Stories to the contrary, including those stating that Reagan showed an onset of Alzheimer’s as early as 1983 are said to be wildly inaccurate .
 The 1968 murder of Martin Luther King, under close examination, seems equally spurious with reexaminations of the case and mock trials favoring the direct involvement of police and intelligence agencies in the killing .
 When you add the 1963 assassination of John F Kennedy into the mix, something emerges that is far more than a simple pattern . The 1963 assassination was the first time the Kennedy family had been involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 James Earl Ray, John Hinckley Jr., Sirhan Sirhan and Lee Harvey Oswald are more than just ‘unlikely’ killers . They are not just 'unlikely' killers. They are more likely to kill more people than just those of us .
 He had just won the California primary and was at a party function at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles when he died .
 Sirhan Sirhan was wrestled to the ground by footballer Rosy Grier . The incident took place in the middle of the first half of the game .
 Sirhan, if we can call him by one name only, was not the shooter, this has been long established and easily proven even without heading into the area of conspiracy . Sirhan was not shot in the head, this is easily proven, even without going into the .
 Police had an ‘all points bulletin’ out for suspects, there were descriptions and witness statements, it was in the newspapers . Then, for some strange reason, as though the hand of G-d reached out, reality was erased . Reality was erased and the manhunt was
 Forensic evidence showed Kennedy was shot from behind and Sirhan Sirhan could not have been the shooter . Kennedy was killed by a single bullet fired from the head, according to the FBI .
 Nothing attributed to the defense claim departs from the strict definition of “hypnosis,” though the CIA had spent millions on programs that strayed into that region . The CIA spent millions of dollars in mind control programs .
 The CIA became obsessed with mind control after prisoners of war held by the Chinese, Russians and North Koreans returned showing symptoms of something far beyond simple indoctrination . The CIA was obsessed with the idea of mind control .
 There are several issues that may tie the 3 shootings together . Reagan Security Caught from behind . Reagan security Caught From Behind .
 Reports from many directions indicate that all three men shared one powerful and very “third rail” belief . Despite conspiracy theories, reports from many sources indicate that .
 All wished to see an end to the privately owned banking system that they believed was pushing America into financial insolvency . They believed that the system was pushing the country into financial inspirancy .
 Reagan and the Kennedy’s had sought economic counsel regarding the dismemberment of the Federal Reserve System . All three sought economic advice regarding the dismembered system .
 The Federal Reserve represents a threat against American sovereignty, the authors say . The authors believe it is an instrument of defacto foreign control of the vital element of American security, control of currency .
 In 1963, Kennedy ordered Treasury Department to prepare to issue non-Federal Reserve currency . Kennedy had ordered Treasury Dept. to prepare for non-Fed. Reserve currency issue .
 Perhaps it may be time to ‘really” reassess Reagan also . This is what we are told, perhaps it may have been time to 'really’ reassess’ Reagan .
 U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy was followed by West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt as he climbs a ladder to a platform giving a view over the concrete wall .
 Seated left to right, are Eunice, Jean, Edward, Patricia, Patricia and Kathleen Kennedy . Seated right to each other, are the Kennedy family members .
 Clark Clifford recalled that Bobby Kennedy seemed at the beginning very much to resent President Johnson . "Bobby Kennedy seemed to resent Johnson," Clifford recalled .
 'The incidents that occurred there simply punctuated Bobby's dislike for the majority leader. The incidents that . occurred simply . punctuated Bobby's dislike of Bobby's disapproval of the majority leader .
 Following John Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, the relationship with the White House deteriorated almost immediately .
 The assassination of King, and the racial conflagration that followed it; the dashed hopes of the Poor People's Campaign; the assassination of Bobby Kennedy and the prospects of a Nixon Presidency all combined to plunge me into a deeper state of depression .
 At first I rantook a flight to Hawaii to put some distance between me and the Kennedy assassination in June . At first, I thought I was going to be able to put distance between us and Kennedy assassination .
 It happened almost exactly two months after Martin Luther King was assassinated . It was the assassination of the civil rights leader in Memphis .
 For anyone who was conscious of events in the world then , the two were linked . For anyone . who was aware of events . then . then, the two . were linked, and for anyone who were conscious of . events in . the world . then , .
 If this was some sort of monstrous calculation, the fear and pain it would be intended to invoke compasses the assassination of a great black leader too . If it was intended to evoke the fear of pain, it would also have been a terrible mistake .
 First-time director Estevez has definitely bitten off more than he can chew here . The film recounts the day of Bobby Kennedy's assassination through the singular & not-so-singular lives of the guests & staff of LA's Ambassador Hotel .
 Bobby Kennedy's assassination on June 6, 1968, shocked Jamaica . Bobby Kennedy was killed by a single bullet shot at the head .
 At the office, everyone from Ivy McGhic to the messenger offered condolences . The office was flooded with condolences .
 Deputy Minister of Health opened a high-powered meeting the day of Kennedy's death with condolences to Americans present .
 As the program expanded, I spent most of my time at the Bureau of Health Education office, which I loved, mostly because of the people . I loved the people I worked for, especially the people in the office .
 He celebrated the fourth of July that year with an uncharacteristic enthusiasm . He celebrated it with a joyous enthusiasm .
 Jackie Kennedy married Aristotle Onassis on October 20, 1968, less than five months after Bobby Kennedy's assassination . Jackie Kennedy was married to Aristotle onassis in 1968 .
 The Greek Orthodox ceremony was held on Onassis's private Aegean island, Skorpios .
 On October 20, 1968, less than five months after Bobby Kennedy's assassination, Jackie Kennedy married Aristotle Onassis . Jackie Kennedy was married to Onassis in 1968 .
 Essays Search our online portal of essays on the assassinations and related topics, hosted here and on sites across the internet .
 The MFF is host to electronic copies of several prominent journals related to the JFK assassination, unlocked for reading and searching . The journals are available for reading, searching and personal use .
 Thousands of online photos from the JFK and RFK assassination investigations and the National Archives . JFK White House photos . RFK and JFK assassination investigations .
 Online video clips related to JFK, MLK, and RFK assassinations . MFF also produces own unique productions . JFK, RFK, JFK assassinations are featured on the MFF .
 The man who assassinated Robert Kennedy says he was manipulated by a seductive girl in a mind control plot . President Kennedy was infamously killed in Dallas in 1963 in Dallas .
 Sirhan Bishara Sirhan shot RFK dead in crowded hotel kitchen in June 1968 . Sirhan made the claims in court documents filed this week . RFK was shot by Sirhan Sirhan in a crowded Los Angeles hotel .
 The papers detail extensive interviews with Sirhan during the past three years, some done while he was under hypnosis . Some of the interviews were done while Sirhan was under hypnotism .
 Sirhan Sirhan claims he was manipulated by a seductive girl in a mind control plot and that it was not his bullets that killed RFK . RFK's murder changed the course of United States history . Sirhan says he is not responsible for the assassination .
 Kennedy was on course to win the Democratic nomination and may well have beaten Richard Nixon to the White House . Kennedy was likely to win in 1968 and may have beaten Nixon .
 Court files point to a mysterious girl in a polka-dot dress as the ‘controller’ who led Sirhan, now 66, to fire a gun in the pantry of the Ambassador Hotel .
 Documents suggest a second person shot and killed Kennedy while using Sirhan as a diversion . Documents suggest second person used Sirhan to shoot Kennedy . Documents also suggest a third person shot Kennedy while Sirhan was a diversion.
 Under hypnosis, he remembered meeting the girl that night and becoming smitten with her . He remembered meeting her again under hypnosis . He said he was smitten by her .
 Sirhan is charged with the assassination of Senator Robert Kennedy . ‘I was fascinated with her looks. She was beautiful,’ he said. Sirhan said. ‘She was beautiful. I was fascinated by her looks .
 Sirhan said on a cue from the girl he went into ‘range mode’ believing he was at a firing range and seeing circles with targets in front of his eyes . Sirhan: 'Range mode' was 'range mode' and he saw circles of targets in his eyes
 He interviewed Sirhan for 60 hours with and without hypnosis, according to the legal brief . The legal brief says the interview was conducted with and with hypnosis .
 Sirhan maintained in the hypnotic interviews that the mystery girl touched him or pinched him on the shoulder just before he fired then spun him around to see people coming through the pantry door . Sirhan maintains in the . interviews that he shot the woman .
 The story of the girl has been a lingering theme in accounts of the events just after midnight on June 5, 1968 . Kennedy was gunned down in the pantry after claiming victory in the California Democratic presidential primary .
 She was never identified, and amid the chaos of the scene, descriptions of her were conflicting . The woman was found dead at the scene .
 Sirhan has claimed no memory of shooting Kennedy and said in the recent interviews that his presence at the hotel was an accident, not a planned destination . Through the years, Sirhan said he has no memory .
 Sirhan remembered seeing the flash of a second gun at the time of the assassination, Brown said . Brown said Sirhan was under hypnotic free recall under the condition of hypnotic memory . Sirhan said he saw a flash of the second gun .
 Lawyer says Sirhan was a victim of a mind control project such as those used by the CIA in the 1960s . Sirhan's lawyer says he is convinced that he was victim of mind control .
 He is seeking an evidentiary hearing to exonerate Sirhan Sirhan in Kennedy's killing . Sirhan is accused of killing Kennedy in 2012 . He has been charged with Kennedy's murder .
 A large portion of the new documents seek to prove the bullets that hit Kennedy came from a different direction than the spot where Sirhan Sirhan was standing . The new documents show that the bullets hit Kennedy were fired from different directions .
 Sirhan Sirhan was denied parole in March by a panel that said he had not shown sufficient remorse for the killing . Sirhan has been sentenced to life in prison without parole since his conviction .
 Sirhan Sirhan claims not to remember killing Robert Kennedy . Lawyer claims he was 'brainwashed' and memory erased . Sirhan says he was ‘hypno-programmed’ into carrying out the attack .
 Sirhan Bishara Sirhan shot RFK dead in a crowded hotel kitchen in Los Angeles in June 1968 . The claim is at the centre of the latest appeal by Sirhan Sirhan . RFK was shot in the heart of a crowded Los Angeles hotel kitchen .
 Sirhan Sirhan will begin his bid for freedom in California on Wednesday . His lawyer is expected to argue that he was a 'Manchurian Candidate', brainwashed into assassinating RFK .
 Sirhan Sirhan was convicted of shooting Robert Kennedy in the crowded kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . Sirhan shot Kennedy in a crowded kitchen at the Ambassador hotel in the 1960s . He was sentenced to life in prison for the shooting .
 Kennedy was there after claiming victory in the California presidential primary . Kennedy was in California to celebrate his victory .
 Proponents of the second gun man theory contend that 13 shots were fired at RFK while Sirhan's gun held only eight bullets . Proponents say the fatal shot appeared to come from behind Kennedy while he faced him .
 Mr Pepper also suggests Sirhan was 'hypno-programmed,' turning him into a virtual 'Manchurian Candidate,' acting robot-like .
 The claims are however not expected to have any bearing on the outcome of the parole hearing .
 The board is not being asked to retry the case and lawyers are not allowed to present evidence relating to guilt or innocence . The board will not be asked to .
 Sirhan, 66, remains a threat to others or to himself, whether he has accepted responsibility for the crime and expressed adequate remorse . At issue is whether he is still a threat or to others . Sirhan has been sentenced to life in prison .
 Robert Kennedy's lack of memory makes expressions of remorse and accepting responsibility difficult . Robert Kennedy has no memory of being shot at Kennedy .
 It is not known whether Sirhan will address the hearing at Pleasant Valley men's prison in Coalinga . Sirhan was sentenced to life in prison in February .
 He has rarely commented during 13 past parole hearings . Some instances has not shown up at all during those hearings .
 If Sirhan is released, he would be the first imprisoned political assassin to win parole in the United States . Sirhan said he committed the crime 'with 20 years of malice aforethought'
 Mr Pepper notes has a personal tie to Kennedy, having been chairman of his citizens' committee when he ran for Senate in 1964 .
 Pepper also represented Martin Luther King's assassin, James Earl Ray, through 10 years of appeals and a civil trial . Pepper said Ray was not King's killer . Pepper represented King in civil trial which he said proved he was not the killer .
 David Dahle, head Los Angeles deputy district attorney for parole candidates serving life sentences, said his remarks at the hearing will depend on what is presented by the defence .
 Few high profile prisoners have been released in the California system . California's prison system has a reputation for releasing prisoners .
 Charles Manson and his followers have been repeatedly turned down for parole . Charles Manson's followers have repeatedly been refused parole . Manson was convicted of murdering his followers in the Manson family .
 Manson follower Susan Atkins attended her final parole hearing on a gurney dying of cancer but was denied release and died in prison three weeks ago . Atkins attended the last parole hearing in prison on her final day in prison . Atkins was denied parole and died last month .
 Robert F Kennedy with brother, Senator Edward M Kennedy are shown during the St. Valentine's Day memorial service . Senator Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Edward Kennedy and Robert Kennedy sit together during a session of the Senate Labor Subcommittee in Washington . Robert Kennedy and Edward Kennedy were both senators from Massachusetts and New York .
 Edward Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 . He was the son of President John F Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy . He died in 1968 .
 Robert F Kennedy was Counsel for the Senate Racket Committee . He was counseled by his brothers Edward Kennedy, Edward Kennedy and Sen. Robert Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy during a committee hearing in Washington, D.C., in 1959 . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Joseph Kennedy, then United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom, with his family at the Embassy residence in London in 1938 . Joseph Kennedy was the U.S. ambassador to the UK .
 Joseph P Kennedy Sr., Edward, Edward, Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy, Jr., Patricia, Patricia, Robert, Kathleen Kennedy . Eunice, John, Rosemary, Jean, Jean and Edward Kennedy were Kennedy's first wives .
 This is the history that the U.S. school system does not teach, that of Manifest Destiny . The Philippine Revolution Against Spain and the Philippine-American War are the Philippines' first two wars .
 From morning till noon he repelled charge after charge he tenaciously held on with a handful of men through the heat and agony of battle, till he himself fell dead among his slain soldiers .