 Kennedy and cuban missile crisis 2011 . Kennedy and Cuban missile crisis. Kennedy and Cubans .
 The Cuban Missile crisis as the standoff came to be called was the most dramatic Kennedy faced . The tension would reach a boiling point in the fall of 1962 .
 First test of Kennedy’s nuclear policy came just 90 miles off the cost of Florida . Crisis over Cuba came 90 miles away from Florida . First test was in Cuba .
 Eisenhower cut off relations with Cuba because a revolutionary leader – Fidel Castro – had declared himself a communist and welcomed aid from the Soviet Union . Eisenhower cut ties with Cuba days before he took office .
 Kennedy had criticized Eisenhower for not being concerned enough about the Soviet threat . Kennedy said the Soviets are winning the race for allies in the third world .
 Kennedy blasted Republicans for letting communism reach America’s doorstep in Cuba . Kennedy took an especially hard line so Democrats would not be seen as soft on communism .
 Kennedy Seeks Greater Containment . Eisenhower relied on massive retaliation to deter soviet aggression . Instead Kennedy developed the Flexible Response Policy .
 The United States was suspicious of Castro’s intentions but nevertheless recognized the new government . Many Americans viewed Castro as a freedom fighter . Castro's government took control of three oil refineries owned by U.S. and British firms .
 The Cuban Dilemma: Castro broke up commercial farms into communes that would be worked by formerly landless peasants . American sugar companies which controlled 75% of the crop land in Cuba appealed to the U.S. government for help .
 The Cuban Dilemma: Castro relied increasingly on Soviet aid . Many Cubans felt betrayed, they saw him as one dictator who replaced another . 10% of the Cuban population went into exile in the United States where a counter movement began .
 Eisenhower gave the CIA permission to secretly train hundreds of Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba . The U.S. hoped this would trigger a mass uprising against Castro that would overthrow him .
 1400 Cuban exiles landed on the Bay of Pigs island on April 17, 1961, but nothing went as planned . An air strike carried out two days before had failed to knock out the Cuban air force .
 A small advance group sent to distract Castro never reached shore . When it finally landed they faced 20,000 Cuban troops, backed up by Soviet tanks and aircraft .
 Castro turned the Bay of Pigs into a public relations triumph with the media saying, “The North American mercenaries look like fools to our friends, rascals to our enemies and incompetent to the rest”
 He negotiated a deal with Castro for the surviving commandos . He ultimately paid a ransom of $53 million in food and medical supplies . 17.
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba to stop the Soviets from delivering the missiles . The United States braced for war as the Soviet ships headed towards the blockade .
 The Solution: Soviet missiles were promptly removed from Cuba; in return Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba . The US also made a secret promise to remove missiles from Cuba .
 Sultan Limon Nov. 2013 Accounts &amp; Admin Officer at Tribune Arichitects Ltd. Ltd.