 Operation 'Anadyr' would have established a significant Soviet military base in Cuba, with intermediate-range and medium-range ballistic missiles, nuclear-armed diesel submarines, bombers and over 50,000 Soviet troops .
 The U.S. discovered Soviet plans before the operation could be completed . After a dangerous test of wills, Moscow had to retreat .
 The Komityet Gosudarstvennoii Bezopasnosti and the Soviet Army's Glavnoe Rasvedyvatel'noe Upravlenie failed to provide sufficient warning of President Kennedy's intentions toward Cuba in the months preceding October 1962
 When scapegoating began in Moscow following the missile crisis, the intelligence services received a good portion of the blame . Russia's intelligence services have been blamed for the crisis .
 The KGB escaped this investigation but its chief representative in Washington, Aleksandr Feklisov, would soon be removed . He would be removed from his post in Washington .
 At the height of the Cold War, there was misunderstanding in the West about the role of the secret services, especially the KGB, in policymaking .
 There is no denying that the KGB permeated the lives of Soviet citizens . Even after Khrushchev's secret speech of 1956, Soviet citizens had reason to fear the organization .
 As a factor in Soviet foreignpolicymaking the KGB was far less pervasive, and ultimately less influential . The KGB was much less influential in foreign policy, but as a factor, it was less pervasive .
 Testimonies from Soviet defectors, especially from those who had served in the intelligence services, often confirm these assessments . The Soviet defector's testimony was often corroborated by defectors .
 Anatoly Golitsyn overestimated the importance of the organization that was trying to find him in his exile . He feared retribution after his defection to the United States in 1961 . The Russian defector feared retribution .
 KGB and Presidium documents can be punctured by KGB documents . But with the benefit of KGB documents, this myth can be broken .
 In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the KGB under Vladimir Semichastny was a secondary factor . In the very least, at the very . least of the . case, he says . The KGB was a primary factor .
 The Soviet intelligence community performed an essential service in informing the Kremlin about the U.S. and Cuba in 1962 . Although not the pivotal player one might have assumed it to be, the intelligence community nevertheless performed an important service .
 The activities of Soviet intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis reveal much about the state of Soviet information gathering at the time of the crisis .
 Vladimir Semichastny was appointed Chairman of the KGB by Nikita Khrushchev in 1961 . He knew almost nothing about intelligence gathering and was inclined to refuse the position . The KGB is now the world's largest intelligence agency .
 Khrushchev expected Semichastny to be his political representative in the organization, he said . He said he expected him to be the political representative of the organization . Khrushchchev naturally prevailed but added, in a revealing aside, that he expected his representative .
 He wanted a tough manager who was loyal to him, not a professional intelligence officer . He wanted to be a tough boss, not an intelligence officer, he said . He said: 'He wanted a hard-working, loyal, loyal manager'
 The job at the KGB was open because Khrushchev had promoted the loyal and respected Aleksandr Shelepin to the Presidium . The job is open because of the promotion of Aleksandra Shelepins to the KGB .
 Semichastny was Shelepin's protege, having already preceded him on every rung of the bureaucratic ladder before this new promotion . Semichstny was already Shelepins' protege .
 Despite this fine pedigree, Semichastny never matched the power of his patron . Semichstny was never able to match his patron's influence .
 Semichastny enjoyed far less influence as Russia's spymaster than his nominal equivalent in the United States, the Director of Central Intelligence in the U.S.
 In the Cuban missile crisis the Chairman of the KGB would neither be invited to a Presidium meeting nor have a single face-to-face meeting with Khrushchev . In the 1960s, the KGB chairman was his own intelligence analyst .
 Before an intelligence report landed on Khrushchev's desk it had to survive a series of 66 intelligence challenges . The report had to be passed on by a committee .
 Every field report went first to the cable section of the First Chief Directorate, the foreign intelligence component of the KGB, where it would be paraphrased and removed .
 If considered of sufficient interest it was sent to the chief of the First Chief Directorate, Aleksandr Sakharovsky, who would decide whether to forward it to the secretariat of the Chairman of the KGB, Vladimir Semichastny .
 Semichastny himself decided whether to pass the report to the Presidium . Semichastsny himself decides whether the report will be passed to the presidium .
 On rare occasions a report with policy implications went to Khrushchev alone . The report had policy implications on policy implications, but it did not have policy implications .
 No section of the Directorate wrote intelligence estimates, and what the Russians describe as 'analyses' were more like exercises in information management than statements of what the official mind believed .
 The KGB typically furnished these 'analyses' at the request of the Foreign Ministry, the International Department of the Central Committee, or the Presidium . The KGB would then provide them to the foreign ministry, the international department of the central committee, or Presidium.
 The 16th department of the FCD, which prepared them, was the dumping ground for officers whose cover had been blown overseas or who were otherwise considered undesirable for operational duty .
 In the early 1960s, the analyses bore the signature of the chief of the service, Feodor Mortin, or Aleksandr Sakharovsky . The analyses were often signed by the chiefs of the FCD or chief of Russia's foreign ministry .
 These reports lack any overarching argument . Largely compilations of information collected on a topic, these reports lack an overarching argument.
 The paragraphs are disjointed and often contradict whatever argument there is in the report's final sentences . The paragraphs often contradict each other's arguments, the report says .
 Professional prudence was the principal reason for the inadequacy of Soviet intelligence analysis, says author . "Professional prudence" was the main reason, he says .
 KGB analytical work also suffered from a limiting institutional ethos . The KGB's analytical work suffered from the constraints of Soviet life, KGB's work .
 The FCD specialized in collecting secret intelligence and resisted reporting information to the Kremlin that came from open sources . Having modeled itself on the British foreign intelligence service, MI6, the FCD was modeled on MI6's MI6 .
 When there was no secret material available at all on a topic of interest to the leadership, the KGB would provide a press summary . Occasionally, when there were no SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 67 secret material there would be a press release .
 KGB analyses did not reflect a synergy of enlightened press comment and secret intelligence . As a result of this grudging use of journalism, KGB analyses were not reflected in this synergy .
 The details of the reporting tree of Soviet military intelligence, the GRU, in the period of the Cuban missile crisis are less certain . The GRU's reporting tree is less certain, but it is likely to reveal more .
 GRU chief Ivan Serov reported either to Defense Minister Malinovsky or to his first deputy and Chief of the General Staff, Marshal Matvei Zakharovsky . Serov's GRU reported to the Soviet Defense Minister or to the first deputy .
 Malinovsky had a direct line to Khrushchev . GRU information enjoyed the same level of support in the inner circle as did that of the KGB because of Aleksandr Shelepin's position .
 GRU officials enjoyed the typical and transparent covers of military attaches . GRU official: "GRU officials enjoy the typical" cover-up of GRU .
 Originally described by US intelligence as 'reclusive' Feklisov and his assistants developed extensive contacts with the Russian government . Originally described as secretive, they developed contacts with US intelligence .
 Feklisov had little success in penetrating the chief power centers in Washington, says a study of the intelligence available to the Presidium during the missile crisis . The Presidium had little intelligence in Washington .
 He relied on semi-official gossip and speculation that circulated around the U.S. and foreign press .
 Feklisov developed a number of useful journalistic sources with the assistance of Anatoli Gorsky . Gorsky was a TASS correspondent who was a member of the National Press Club . Gorski was a journalist for TASS .
 One network in Washington included foreign correspondents from some European newspapers . One network included, for example, foreign journalists .
 Good material, sometimes even excellent reports, came from Washington's foreign diplomatic community . Good material was sometimes excellent .
 The Soviets had a much harder time penetrating the US government itself . But the U.S. government itself had a bigger problem than the Soviets .
 There were two agents with regular State Department contacts, and some information from the State Department's German and Venezuelan experts, possibly through these men, flowed to Soviet intelligence . Some of the information flowed to the Soviet intelligence.
 Information came from a source friendly with a CIA officer . Sometimes information came from sources friendly with CIA officers .
 The KGB filtered the information from these sources through an interesting interpretive prism . The information was filtered through the KGB's "interpretive prism"
 The KGB's assessments of the American policy system were straightforward, simplistic, but essentially not ideological . The KGB assessments of American policy were straightforward and simplistic . It was not ideological.
 KGB reported on two tendencies in Washington the hawkish 'position of strength' lobby and an amorphous 'liberal' side . President Kennedy did or did not belong to the more militaristic of the two .
 Soviet intelligence could not boast of any major sources of American political intelligence in this period that had the dazzle of the Burgess-Blunt Cambridge Ring . But it did play a role in shaping, or at least confirming, the understanding of John F Kennedy .
 Before the 1960 election, the Kremlin received little from its principal sources of foreign political information, the KGB and the Soviet foreign ministry, that was not readily available in the United States press .
 Kennedy seemed to Moscow to be interested only in minor palliatives arms control, for example, instead of disarmament . Kennedy seemed not to reject out of hand the possibility of reversing the tide of Socialism in Eastern Europe and China .
 The Embassy warned that because Kennedy believed in a strategic missile gap between the superpowers, he was unlikely to engage in any meaningful negotiations before he had restored the United States' 'position of strength'
 The possibility of old Joe having some nefarious influence over his son was left implied . Although not explicit, it was implied that old Joe had influence .
 Initially the KGB was a little more hopeful for better superpower SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 69 relations if Kennedy were elected . The KGB was more hopeful of better superpower relations if he was elected .
 Adlai Stevenson had twice run unsuccessfully for president against Eisenhower . Stevenson was associated with a comparatively less belligerent view of the Soviet Union and a commitment to domestic reform .
 JFK's tough sparring with Richard Nixon over foreign policy caused a slight shift in the KGB's assessment . Kennedy's tough debate with Nixon on foreign policy led to a slight change in the assessment .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco in April 1961 seemed to confirm for Moscow that Kennedy was no hawk . Remarkably, the Bay of Pigeas fiasco in . 1961 seemed . to confirm . for . Moscow that JFK was not a hawk .
 In the days and weeks following the event, the KGB received a stream of intelligence blaming the CIA and other hawkish influences for bullying the President into attacking Cuba .
 If left to his own devices, these reports implied, Kennedy would be less aggressive toward Fidel Castro . The reports implied that Kennedy would have been less aggressive .
 In sum, the American President seemed to be the kind of leader with whom Moscow could work . But his pragmatism combined with his relative youth made him vulnerable to the heirs of the John Foster Dulles approach to superpower relations .
 This understanding of the President would come to influence Nikita Khrushchev's future actions . Extending beyond beyond the KGB, this understanding would come into effect . The understanding of President would influence future actions of the Soviet Union .
 The KGB played a central role in shaping the Kremlin's thinking on Fidel Castro and his regime . In contrast to its limited ability to inform the United States, the KGB helped shape the thinking of the Kremlin .
 Aleksandr Alekseev acted as the principal back channel between Havana and Moscow prior to the Cuban missile crisis . He set up shop in Havana in October 1959, became a confidant of Cuban leader .
 Before the opening of the Havana KGB station in October 1959, Mexico City was the central collecting point for information about the Cuban Revolution and its enemies .
 Members of the Cuban communist party traveled to Mexico City to report on the transformation of Cuban society under Fidel Castro .
 Nikolai Leonov was an important link to the communists in Fidel Castro's entourage . The young KGB officer was assigned to the office at the time of Castro's assassination .
 Alekseev was one of the few area specialists to whom the leadership could turn . In the late 1950s, some in the Kremlin sensed the opportunity for an expansion of Soviet influence in Latin America .
 Alekseev took over the Latin American division of the Council of Ministers' Committee on Cultural Relations . Recalled from the KGB station in Buenos Aires in 1958, Aleksoev was in charge of the committee .
 Alekseev was quick to apply his expertise and knowledge of Latin American personalities to devising propaganda operations . The Russian politician is quick to use his Spanish-speaking expertise to devise propaganda .
 Alekseev suggested to his superiors that he might be sent to Cuba as a Soviet observer . In January 1959, he suggested to superiors he might serve as an observer in Cuba .
 His bosses in the KGB agreed, assigning him a 'special mission' to establish contact with the top levels of the Cuban leadership . But it took over seven months for the Cubans to grant him a visa .
 In 1960 and 1961, the deepening Soviet-Cuban political and military relationship led to extensive liaison in intelligence matters . In 1960s and 1960s, the Soviets and Cubans were in touch with each other .
 Cubans responded positively to Soviet offers of intelligence assistance . A few men were sent from Havana to Soviet intelligence schools in 1960 .
 The Soviets offered to build a signals intelligence service for the Cubans in the summer of 1960 . The Cubans were offered the service by the Soviets .
 Moscow assumed that the United States could read Cuban diplomatic correspondence . The U.S. was able to read diplomatic correspondence from Cuba . The United States has been accused of spying on Cuba .
 Liaison reached an unusual level of intensity following the Bay of Pigs operation . Liaison between the U.S. and the Soviet Union reached an unprecedented level of intense .
 Havana restructured its intelligence community, asking Moscow to staff key positions in Cuban intelligence . Havana also asked Moscow to accelerate the training of a Cuban intelligence cadre . Moscow has also been asked to staff positions in key positions .
 In October 1961, Soviet military intelligence officially came to the island at the request of General Sergio del Valle, the chief of staff of the Cuban army . The Cuban military intelligence was officially established in October 1961 .
 Some of the Soviets' more detailed sources on U.S. policy toward Cuba were in Europe . Soviet intelligence gathered in Europe and Russia .
 In particular Soviet appreciations of Kennedy's policy benefited from excellent sources in the French and Belgian foreign offices . In particular, Kennedy's appreciation of his policy was particularly appreciated .
 The KGB was able to provide the Kremlin with verbatim copies of French diplomatic traffic from Moscow and Washington . The KGB provided the Kremlin a copy of diplomatic traffic .
 Khrushchev was given detailed reports on visits to Paris by influential Americans, such as Dean Rusk and even President Kennedy . He was given copies of cables sent to France by the French Ambassador in the United States .
 Soviet intelligence acquired reports written by Belgian mission in Havana on internal situation in Cuba and Castro's policy of assisting other Latin American revolutionary groups . Soviet intelligence obtained reports from Belgian foreign ministry .
 The Cuban missile crisis was divided into three phases in 1962 . For the purpose of evaluating the performance of Soviet intelligence in 1962, it is useful to divide the crisis into three stages .
 Despite a lack of startling sources, the KGB and GRU exhibited little reluctance in forwarding what in retrospect appears as gossipy or secondrate information to the Kremlin . The KGB and the GRU did not hesitate to forward information to Moscow .
 Khrushchev paid attention to the intelligence community . The intelligence community was tasked to acquire certain kinds of information before the leadership rendered a major policy decision .
 Neither Soviet intelligence, nor any particular product of the intelligence community, sparked Khrushchev's decision to deploy ballistic missiles to Cuba . The missiles were deployed in 1962 .
 Khrushchev made the decision in May 1962 . Decision came at the end of five months of discussion over what new steps should be taken to assist Fidel Castro .
 Kennedy's comments were made in a meeting with Khrushchev's son-in-law Aleksei Adzhubei on 30 January 1962 . The process was set in train when news reached Moscow of some candid comments that President Kennedy had made .
 Adzhubei's report that Kennedy was impatient with the status quo in Cuba shook the Kremlin . It re-opened a debate over Fidel Castro's security that had started at the Cuban leader's instigation in September 1961 .
 Castro requested a qualitative improvement in Soviet military assistance to his regime . A few months after the Bay of Pigs, Castro had requested improved military assistance from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev: 'I consider the invasion which took place in Cuba a mistake' 'We cannot fail to follow the development of events on Cuba. However, however, we cannot fail, following the developments on Cuba,' he said .
 If this had been all that Kennedy had said, then the Kremlin might not have reassessed its support for Cuba in February 1962 .
 Adzhubei: Kennedy bangs his fist on the table during a speech . Kennedy's reaction to the comments provoked him to bang his fist, according to the senator .
 "When they had difficulties in Hungary, they liquidated the conflict in three days," says President Obama . "They liquidated [the] conflict in Hungary] in just three days" says Obama .
 When they did not like things in Finland, the president of that country goes to visit the Soviet premier in Siberia and all is worked out . The president of Finland goes to meet with the Soviet prime minister in Siberia .
 Kennedy's comments moved Khrushchev to endorse the shipment of military supplies that Castro had asked for six months earlier . It provoked the Kremlin to order the KGB to present a new assessment of US intentions in the Caribbean .
 In July 1960, the KGB had written that a US invasion of Cuba was unlikely unless the Cubans invaded the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo or the Soviets themselves attempted to put nuclear missiles on the island .
 In the 18 months that followed, which included the transition from the Eisenhower to the Kennedy administration, it appears the KGB had not been asked to reassess this position . In the next 18 months, the KGB was not asked to .
 Kremlin finally called for a new opinion after the Adzhubei-Kennedy meeting . The Kremlin has been in touch with the Kremlin since the meeting .
 On the basis of available intelligence in March 1962, the KGB could not reach any overarching conclusions about the likelihood of a U.S. invasion .
 For months Cuban security had been reporting an increase in counterrevolutionary activity . For months, Cuban security was reporting a rise in counterterror activity . The U.S. Embassy in Havana reported a decrease in activity .
 Rebel bands had grown in number and were receiving additional supplies of weaponry, food and medicine . Rebel bands were receiving more supplies of weapons, weapons and medicine from the rebels .
 It's not clear that the U.S. is preparing for a second and bigger paramilitary assault . Yet it was not clear whether the United States was preparing for the second and larger assault .
 Interrogations of captured rebels were turning up evidence of a change in CIA instructions . Interrogation of captured rebel rebels turned up evidence that CIA instructions were changed .
 The rebels were now expected to emphasize intelligence gathering and sabotage operations . It is hardly what one would expect on the eve of an attack .
 Cuban services assumed that the U.S. was instead attempting to create a general crisis on the island by paralyzing the economy . Consequently, the Cuban services assume that rather than planning a near-term invasion, the United States was instead planning an invasion .
 Evidence from U.S. allies shed little light on Washington's objectives regarding Cuba in 1962 . Evidence from America's European allies shed no light on the situation .
 Moscow acquired the report of a NATO committee empaneled in September 1961 to investigate Latin America . Moscow acquired report of the report from the NATO committee .
 NATO report outlines European concerns that tension would rise with economic hardship in Latin America . NATO report outlined European concerns about economic hardship .
 NATO experts feared that expansion of the Common Market would harm trade between Europe and Latin American countries . The Soviets noted that NATO experts fear that the expansion of Europe's Common Market will harm trade .
 The KGB had to admit to the Kremlin that it could not produce any intelligence material of any value on Cuba or the Latin American question . But there was no indication that the United States was eager to use force to settle the question in 1962 .
 The best indications in this period on Kennedy's Cuban policy came from Soviet intelligence, French sources . The best European indications of Kennedy's Cuba policy were from Soviet sources .
 The Soviets received reports on the substance of Charles de Gaulle's conversations with President Kennedy about Cuba . The Soviets also received reports from the French president on the matter .
 There was nothing here to help an assessment of Kennedy's feelings toward Cuba in 1962 . Kennedy's views on Cuba were not reflected in 1962's events .
 It seemed that the young man admitted his unhappiness about the failure at the Bay of Pigs . He was looking for European support in isolating Cuba .
 De Gaulle and Kennedy agreed that Europe needed to expand economic and cultural ties with Latin America to remove the sense in those countries that the only obvious choices were U.S. hegemony or communism .
 There was nothing in this basket of information about U.S. designs in 1962 .
 The KGB's spring assessment of Kennedy's immediate plans for Cuba was equivocal because its man in Washington doubted that an American military intervention was on the horizon . The KGB was confident that Kennedy's plans would not be thwarted .
 Aleksandr Feklisov believed that Kennedy would have to be provoked to use military force in Cuba . Aleksandandov believed Kennedy would be provoked by using military force .
 Feklisov had overseen the intelligence assessment in 1960 that Eisenhower was unlikely to invade without a Cuban assault on Guantanamo or the creation of a missile base on the island . The KGB chief was sent to run the KGB's principal station in the United States .
 Two years later, he still believed this, despite 74 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS the change in administration and the experience of the Bay of Pigs .
 In the middle of March 1962, Feklisov reported that Kennedy was unlikely to approve an invasion because a military intervention would undermine the Alliance For Progress, which was Kennedy's preferred weapon to use against Castro .
 Kennedy knew about the serious food shortages in Cuba and had called for measures that would further aggravate the situation . Kennedy called for further measures to prevent further aggravating the situation in Cuba .
 The tone of Feklisov's report suggested that the American President was not overly concerned about Cuba . But the tone of the report suggests that the U.S. is not too concerned .
 Feklisov: U.S. military intervention in Cuba unlikely . Without exception all reported to him in March 1962 that a US military intervention was unlikely . U.N. forces were unlikely to intervene in Cuba, he says .
 Kennedy would not risk a military operation before the November congressional elections because of his concern that the Republicans would use it against him . This source, whose location was not indicated on the summary prepared for the leadership of the KGB, said .
 The source suspected that if the intervention came it would be launched from Central America . The source said the intervention would likely be launched in Central America.
 Neither the KGB nor the GRU could provide any confirmation of Kennedy's warning . Moscow decided to table the question of future military assistance to Castro until mid-April .
 The first was a massive military maneuver launched by the United States armed forces near Cuba . The U.S. armed forces launched the first major military maneuver in Cuba .
 LANTPHIBEX-62 was the largest Atlantic-Caribbean military exercise ever conducted . LANTPE-62 is the largest military exercise in the world ever conducted in the Caribbean .
 It involved 40,000 men aboard 84 ships, who would participate in two amphibious landings . The landing operation took place on June 4, 1944 .
 The second was a political offensive launched by Fidel Castro against some of the most powerful communists in his entourage . Fidel Castro launched the attack on some of his most powerful communist allies .
 The KGB played a role in providing the Kremlin with worrisome reports on the state of Cuban-Soviet relations . The KGB did not supply any significant information on US activities .
 Soviet intelligence was able to report in late March on the devastation of the positions of some of the top communists in Cuba because of the dismissal of Anibal Escalante . Soviet intelligence reported the devastation .
 Kremlin ordered Aleksandr Alekseev back from Cuba in April 1962 . In response to the loss of one of its closest allies in Havana, the Kremlin ordered the intrepid Aleksandr Aleksander Aleksoev back .
 Aleksandr Shelepin, Semichastny's predecessor, participated in the decision to elevate Alekseev to the position of Soviet Ambassador to Cuba in the SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 75 wake of the Escalante affair .
 Khrushchev respected Alekseev's expertise and knew that he was close to Fidel Castro . He knew that Fidel Castro was a close ally of the Soviet Union .
 Alekseev used KGB officer to test his assumptions about what Fidel Castro might accept . The Soviet leader was less interested in his ideas as to what should be done in Cuba than he was in testing his assumptions .
 Khrushchev decided to put ballistic missiles on the island . Alekseev stayed in Moscow during his stay in the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The Kremlin did not use the KGB to collect additional information on Kennedy's tolerance for a Soviet military base in the region . The Kremlin wanted to maintain the strictest secrecy surrounding the plan, it says .
 It was not uncommon for KGB headquarters to send out a general questionnaire to all stations if the Kremlin was suddenly seized with interest in a certain matter .
 In January 1961, KGB residents in all of Latin America received a six-part questionnaire reflecting the new Kennedy administration's policy toward Cuba . The questionnaire reflected the KGB's ignorance of the new administration .
 Aleksandr Feklisov spent much of May 1962 devising a covert operation to increase tensions in Franco-American relations . Nothing like this was sent in April or May 1962 .
 No one in the KGB was asked for a formal assessment of the likely U.S. reaction to the placement of missiles in Cuba . For Western scholars, it is even more startling that no one was asked about the likely reaction .
 Since World War II, the U.S. intelligence community had attempted to provide estimates of the intentions and capabilities of important foreign countries . Since World WWII, the United States intelligence community has attempted to estimate the intentions of important countries .
 Committee-generated estimates often evinced the flaws of committee-generated reports . They often reflected an effort to coordinate and make sense of secret knowledge on a certain policy matter .
 In some cases, these reports sought to clarify the murky world of the subjunctive . In others, they sought to illuminate what might happen .
 'Intelligence estimates' in the Anglo-Saxon intelligence world were foreign to Soviet experience . Called 'intelligence estimates', these reports are foreign to the Soviet experience. Called 'intimate estimates' by British intelligence .
 In Moscow, 'what if questions were reserved for the consideration of the Presidium alone. In Moscow', questions are reserved only for the . Presidium .
 The most startling proof of how far the KGB was from the events that led to the decision to deploy nuclear missiles in the Caribbean . Khrushchev's apparent inattention in May 1962 to the problem of reconciling the need to keep 'Anadyr' secret with evidence of U
 As of the spring of 1962, Soviet intelligence was well aware that Washington was sending U-2s over the island .
 On at least two occasions Feklisov reported to Moscow that U-2s were scouring the skies above Cuba . The U.2s are believed to have been flying over Cuba on two occasions .
 The Soviets took great pains to cover the movement of the missiles from the Ukraine . The Soviets covered up the movements of missiles from Ukraine .
 The planning documents for Operation 'Anadyr' detail the use of physical deception to create the impression that the shipments were intended for Siberia . The documents were used to create an impression that they were intended to be sent to Siberia .
 There appear not to have been any specific measures taken to confuse the cameras of a U-2 flying over the construction sites on the island .
 The role of the GRU in the events preceding the missile decision is harder to determine, experts say . The GRU's role in Russia's decision to launch the missile program is unclear .
 Kremlin records for the decision do not include anything resembling a Soviet military intelligence assessment of US intentions toward Cuba . The Kremlin records do not mention anything resembling anything resembling an assessment .
 Most relevant intelligence reports seem to have reached Moscow in mid-March . The most relevant intelligence has reached Moscow since then, it seems .
 The huge Soviet nuclear test in August 1961 deterred the U.S. from proceeding with plans to launch a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union . According to two reports from a well placed source in the United States national security bureaucracy .
 The U.S. decided to launch a nuclear strike on the USSR in September 1961, according to a source . The source was considered reliable and whose reports were passed on to the Soviet leadership .
 It was due only to the Soviet announcement of the new series of atomic tests that the U.S. reversed its decision . The United States was forced to reverse its decision to test nuclear weapons .
 According to the GRU's informant, the tests convinced the United States that the Soviet nuclear arsenal was more powerful than previously assumed . Khrushchev's mind may have been focussed on the perils of remaining strategically inferior to the U.S.
 Khrushchev learned that it would take a few years for Moscow to have enough of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces' new SS-7 intercontinental ballistic missiles to match the land-based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad .
 Khrushchev's own mind was not challenged by the GRU's information, but by the KGB . The information did not provoke doubt in his own mind about his assessment of the challenges of the world around him .
 Nikita Khrushchev was as usual acting as his own intelligence analyst . June 1962-22 October 1962 was the Cuban crisis .
 In the summer, political reporting from Washington seemed to reinforce Khrushchev's expectation that Kennedy would ultimately accept the missiles . The missile test was the first time the U.S. tested the missiles in the 1960s .
 Leaders of Pentagon doubt that Cuban emigre and Central American detachments, trained by the United States, could successfully fight Castro's well-prepared army .
 The leaders of Pentagon believe that an intervention in Cuba could only bring about the overthrow of Castro if specially prepared U.S. troops would participate in this operation .
 John F Kennedy is against the participation of United States troops in military operations vs. John F. Kennedy . Kennedy was president of the U.S. during the Vietnam War .
 He is afraid that USSR and China would respond with an attack on West Berlin and Southeast Asia, which could bring the U.S. into a world war .
 Khrushchev was prepared to use his intelligence services to deceive Kennedy . He was unwilling to involve his own intelligence services in his own policymaking . He used these services to mislead Kennedy .
 Colonel Bolshakov acted as a special channel between the Kremlin and the President . Since April 1961, a member of the Soviet military intelligence station in Washington, Colonel Georgi Bolshkov, had acted . Colonel Kolshakov was a special agent for the Kremlin .
 Bolshakov conveyed messages authorized by Khrushchev . In more than 50 meetings with Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Bolshkov conveyed messages .
 In August 1962, the Soviet leader decided to use the unwitting Bolshakov to mask the significance of the shipments to Cuba . The Soviet leader used the unwitting use of the use of Bolshavsky to mask his actions .
 Soviet signals intelligence — generated by means of the interception and decryption of foreign communications — provided little warning of the growing crisis . The Soviet Union had little warning that the crisis was growing .
 The signals intelligence component of the KGB focused on analyzing the volume of US communications traffic . Unable to break any high-level U.S. ciphers, the signals intelligence section focused on analysis of the volume .
 The Soviets detected unusual activity but could not determine the exact reason for it . In the days immediately before Kennedy's blockade speech, the Soviets detected strange activity .
 GRU disseminated worrisome but inexact signals of trouble ahead . Similarly, the U.S. disseminated worrying but inexhaustible signals of danger ahead .
 As of 21 October, the headquarters of the GRU had received four different reports suggesting that Kennedy was considering some form of military action in the Caribbean .
 GRU reported on a convoy of military planes that had left for Puerto Rico . Noting unusual activity by the United States Air Force, the GRU noted unusual activity .
 It also appeared that the number of bombers on duty in the Strategic Air Command had inexplicably increased .
 The Soviets detected that the U.S. Navy had increased its presence in the Caribbean as part of an exercise . On the high seas, the Soviets detected the increase in the presence .
 There are indications that this was only the beginning of some U.S. military operation . Finally, there were indications that it was only a military operation.
 The Soviet military picked up Robert McNamara's order that senior military officers remain near the Pentagon to participate in a series of intensive meetings . McNamara ordered the meetings to take place at the Pentagon .
 Berlin and Cuba were both on the agenda for the scheduled Presidium meeting that day . The meeting indicated uncertainty over which Cold War volcano might be about to blow . Berlin and Havana were both mentioned in the meeting .
 The KGB detected after the speech that the decision to blockade Cuba had been made by a special group around Kennedy . But its information about the composition of that group was flawed, the KGB said .
 Sakharovsky considered the report empty on its own and not worthy of disseminating to the Kremlin . He said the report was not enough to be disseminated to Russia's Kremlin .
 Sakharovsky's report was published in Moscow, Russia, on 24 October . The State Department had not been invited to the State Department press conference for American and foreign correspondents . In some cases the report was thrown away .
 Gorsky was making a late night visit to the Tap Room in the National Press Club . Gorsky visited the bar and was approached by the bartender at the end of the night . Gorski was a member of the Press Club in New York City .
 Gorsky rushed back to the Embassy that night to make his report . This was the first solid indication that Gorsky had received in the crisis that Kennedy had decided on war . Gorsky: "This was the most solid indication of the crisis"
 Rogers and Donovan had SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 79 been discussing the invasion; but it was Rogers, not Donovan, who was on the Pentagon's list to go if the invasion happened . Rogers was not Donovan's list of those who would go if it happened .
 One journalist, who worked for one of the television networks, refused the assignment for an unspecified reason . The rest were keen to go, though they were well aware of the consequences for themselves and for the country .
 Donovan, who was Washington Bureau Chief, had selected Rogers for the assignment . Donovan was Washington's Washington bureau chief . Donovan had picked Rogers to replace him as Washington's top reporter .
 It was a mark of the limitations of Soviet intelligence in this crisis that information from Warren Rogers would make its way from the alcoholic haze of the National Press Club to the desk of Nikita Sergeyvich Khrushchev .
 This intelligence resonated with something just picked up by the Soviet military . Though flimsy, this intelligence resonates with something of a Soviet military.
 The GRU office in the Embassy eavesdropping on an even more ominous signal . While the bartender, Johnny Prokov, was overhearing the two American journalists, the GRU's office eavesdrove .
 The military attaches in the Embassy regularly scoured the skies for Pentagon radio signals . The embassy's military attaches would scour the skies looking for Pentagon signals .
 The US military routinely transmitted changes to the Defense Condition status of Americans forces en clair, in an unclassified form . The changes were made in the form of unclassified information .
 The GRU intercepted an order from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Strategic Air Command placing SAC on a nuclear alert . At 10m., Washington time, on Wednesday, SAC was placed on nuclear alert at 10m. time .
 The Soviet military intelligence service had never seen anything like this . In the 15 years of intercepting U.S. military messages, the Soviet military intercepted nothing like this. In the United States Cold War military messages were intercepted by the Soviets .
 Gorsky and his boss, Feklisov, discussed the urgent need to corroborate the bar story . Gorsky: "In light of these threatening signals, we discussed the need for corroboration" Gorsky says the bar bar story is "a threat to our lives"
 Rogers was known to have irregular contact with one of the political officers in the Embassy . Rogers was a member of the embassy staff in Washington, DC .
 'Boris something' was called at home and told to find a way to intercept Rogers before late morning . This man, a young second secretary whom Warren Rogers remembers today only as Boris something, was told to intercept him .
 Boris knew Rogers usually parked his car in the lot used by many journalists behind the Willard Hotel . Boris knew that Rogers usually used the lot to park his car there .
 The Embassy decided to have Boris hang around the lot from the crack of dawn to be sure that Rogers was kept under observation .
 If the journalist's information is accurate, Moscow would have less than a day to react .
 This dramatic spy story led to the writing of dispatches that would command Khrushchev's full attention on 26 October . It led to a dramatic spy operation that led to Khrushchems' full attention .
 Khrushchev had already successfully proposed a diplomatic settlement to the rest of the Presidium . The Soviet Union had already agreed to a diplomatic solution .
 The Kremlin received the reports on Warren Rogers and the DefCon 2 alert . This he did on 25 October, before the Kremlin received reports on the reports .
 Khrushchev's own timetable for making an offer to the White House was accelerated . The new information from Washington from Washington accelerated his own timetable .
 At the climax of the crisis a KGB operation had more influence on the actions of the U.S. government than it did in Moscow . Ironically, at the . climax of . the . crisis a . KGB operation was more influential in the United States than it was in Moscow, says
 On 26 October, Aleksandr Feklisov re-established contact with John Scali . Aleksandandov: "I'm glad to see you back in contact with me again"
 Feklisov and Scali had been meeting infrequently since the end of 1961 . The two men had met infrequently in the past .
 On 6 July 1962, Scali had discussed with Feklisov Secretary of State Rusk's recent trip to Europe . Scali and Rusk met in 1962 to discuss a visit to Europe by the Soviet Union .
 Despite Feklisov's claim in his memoirs that he met Scali on 23 October, the 6 July meeting appears to have been the last before the two men had their dramatic meeting at the Occidental Restaurant on 26 October .
 A plaque on the wall of the Occidental Restaurant celebrates a lunch meeting 36 years ago that averted a nuclear war . The meeting was said to have averted the threat of a nuke war . A plaque commemorating the meeting is on display in the restaurant .
 A few years after the crisis, Assistant Secretary of State Roger Hilsman and later Scali himself revealed the role that the journalist had played .
 Scali sensed the agitation in Feklisov's voice and agreed to meet for a late lunch at the Occidental . The two men agreed to sit down for lunch at a steak joint .
 Feklisov alias Fomin had a set of proposals that his government wanted Scali to convey to the White House . The proposals were part of a proposal that Scali wanted to convey .
 In essence, the Soviets were looking for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, involving a US commitment to lift the blockade and a pledge not to try to invade Cuba in return for the removal of the Soviet missiles .
 Scali carried these proposals to Kennedy through his friend Roger Hilsman at the State Department . Scali's proposals were carried out by his friend and colleague . The proposals were sent to Kennedy .
 "There was always something about the traditional story that did not make sense," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In recent years, Scali and Feklisov have contributed to oral histories but have done little to solve this puzzle . In the U.S. it has not been able to find out what happened in the past .
 When glasnost' allowed Aleksandr Feklisov to make his first public comments on the case, he shocked Scali and historians by denying that he had suggested anything at the Occidental . The case remains unsolved .
 Feklisov: Scali was the author of the proposal for a diplomatic settlement . Scali, he says, was the original author of a diplomatic solution .
 Scali clung just as resolutely to his own version, and dismissed Feklisov as a liar . Nevertheless, in an interview conducted only a few months before his death, Scali still clung to his version of events .
 Soviet records are consistent with Feklisov's version of what happened . Soviet records show he was killed in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 There is no record of an instruction from the Presidium to the Foreign Ministry or the KGB on 25 October to seek a diplomatic settlement . No record of the instruction was given by the KGB or the Foreign ministry .
 The Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation said it could not find any separate instruction to Feklisov during the crisis . FCD was the successor to the KGB's FCD, which is now Russia's successor .
 Feklisov's cable of 26 October suggests he was a passive recipient of an offer from the Kennedy administration . The cable also suggests that he was the passive recipient .
 Had the Presidium tasked the KGB to probe Kennedy, presumably this cable would have been handled more expeditiously .
 There is reason to believe that the documents do not tell the full story . Nevertheless, despite evidence corroborating the thesis that the Soviets were passive players at the Occidental Restaurant .
 Khrushchev suggested a possible diplomatic settlement to his colleagues on that day . Malin's notes of the 25 October Presidium meeting were taken from the Presidium's notes .
 He offered to remove missiles in return for a non-invasion pledge . Although not yet ready to act, he prepared his colleagues for ultimately offering to remove the missiles . He said he was prepared to act .
 The similarity between the formula presented by Khrushchev to his colleagues and the deal discussed only a few hours later by Scali and the KGB's chief representative in Washington invites speculation about the possibility of a special KGB operation .
 Khrushchev made his suggestion on 25 October . Aleksandr Shelepin, former Chairman of the KGB and Presidium member, was among those who heard him make the suggestion .
 Shelepin remained close to his former protege, Vladimir Semichastny, and it is plausible that he leaked the story of the meeting to him . It is plausible to imagine that shelepin leaked the story to him, she says .
 Semichastny and Feklisov disagree over what happened at the Occidental . Semichastsny: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to blame it for it"
 Feklisov today is angry at his former boss for suggesting that he has been lying all of these years . Not surprisingly, he is angry that he was accused of lying all the time . The former Russian president is angry about the allegations .
 Feklisov has come to believe that the KGB mounted a little deception campaign against him . He says he believes that he was targeted by the KGB in the 1990s .
 When shown the archives' copy of the disseminated form of his famous 26 October dispatch, he pronounced it nonsense .
 Feklisov's feelings of betrayal lend some credence to the possibility that in October 1962 Shelepin and Semichastny schemed to present Khrushchev with an 'American proposal' that would make retreat less humiliating .
 There is no evidence that Scali initiated the proposal at the first meeting of the men on 26 October . Scali is accused of defying Italy's anti-gay ban .
 Feklisov's only report of that day came after the second meeting at 7:30m. Fekisov's report of the meeting was published at 7.30m .
 Perhaps the two men had a freewheeling discussion in the morning and misunderstood each other . Perhaps they had a free-standing discussion and didn't understand each other?
 Scali rushed to see his contact at the State Department, Roger Hilsman, thinking that the stony-faced Feklisov had made a tentative offer . Scali thought that the offer was a good idea .
 Feklisov returned to his Embassy not sure of what had actually transpired . Meanwhile, he was not sure what had happened .
 In this case, Scali is the participant who has not told the full story of his role . Scali has not been able to explain his role in this case .
 The Scali-Feklisov case illustrates how governments in the grip of a crisis can misunderstand each other . The case is the latest in a long line of political tensions .
 It is certain that the United States and the USSR misunderstood what went on between Scali and Feklisov . It is only speculation that the accounts are different .
 In following the course taken by this important telegram, we see that it did not play any role in shaping Khrushchev's letter of 26 October, which proposed a United States guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba as a means of resolving the crisis . The letter of 27 October demanded
 The fact that this telegram was not given priority treatment strengthens the case against this being a KGB initiative . It was not the first telegram to be sent to the White House from the KGB .
 The KGB sat on it so long that by the time the Ministry of Foreign Affairs received a copy of the Feklisov cable, Khrushchev had already sent to Kennedy his second letter demanding a missile trade .
 Khrushchev sent Alekseev on 28 October that he eventually learned about the Scali-Feklisov discussions . Aleksoev learned of the discussions from Khrushchevnikniknik .
 Khrushchev asked his ambassador in Havana to inform Fidel Castro about this remarkable source who provided an intriguing suggestion from the Kennedy administration . Unfortunately, the suggestion came too late to influence the course of the crisis in Cuba .
 Khrushchev's purpose in sharing this information with Castro was to enlist his support for the diplomatic settlement, it seems . Kennedy's sincere interest in finding a peaceful way out of the crisis, he says .
 The weight of KGB information pointed toward a U.S. attack in the near future . Meanwhile, as Scali and Feklisov may have been confusing each other SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 83 at the Occidental Restaurant .
 Khrushchev's letter of that day may have been influenced by a shift in the information he received from the government . It has been argued that there was a shift on 27 October that influenced his letter .
 An examination of the intelligence available to him that morning refutes this speculation . The intelligence available on the day of the incident refutes speculation .
 Khrushchev's understanding of the crisis led to a change in his thinking . The information that changed was not the information but the understanding of Khrushchev's understanding . It was the information that made the change .
 Nikita Khrushchev did not bequeath a set of tapes of the crisis-era Presidium meetings to historians . Unfortunately, the tapes were not bequathly passed on to historians by the Soviet leader .
 The best we have are the colorful yet often elliptical notes of Vladimir Malin's amanuensis, Vladimir N Malin .
 The Malin notes of the key Kremlin meetings between 22 and 28 October reveal Khrushchev as an avid consumer of information who was having a hard time making up his mind about his adversary .
 News of the forthcoming speech by Kennedy filled him with dread that the United States had discovered the missiles and would invade, as Kennedy had indicated he might in a 4 September press statement .
 Khrushchev's fear that Kennedy was going to invade squared with his fear of invasion . The flimsy information from the National Press Club squared with the fear that the invasion was going on .
 Khrushchev continued to maintain a somewhat contradictory view of the nature of his adversary . Despite these fears, despite these fears he maintained his view of his adversaries .
 In the depths of his soul, Klirushchev had doubts that Kennedy would actually go through with an attack, he says . "I had doubts," he says of Kennedy's attack .
 From the very first assessments of the young President, the Soviets distinguished between Kennedy and the Pentagon . From the beginning of the . first assessments, the . very first assessment of Kennedy, the Soviet . government distinguished between . Kennedy and . the Pentagon. From the first assessment, the. Soviets
 Khrushchev would bait Kennedy and his advisors with the taunt that JFK lacked the courage of his convictions . Kennedy was frustrated by a lack of progress in a area of superpower discussion, says JFK . Kennedy would be the first president of the Soviet Union to be elected .
 Kennedy prevailed in Khrushchev's own thinking, without the aid of outside information or counsel . This inner sense of Kennedy prevailed, he says, without outside information .
 The picture gleaned from KGB reporting remained bleak on 27 October; but that day Khrushchev on his own decided to up the ante for a diplomatic settlement .
 Khrushchev proposed that the U.S. remove its Jupiter IRBMs from Turkey as part of the price for Moscow dismantling its Cuban missile sites . Over the concerns of his Kremlin colleagues, he proposed the additional demand that the United States remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 Aleksandr Feklisov should have been trolling for information about U.S. intentions in the fall of 1962, he says .
 Aleksandr Alekseev was the only KGB field officer who was briefed on the Cuban initiative . Aleksandandov was only KGB officer briefed on Cuban initiative in Cuba .
 The failure to integrate intelligence in the policy process was only one reason for the GRU and KGB's secondary role in the missile drama . The failure of integration intelligence in policy process is only one of the reasons for the failure of intelligence, the author says .
 Neither organization had sources in the U.S. that were well placed enough to detect the innermost thinking of the Kennedy administration . Neither organization's sources were able to detect Kennedy administration's thinking .
 The GRU's Georgi Bolshakov was without a doubt the best placed Soviet intelligence operative in Washington . Bolshakakov was in Washington, D.C. for more than a decade . He was a key intelligence operative for the GRU .
 He spent most of these visits discussing Berlin, Laos and a nuclear test ban . But lacking any instructions to ask about Cuba, he didn't ask about the country .
 American U-2 photographs provided Khrushchev with enough evidence to conclude that the U.S. was about to invade Cuba and that Kennedy did not want to invade it . The U.2 photographs might have turned the thinking of the Soviet leadership around, but they were not enough to
 It was left to Khrushchev himself to decide which of the two scenarios (or perhaps some combination of two) seemed more likely .
 Soviet intelligence picked up signs that Kennedy was not committed to the non-invasion guarantee . Following the crisis, Soviet intelligence said that Kennedy did not commit himself to the guarantee .
 Khrushchev, however, would choose to ignore this information out of a sense that the crisis had placed him in a position in Moscow where he had to rely on Kennedy to keep his word . The crisis had put him in an even more powerful position in Russia .
 If Kennedy's pledge were insincere, Khrushchev's critics in Havana and Moscow were right to describe the entire affair as a Soviet defeat . Kennedy's promise to the Soviet Union was a mistake, but it was a defeat for the U.S.
 For Khrushchev's purposes the most useful intelligence came through the KGB's liaison with the Cuban government . The KGB allowed the Kremlin to follow the course of Fidel Castro's slow acceptance of the October settlement .
 In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the most significant missing piece of the puzzle up to now was the thinking of the Kremlin in general, and the inner workings of the mind of Nikita Khrushchev in particular .
 Semichastny's name does not appear on any of the routing slips for draft letters or instructions sent by the Presidium to non-members . Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko are among the non-member members of the Russian Federation .
 This statement is based on analysis of foreign policy files in Folio 3, Lists 65 and 66 at the Archives of the President of the Russian Federation . Analysis of the KGB's spravka files regarding Cuba and the United States .
 Distribution of field cables is indicated on the summaries in the files . In most cases, the distribution of field cable is indicated .
 Distribution seems to have been a matter of discretion for Aleksandr Sakharovsky and Semichastny . Aleksandandovskiievsky is known for his work in Russia .
 Unlike CIA information cables from this era, each KGB spravka appears to have had its own particular distribution . Unlike CIA cables, which carry a printed distribution list, each CIA information cable appears to be different .
 FBI encouraged John Scali to meet with Aleksandr Feklisov after he first approached him . Scali says FBI encouraged him to meet regularly with the Russian . FBI says it was the first approach to contact Scali after he made the first contact . FBI: Scali's
 FBI described the KGB resident, whose alias in the U.S. was 'Aleksandr Fomin', as unusually reclusive . The KGB resident in the United States was described by the FBI as 'unusual'
 KGB headquarters tended to downplay the concerns of the Cubans, concluding that the counterrevolution, even with outside assistance, was likely to fail . The counterrevolution was unlikely to succeed even with help from outside assistance .
 The Center sent 86 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS information from outside Cuba to Alekseev in Havana . The information tended to underscore the weakness of the counterrevolution, the Center says .
 The KGB had acquired a review of the status of Latin American countries that foresaw a rosy future for Cuba . Somewhere in Europe, probably France, probably . France, had acquired the review .
 In late March, the KGB instructed Alekseev to read it and pass it on to Castro . The KGB instructed him to read the book and pass on it to Castro, the Kremlin says .
 For further discussion, see the discussion by Domingo Amuchastegui in the next essay .
 Soviet leaders did receive the report, and appear to have assimilated it . However unbelievable this report may seem, it appears to have been accepted by Soviet leaders .
 Had DefCon 1 gone one level higher, the U.S. would have been waging a nuclear war . Had it gone one higher, it would have led to nuclear war in the United States .
 The first reference found in the KGB archives to Scali is dated 6 July 1962 . Scali — or 'MIN', Scali's code name — was the first reference to the Scali code name .
 Vladimir Semichastny made this claim most recently in a Russian TV documentary on the SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 87 Cuban missile crisis, aired in July 1997 .