 These critiques have been far more successful in refuting the standard description of making a decision than in proposing well-developed, empirically based alternative descriptions . The critiques have not been able to refute the standard descriptions of making decisions .
 These deviations from the standard task description are used to develop an alternative characterization of the decisionmaking task, decision making by objection, which emphasizes sequential choice, goal discovery, and the avoidance of failures .
 This description of the decision-making task has been subject to two varieties of criticism . It has been criticised by both sides of the debate .
 The first challenges the task description from an information-processing perspective . The first argues that individuals can at best roughly approximate the rational computational ideal implied in the description .
 The path from goals to choice, however, is not a fixed sequence, but includes loops and cycles . The path to goals to choices includes loops, cycles, and cycles, not fixed sequence .
 The second variety of criticism challenges the task description in a different and, in some senses, more fundamental way, by questioning the adequacy of the description itself .
 The result is to deny the task description as a metaphor for why organizations act as they do . I would like to thank Lee Sproull, Greg they do (Allison, 1971; Cohen, March, and Olsen, 1972; March, Fischer, Sara Kiesler, Sara
 The CMU-Ford Motor Company Research action as a product of something other than the standard Fund provided the resources to acquire the documents from the John F Kennedy decision-making task description .
 My purpose here is not to suggest a grand union between the two domains . Instead, it's to say: "I don't want to see a grand unification between two domains"
 It is, instead, a more modest attempt to use relatively finegrained observation of foreign policy decision-making behavior to suggest elements of that union .
 Decision making is largely an intellectual task in which goals are identified, alternatives sought, consequences predicted, alternatives evaluated, and choices made . Decision-making is a task that involves goals and consequences being sought, choices being evaluated .
 Making a decision for the organization is also a social act, says author . Decision is a challenge to individuals, but it is also social, he says . Making decisions for an organization is a social issue, he writes .
 Gathering information, making choices, and communicating decisions are social acts . Gathering information and making choices is social acts. Gathering information is a social act, and it's a social action .
 Organizational decision making is not just a product of intellectual information processing, but also involves social information processing . Organizational decisions are a result of individual intellectual and social information information processing.
 The intellectual information-processing aspects of decision making can be successfully studied in the laboratory . The controlled laboratory setting works against studying the social information-processing aspects of making decisions .
 Social elements of the setting -the signs, symbols, and meanings -are artificial . While laboratory subjects can be confronted with intellectual tasks that are as real as any facing an organizational member, the social elements are artificial .
 Social information-processing character of organizational decision making can best be studied in natural settings . The social information processing character of organization decision making is best studied . Decision making can be made in natural decision settings .
 High density observations of decisions in natural settings can generally be obtained only under the most unusual circumstances . Unfortunately, such observations can be obtained under unusual circumstances, such as the most extreme circumstances .
 In the prototypic decision situation, decision makers confront a problem in need of some solution . Decision makers face a problem that needs to be solved by a solution .
 They face an array of competing possible courses of action and their task is to select the alternative that will solve the problem and achieve their goals . The task of the team is to choose the best course of action .
 The evidence discussed below suggests that during the Cuban missile crisis, decision making deviated from the prototype in three important respects . The evidence suggests that this is not the same as the prototype for the missile system .
 The standard description assumes that making a decision involves choosing one alternative from a set of competing courses of action . The standard describes a decision as choosing one of a number of competing options .
 Evidence from the crisis suggests that instead of seeing competing alternatives, decision makers often face a series of yes-no choices over an array of noncompeting courses of action . Decision makers often choose between yes and no, rather than see competing alternatives to yes .
 First, the standard description assumes that decision makers identify goals as a first step . Second, it assumes that decisions will be made in advance of a goal .
 The goals serve as the benchmark from which alternatives are sought and then evaluated . The goals are the benchmark for what is then sought and evaluated .
 The evidence from the crisis, however, suggests that goals are discovered throughout the course of making a decision . The evidence shows that goals can be found throughout the decision-making process .
 The standard description assumes that the whole point of decision making is to solve a problem . Finally, the standard description assume that the point of solving a problem is solving it .
 Evidence suggests that what decision makers are looking for is not a solution to a problem but a course of action that does not have a high probability of making matters worse . The evidence from the crisis suggests that .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council made the decision during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . The committee made a decision to make the decision in the wake of the crisis .
 Position papers, notes, minutes, minutes and memoranda generated during the crisis were deposited in the John F Kennedy Library . Many have now been declassified .
 The rich and detailed by-products of the decision-making process provide an extraordinary opportunity for discovering in detail the nature of the task that confronted the decision makers .
 These records are essentiallytranscripts of the meetings written in the third person by the NSC staff .
 The records of the fifth through eighth meetings of the ExCom are currently open for research . The records are currently available for research.
 The fifth and sixth meetings dealt with enforcing the blockade and maintaining pressure on the Soviet government . The meetings were held during the 1950s and 1960s .
 The public hard-line Soviet proposal involving a trade of missiles in Turkey for missiles in Cuba was received during the seventh meeting . The proposal was made during the meeting .
 The records of the second, third, fourth, and ninth meetings are currently classified and closed to research . detailed records only begin after the first meeting .
 The deleted material largely concerns intelligence sources and methods . It does not amount to more than 10 percent of the material . The material is mostly concerned about intelligence sources, methods .
 The whole of the foreign policy decision-making process does not take place in groups . Groups are ideal settings in which to study decision making as social information processing .
 The groups involve social interaction, but also social interaction within the context of shared standards of legitimacy, provided in part by organizational goals like the national interest . The national interest is a key part of the groups' success .
 Whatever disagreements among policy makers, there is the shared presumption that they ought to come to agreement when national security and the national interest are at stake . Whatever disagreements, there should be a shared presumption of agreement, policy makers say .
 As Halperin has argued, whatever private motives that lead individuals to support a proposal, they must be able to justify that position to others with an argument grounded in terms of the national interest .
 First, advisory and decision-making groups involve public information processing . Second, advisory groups involve information processing. Second, decision-makers use public information .
 If advocates want to gain supporters, defeat opponents, and build a consensus, they must do so with public arguments and justifications . Advocates must use their arguments to gain public support and build consensus .
 Much of the process is exposed to observation by the need to influence others . As a result, much of the processes are exposed to the need for influence others to observe .
 It is possible to think of the records of group discussions as a naturally occurring form of the ""think-aloud protocol" like those used by Newell and Simon to study human problem solving .
 An inductive strategy was adopted for determining how decision making during the missile crisis deviated from the standard description . METHODs were used to determine how decision-making deviated . The study was carried out in accordance with the criteria of a standard description.
 The records of the discussion in the ExCom were used as a form of think-aloud protocol . The records were used to discuss topics in a think-a-word protocol .
 Analyzing protocols involves categorizing the interactions in terms relevant to the decision-making task and using the resulting trace to identify the characteristics of the underlying process . Analyzing the interactions is a form of analysis that can be applied to the task of a decision maker .
 Documents generated as a by-product of the decision-making process, as well as existing analyses of the crisis, are used to identify the deviations from the standard description of the task .
 The standard approach to coding is to develop a complex set of rules that specify the conditions under which a particular type of statement should be assigned a particular code . This is the result of the rules being developed in a complex coding system .
 Coders need to understand nuances that govern the application of the rules . That approach requires investing considerable resources in training coders to understand the rules.
 The approach adopted here was to develop a coding procedure that could be used by relatively untrained and inexperienced coders . The approach was developed to create a code that can be easily used by untrained coders.
 Players ask a series of binaryyes-no questions about the object in an attempt to guess its identity . The players then try to guess the object's identity .
 In coding the interactions, the coding scheme takes the role of the guesser and the coder answers binary yes-no questions about the piece of text to be coded . The coding scheme is based on a binary yes/no question .
 In principle, one-half of the possible coding categories can be eliminated by the answer to each question . n questions are sufficient to assign a piece of text to one of 2n coding categories .
 What this means in practice is that the questions form a hierarchical, binary discrimination net that progressively narrows possibilities. What this . means in . practice is . that the . questions form . a hierarchical . binary discriminationNet that narrows . possibilities .
 Second principle was that the coder should be able to answer a question solely on the basis of the fragment of text, without knowledge of the coding scheme or of the categories .
 The practical application of this principle is that the questions must be narrowly focused, with clear yes-or-no answers . It is also that the answers must be narrow and clear .
 A fragment of the binary discrimination net for conditional sentences is displayed in the figure . The figure is shown in the context of the analysis of conditional sentences .
 The binary-discrimination-net coding scheme was used to design an interactive computer program to guide the coding of documents .
 The responses by the coder determined the path the program took through the binary net . The responses were determined by the responses by a coder .
 The program continued asking questions, going deeper in the net, until it reached a terminal point in the network and assigned a coding category . The program continues to ask questions, before assigning a code category .
 The binary net contains a total of 43 questions, and the program needed to ask about five to seven questions to code a fragment of text . The program was programmed to code fragments of text using a binary net .
 This coding procedure can be used with any size fragment of text . The convention adopted here was to treat the sentence as the unit of analysis . The procedure was used to treat sentences as the units of analysis.
 Maintaining the link between the original text and the code means that the context and content of the interactions are preserved . The data allows for iterative analysis of the data in studying the details of interactions .
 The analytic coding procedure is a systematic way of annotating the raw description of the decision process . It is an attempt to annotate the raw descriptions of the decisions made .
 The conventional description assumes that decision makers face an array of competing alternative courses of action . Decision making involves choosing one course of action and rejecting one of the others .
 But that assumption owes more to the technical requirements of the theory of probability and decision theory than to the reality of decision making . The assumption is more likely to be based on the theory, rather than decision theory .
 Some of the choices involve selecting an alternative from a set of competing, mutually exclusive courses of action -to launch an airstrike or to impose a blockade . Some of these sorts of choices involve choosing between an airstrike and a blockade, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Other choices involve deciding whether to trade missiles in Turkey for missiles in Cuba . The U.S. has a history of dealing with the Cuban regime .
 During the early days of the crisis, the overriding objective was to force the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . The overriding objective of the ExCom was to remove them from Cuba.
 This choice appears to have been one of the few choices between competing alternatives decision makers faced during the crisis . The choice appears, however, to be one of only a few choices among competing alternatives .
 The imposition of a blockade did not resolve the problem facing the ExCom, for with the blockade in place they faced the further problem of translating that initial show of determination into removing missiles from Cuba .
 The prevailing opinion in the ExCom was that if the missiles were to be removed, additional pressure would have to be applied to the Cuban and Soviet governments; the blockade would not be sufficient .
 A wide range of political and military measures were available to the United States government to increase the pressure for the removal of the missiles . The U.S. government is seeking to remove the missiles from Russia .
 UN Security Council and U.S.-sponsored resolution condemning Soviet action condemned the Soviet action . UN General Assembly offered a forum to discuss the issue in the likely event Soviet government vetoed the resolution .
 The U.S. could have used other measures to block Cuban imports and exports . The United States could also have blocked Cuban exports and imports .
 The exact nature of these alternatives is unclear because the descriptions of the alternatives are classified and have been excised from the records of the ExCom .
 The United States pursued a course of action that included political action in the UN Security Council and the OAS, the release of U-2 photographs of missile sites, a selective blockade of Cuba, and surveillance flights .
 "At no time, however, was that particular array of actions in competition with an alternative array of . actions," the mayor says .
 The mix of means by which the U.S. applied pressure to the Soviet government was the product of a sequential choice process . The United States applied pressure on the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The ExCom faced a series of choices of whether to pursue particular courses of action . The U.S. response was the sum of these choices, the author says .
 There was conflict and disagreement over the issue, but it did not occur in the context of choosing one alternative over another .
 The issue of strengthening the blockade by including POL was treated by itself as a yes-no choice . The standard task description would predict, in the context of a group of competing courses of action, would predict .
 The tanker Graznyy is apparently moving but will not cross the line today . The tanker is not expected to cross the the border today .
 He suggested that shortly we should embargo fuel used by bombers and substances from which airplane fuel is made, i.e., petroleum products . He suggested we should also embargo fuel .
 President suggested that if we decide to embargo bomber fuel, we should also mention the factwe were embargoing fuel which was contributing to the operational capability of the strategic missiles . The President suggested we should mention that we are also embargoing bomber fuel .
 Secretary Dillon stated his reservations concerning this course of action . Secretary Dillon said he had 'concerns' about the decision .
 A confrontation with the Russians would not be over missiles, but over Soviet ships . Thus, a confrontation with Russia would be over the missiles, rather than the ships . The U.S. would have to confront the Russians over their ships, not missiles .
 He believed we should go for the missiles rather than force a confrontation with the USSR at sea . He believed the missiles should be aimed at the Soviet Union rather than at sea.
 A decision on adding petroleum to the embargo list was delayed until the political path was decided upon . A decision was also delayed until a political path is decided upon by the government .
 The records of the ExCom indicate that conflict and disagreement with respect to courses of action did not occur as a result of advocacy of competing alternatives . The records indicate that disagreement was not as result of opposing competing alternatives but as of objections to pursuing a particular course of action .
 A surprisingly large number of alternatives were proposed during the meetings . Few of the alternatives were inconsistent with previous proposals . Few were consistent with previous plans .
 13 alternatives were proposed in the fifth, 17 in the sixth, 18 in the 2 seventh, and 16 in the 8th meeting of the ExCom . The coded summary records indicate that 13 alternatives .
 Alternative courses of action were examined sequentially in a yes-no well-articulated course of action . However, alternative courses were never considered together, but were examined separately . Alternative courses were not considered together but were considered separately .
 17 alternatives were proposed during the sixth meeting of the not inconsistent with limited informationprocessing capacities . For example, the fashion, the large number of alternatives is 17 alternatives proposed .
 The alternatives inconsistent with previously proposed courses of 3 action are in italics . The alternatives are shown in italicized .
 The study of decision making in the U.S. Military Assistance Program was conducted in every instance except two . The alternative represented a proposal to continue the status based on interviews with governmental officials or a simple objection to a proposed course of action .
 Decision makers said it would be better to go for missiles than to force a course of action at sea .
 Decision records of the meetings of the ExCom, decision making during makers did not conceptualize the various means at their disposal in terms of mutually the crisis . Decision making during the crisis frequently involved yes-no choices over an array of exclusive courses of action. noncompeting alternative courses of
 Secretary McNamara suggested that shortly we should embargo fuel used by bombers and substances from which airplane fuel is made, i.e., petroleum products . McNamara also suggested that .
 The president suggested that if we decide to embargo bomber fuel, we should also mention the fact that we were embargoing fuel which was contributing to the operational capacity of the strategic missiles, he said . President suggested that .
 Secretary Dillon believed we should go for the missiles rather than force a confrontation with the USSR at sea . Secretary Dillon said the missiles would prevent a confrontation at sea.
 Secretary McNamara asked that public announcement be made of our continuation of air surveillance . Air surveillance will continue in the U.S.
 Secretary McNamara recommended daylight reconnaissance measures be flown today and a night mission tonight, including the dropping of flares .
 Secretary McNamara thought that one way of avoiding reaction to night reconnaissance was to inform the Cubans and the Russians in advance that we were initiating such flights . McNamara: One way to avoid reaction was to tell the Russians and Cubans the flights were planned .
 Ambassador Stevenson opposed any public announcement of our surveillance activities . Ambassador Stevenson opposes any public disclosure of his surveillance activity .
 Acting USIA Director Wilson requested that better aerial pictures be made available to USIA for distribution . USIA director Wilson requested for better aerial images of the event .
 Mr McCloy stated that our quarantine was vital and should be kept in place until the Russians had accepted all of our conditions . The quarantine is vital, he said .
 Secretary Rusk felt that it was better for us not to participate in such actions as would be necessary if it were done by an organization, i.e., the OAS, to which we belong .
 The president asked whether we could commit ourselves not to invade Cuba, the president said . President Obama asked whether the U.S. could commit itself to not invade Cuba .
 The president agreed in general, but wanted to have another look at it, he said . Castro's message to the Castro Castro was rejected, but he said he wanted to see it again .
 Ambassador Stevenson wanted to know whether he should seek a standstill on all Soviet arms or only offensive weapons . Ambassador Stevenson was asked whether he wanted to seek a cease-fire on Soviet arms .
 Ambassador Stevenson needed to know whether in return we would be prepared to suspend the quarantine, he said . Ambassador Stevenson also wanted to know if we would suspend quarantine in return, he added .
 When decision making involves sequential choice, the resulting pattern of activity does not represent an alternative chosen over other competing courses of action . When choosing a course of action is sequential, the patterns of activity do not represent a different choice .
 Although it is possible to represent sequential choice over an array of noncompeting alternatives in terms of mutually exclusive alternatives, that is merely a technical solution . That's merely a 'technical solution' for sequential choice .
 Three sequential binary choices can be represented in terms of a decision tree with eight mutually exclusive alternatives . For example, three sequential, binary choices are represented in a tree . The decision tree is a tree of decision trees with mutually exclusive options .
 "This sort of reconstruction does not, however, reflect decision-making behavior during the missile crisis," he says . "It's not a reconstruction of what happened," he adds. "It doesn't reflect the behavior of the U.S. government in the wake of the crisis"
 There is no evidence that the variety of possible actions were ever examined simultaneously . No evidence that there were any other possible actions taken simultaneously .
 The maze-like character of decision making suggests an alternate explanation for the frequent lack of coherence in government action . The maze of decision-making suggests an alternative explanation for government action, says author .
 Sequential choice over an array of noncompeting alternatives suggests a third explanation . Sequential choices may be a result of a lack of competition, say experts .
 Government action may lack coherence because, even in tig htly controlled foreign policy crises, it is the product of sequential choice . Governmental action may not be coherence due to sequential choice, says David Cameron .
 Decision-making is a major deviation from the standard task description of decision-making . Goalkeeping is a key part of the decision making process in the United States .
 If the standard task description is to be believed, identifying goals is the first step in making a decision . Identifying goals is a first step for a decision, and it's not always easy to do .
 Goals are discovered in the course of making a decision, says the ExCom . "On the basis of the records of the ExCOM's deliberations, a more accurate description is that goals are discovered," he says .
 In orderto talk sensibly about discovering goals in the course of making a decision, it is necessary to distinguish global goals from discovered goals . In order to make decisions sensibly, it's necessary to separate global goals and global goals .
 Global goals stimulate the decision process by identifying a situation as a problem . Global goals can be used to stimulate the process of solving a global problem, say experts .
 But defining something as a problem does not directly identify a solution, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Defining a problem is not directly identifying a solution"
 The goal of getting missiles removed stimulated the process without providing a precise definition of an acceptable resolution of the crisis . In the missile crisis, the goal of removing the missiles in Cuba was stimulated by the problem .
 The problem of the missiles could have been resolved in any number of ways, including an invasion, a blockade, or a missile trade . The problem was resolved by an invasion or a trade deal .
 The initial or global goal was not sufficient to identify uniquely the ""best" course of action, because what the "best" was had yet to be determined . What the 'best' was had not yet been determined .
 Goal discovery is a social process in which the causal texture (Weick, 1 979b) links objectives, constraints, and imperatives with alternatives and their consequences through discussion and debate . Weick, Weick: The causal texture of goal discovery is the texture of a causal texture
 The blockade demonstrated U.S. firmness and commitment to removal of missiles, avoided Pearl Harboranalogythat plagued a possible airstrike . Did not put extreme pressure on Khrushchev and gave him an opportunity to avoid attack; was a middle course between inaction and attack .
 If these were the goals, then their absence in the first meeting is an anomaly in the context of the standard analysis of decision making . If these are the goals then it's not an anomaly .
 The argument in this section is that most of the goals on that list were discovered during the course of deliberations . The argument is that the goal was discovered during deliberations . This section includes a list of goals that were discovered by deliberations .
 Robert Kennedy: An airstrike represented a surprise attack by a very large nation against a very small one . Kennedy: Airstrikes represent a 'surprise attack' by a 'very large nation'
 The Pearl-Harbor-in-reverse analogy introduced consistency with moral traditions as a goal . Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon has shifted his position on the issue .
 The Pearl Harbor analogy -i.e., consistency with U.S. moral traditions -appears on the list of goals and objectives used to explain the choice of a blockade and was not part of the discussion during that first meeting .
 Robert Kennedy did not walk into the meeting and say that whatever the response had to be consistent with U.S. moral traditions, he said . Robert Kennedy didn't walk into a meeting and said that whatever it was, it had to have been consistent with moral traditions .
 It was not a global goal, in that it did not stimulate the decision process . It was 'not global goal' in that way, but it was not 'stimulating the process'
 Robert Kennedy's concern with moral traditions was stimulated by his reaction to discussions of an airstrike . Robert Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family . Kennedy's father was assassinated in 1968 in Washington .
 Robert Kennedy's concern was essentially a reaction to proposals for an airstrike . It occurred during discussions of the alternative and took the form of an objection that introduced a constraint .
 Robert Kennedy did not walk into the first meeting with a conscious conviction of the necessity of maintaining the public image of American traditions . Without penetrating too deeply into Robert Kennedy's psyche, it is plausible to suppose he did not .
 It is conceivable he believed in its importance but did not or had no reason to make an immediate association between appropriate action and U.S. traditions .
 It took a proposal for a surprise attack on the missile sites to stimulate the association . The proposal for the attack on missile sites was rejected .
 Bobby Kennedy's argument that we ought to be true to ourselves as Americans, that surprise attack was not in our tradition. What changed my mind was his argument that . Bobby Kennedy argued that surprise attacks were not in America's tradition .
 There is no reason to suppose Kennedy's argument convinced Dillon of the importance of American traditions . Kennedy: "There are no reasons to suppose Dillon was impressed by American traditions"
 The argument stimulated the association with Dillon's existing beliefs, according to the argumentist .
 Kennedy's arguments caused Dillon to recognize an association with his existing beliefs . The goal of preserving the public perception of a U.S. tradition of fairness was a discovery .
 An airstrike would have immediately removed options and threatened a spiral of escalation without graduation or convenient exit . "An airstrike" would have removed options, the author says .
 This advantage of a blockade was put forth by Robert Kennedy, Douglas Dillon, and Robert McNamara, convinced McGeorge Bundy to join a blockade . Bundy joined the advocates of the blockade in the 1960s .
 The discovery of goals during the course of making a decision can be interpreted in the larger context of the role of argumentation in decision making .
 Axelrod suggested that novel arguments play an important role in the argumentation and debate process of decision making . Axelrod: Novel arguments play a vital role in decision making.
 From the perspective of goal discovery, novel arguments have an impact on decision making . Novel arguments stimulate new associations among existing belief structures, says John Defterios .
 Accounts of U.S. decision making provide evidence that the others were discovered in the course of the process, i.e. They were put forth as arguments for a blockade and against an airstrike .
 There is no evidence in the records now available, however, for the discovery of the final two items . There is also no evidence that the items were found .
 Weick's ""retrospective sense making"" seems the most likely explanation for the discovery of the last two goals . If the evidence for their discovery is not in the records closed to research, it would be difficult to find out what happened .
 While the blockade possessed the ""missing"" advantages, they were ""discovered"" after the choice had been made, in orderto demonstrate the inevitability of the blockade as the only reasonable option .
 In this view, they played no role in determining the final selection, because the opportunity to discover them never arose . This view, however, is the view of many of the world's greatest thinkers .
 Goal discovery did not stop with the decision to impose a naval blockade on Cuba . Goal discovery came after the decision was imposed by the Cuban government .
 Goal statements were an important force in shaping the arguments and discussions . Goal statements are important to shaping the discussions and discussions of the ExCom .
 Interaction sequences in the ExCom reveal a relationship between goals and alternatives . The interaction sequences in ExCom are interactive sequences that reveal goals and alternative alternatives .
 A goal statement was followed by another goal statement 31 percent of the time and by an alternative 27 percent of that time . Goal statements are followed by a second goal statement or a third goal statement .
 Goals or alternatives preceded goals 52 percent of the time, and goals were followed by another goal or alternative 58 percent of time . Goal or alternative was followed by a goal or an alternative 58 per cent of time, the study found .
 Goals tend to produce and be produced by alternatives and other goals . Goals, therefore, tend to be produced and therefore, other goals are produced . Goals are produced and produced by alternative goals .
 Goals can become devices for advocates to direct the attention of the group to constraints, objectives, and imperatives that define acceptable situations . Goals can play a role in evaluating specific alternatives, according to the author .
 Goals were not restricted to evaluating specific alternatives but were also used to direct the attention of the decision makers to define criteria that should be used to define acceptable situations .
 The focus of the task is on alternatives, predictions, and evaluations . From that point on, the task will be focused on alternatives and predictions . The task is now to find out what alternatives and evaluations are possible .
 Evidence from the missile crisis that goals are discovered in the course of making a decision suggests that decision making does not involve choosing alternatives so much as discovering goals .
 Once agreement on goals has been reached, the alternative often follows as a matter of course . This is not the first time a team has agreed to a deal with the government .
 The analysis of the missile crisis is generally consistent with the view of goals put forth by March and Weick . Two novel characteristics of the crisis are worth noting .
 March and Weick argue that choices can precede goals and that retrospective views of choices can be a way to discover goals . Weick and March argue that retrospective view of choices is a way of discovering goals .
 The goals discovered in the course of making the decision had the most impact on the missile crisis . It is true that goals can emerge from previous choices .
 "It was not retrospective discovery, but the near simultaneous discovery of goals and choices," she says . "It's not retrospective, but it was not. Thus it was . the near . simultaneous discovery, the discovery of . goals and . choices, she writes .
 The second characteristic that emerges is the emphasis of the role of argumentation and debate in the goal discovery process, which provides a more explicit description of the process of goal discovery .
 Goals are discovered through a social process involving argumentation and debate in a setting where justification and legitimacy play important roles . Goals must be discovered through argumentation, debate and justification . Goals will be found through argument and debate, a process where justification is justified .
 Not just any sort of goal will be discovered; it will be one that is consistent with shared organizational goals . The goal is to find a shared organizational goal that can be consistent with a shared goal .
 The third important difference from the standard task description concerns the evaluation of alternatives . The task is to evaluate alternatives to the task .
 Implicit in the task description is the assumption that the whole purpose of making a decision is to choose an alternative that will solve a problem . The task description assumes that the purpose of choosing an alternative is to find a solution .
 Decision makers often choose alternatives that they don't expect will solve the problem . What is striking is that they often choose the wrong thing to solve it .
 Decision makers behave this way in the face of important problems. Moreover, decision makers behave in the way they do so, says David Cameron .
 Gelb argued that they had reasonably accurate and generally pessimistic views of the likelihood of success . Gelb: They had a fairly pessimistic view of the success of the project .
 The President said we will get the Soviet strategic missiles out of Cuba only by invading Cuba or by trading . President said he would only be able to get them out of the country by invading or trading .
 Decision makers do not, of course, choose an alternative because it is likely to fail . It is simply that the ""best"" or ""satisfactory"" alternative often has a low probability of success . Decision makers often choose the best or the best alternative because they are not likely to
 There is something paradoxical about a ""good,"" ""optimal,"" or ""satisfactory"" alternative with a low probability of success . But even if alternatives with a high probability of . success are rare, they are rare . There is a paradoxical paradox about a good
 The paradox is magnified by the fact that decision makers hold that an alternative can be both unattractive, i.e., have a low probability of success, and satisfactory . Decision makers also hold that the alternative can also be unattractive and unsatisfactory .
 It would be less of a paradox if they modified their beliefs in ways that equated satisfactoriness with attractiveness, i.e., inflated their subjective estimates of the probability of success . iReport: What do you think? Share it with us at CNN iReport .
 Decision makers often choose an unattractive alternative as a satisfactory solution to a problem . Decision makers sometimes choose unattractive alternatives as a solution to the problem .
 The probabilities are independent in the sense that both can be low, one can be high and the other low . These two probabilities can be very low or very high, or very low .
 Agood alternative has high probability of producing a positively valued state of affairs and a low probability of . producing a negatively valued state . State of affairs . Agood alternatives have high chance of producing positive and negative state of . affairs .
 A bland alternative has low probabilities of producing either positively or negatively valued states of affairs . A bland alternative has low probability of producing positive or negative outcomes, says author .
 Amixed alternative has high probabilities of producing positively or negatively valued states of affairs . Amixed alternatives have high probability of producing positive or negative state of affairs, say experts .
 A poor alternative has a low probability of producing a positively valued state of affairs . A poor choice has a high probability of making a negative choice, a poor alternative, a positive choice .
 Binary evaluations generally recognize only the first and fourth classes of alternatives; an alternative is either good or poor . Binary evaluations are often based on the first, fourth and first class of alternatives . In the U.S. binary evaluations, a person is either a good or a poor alternative .
 Separating positive and negative outcomes recognizes two additional types of outcomes . Separate positive outcomes from negative outcomes can be positive, positive or negative .
 Only perverse decision process would fail to select a readily available good alternative . Only a perverse decision made by a perverse process would not select a good alternative, it says .
 This proposition implies that bland alternatives, those with low probabilities of either success or failure, will be acceptable when no good alternative is readily available . This proposition is said to be the case of bland alternatives .
 The tendency to suspend search in the face of a bland alternative can be explained by assuming that in the absence of a good alternative, decision makers attend to the probability of a negative outcome in evaluating alternatives .
 An alternative with an unacceptably high probability of producing a negatively valued outcome will always be less preferred than an alternative that does not . An alternative to a negative outcome is always less likely to be preferred than a positive outcome .
 In this view, the probability that an alternative will produce a positively valued outcome is a secondary consideration . The probability of an alternative to a positive outcome is not a consideration, it is a matter of concern .
 This view of evaluation suggests that decision makers are looking for alternatives that do not have high probabilities of making the current situation worse . Decision makers should look at alternatives that don't have high probability of making a change worse, experts say .
 "Good" and "bad" are not fixed, but anchored to the situation facing decision makers . Thus, evaluations are not absolute, because they are anchored to a situation facing a decision maker .
 If the status quo is sufficiently intolerable, extreme alternatives may present low probabilities of making an intolerable situation worse . The conservative strategy of avoiding alternatives with high probabilities of undesirable outcomes is based on the conservative strategy . Extreme alternatives present low probability of making intolerable situations worse .
 The blockade during the Cuban missile crisis is a clear example of a bland alternative . The blockade of Cuba during the missile crisis was a bland option .
 Inaction, diplomacy, and an airstrike had high probabilities of producing undesirable states of affairs . Inaction and diplomacy had high probability of producing unwanted states of state of affairs, author says .
 The standard task description assumes that the purpose of decision making is to solve a problem . Decision makers appear to operate with a very different perspective, says the author .
 Whether the action will solve the problem that motivated the process is less important than whether it has a high probability of making matters worse . It's important to know if the action is likely to make matters worse than if it will solve it, experts say .
 The Cuban missile crisis shared some characteristics of Cohen, March, and Olsen's garbage can model . But that model is not wholly appropriate for understanding the group decision-making process .
 The missile crisis was in danger of becoming an organizational garbage can . President Kennedy and his top advisers controlled the issues that they allowed to be attached to the crisis .
 The crisis also shared characteristics of Weick's enactment-selection-retention model . The crisis was similar to the Weick-era-era model . Weick was the first president of the United States to be elected to office .
 Decision making during the crisis was far more directed and intentional than Weick's metaphor of organizational action would lead us to expect . Nevertheless, decision making during this crisis was much more directed than the Weick metaphor would suggest .
 The findings of this study do not, however, suggest a wholesale denial of the standard concepts of decision making, the study says . The findings were published in the journal Nature Nature .
 Goals were still identified, there was search for alternatives, and consequences were evaluated . Goals still identified and there was a search of alternatives .
 The way goals were identified, alternatives sought, and consequences evaluated was very different from what standard descriptions would predict . However, the way goals and alternatives were identified and evaluated was different .
 A problem is defined and a global goal is identified, which produces a rough description of an acceptable resolution of the problem . A global goal must be identified and an acceptable solution is identified .
 The alternative will be accompanied by an argument describing the positive outcomes associated with undertaking the action . The alternative is accompanied by a statement of support for the government's decision .
 If there is general agreement on the desirability of following the course of action, it will be ratified . If there are general agreement, the decision will be made .
 If there is no support and no formal opposition, the alternative will die for what amounts to the lack of a second - the fate of the majority of alternatives proposed during the missile crisis . The alternative will be the same fate of many of the most of the .
 The third and most interesting case is when there is an objection to the alternative . The alternative is when the alternative is not the best, the best .
 Objections are framed in terms of the negative or undesirable consequences of the alternative, and the effect is to propose constraints, beyond the global goal, that further define an acceptable resolution of the problem . Objections should be framed as negative, undesirable consequences .
 If there is disagreement over the newly introduced constraint, a secondary discussion on the merits of the new goal may ensue . If there are disagreements over the new constraint, there may be a secondary debate .
 Only if there is an imperative to act will a competing course of action be proposed . Only if the imperative is to act is proposed, it will not be possible to do so, says David Cameron .
 In the absence of an imperative to act, the original alternative is generally discarded and a different independent course of action is proposed . The original alternative to act is often discarded and the new alternative is proposed.
 This description of the task of decision making is far less linear than standard descriptions propose . The task is described as a task that is not linear . This description is far from linear .
 The iterative and selfdefining character of the task is emphasized, rather than the stages of it . The self-defining nature of the tasks is emphasized in the task .
 Alternatives stimulate arguments that lead to the discovery of the goals, which then influence the choice of alternatives . Alternators stimulate arguments, which leads to the choices of alternatives, which are made by people who want to achieve goals .
 A standard and a decision-making-by-objection reconstruction of the choice between a blockade and an airstrike can be different . Consider, for example, the differences between a standard and decision-based reconstruction of a blockade or airstrike .
 The goal was to remove the threat to the United States posed by the strategic weapons in Cuba . The U.S. government says it wants to remove Cuba's strategic weapons .
 The initial search produced two alternatives, an airstrike against the missiles and a policy of inaction . The first option was an airstrike on the missiles .
 Neither alternative was wholly acceptable, and further search produced the blockade option . The blockade option was the first to be considered a solution .
 Two groups argued, debated, and challenged each other's assumptions and predictions . The two groups debated, debated and challenged their assumptions, predictions .
 The consequences of following each course of action were presented to President Kennedy and he made his choice . President Kennedy made his decision to make a decision .
 The initial goal was to deal with the threat posed by the missiles in Cuba . The initial aim was to protect the U.S. from the missile threat in Cuba, officials say .
 The attention of the ExCom quickly focused on an airstrike against the missile sites . The attack was the first strike on a missile site in the area .
 Even though the military insisted during the very first meeting that the airstrike could not be limited, surgical versus large-scale airstrikes were not clearly delineated until much later .
 As part of an objection to the airstrike proposal, Secretary of Defense McNamara made his missile-is-a-missile argument .
 After a secondary discussion, which resulted in a rejection of McNamara's do-nothing proposal and the definition of the removal of the missiles as the only acceptable resolution, advocacy of an airstrike resumed .
 Bobby Kennedy objected to the airstrike proposal with his Pearl-Harbor-in-reverse argument . Bobby Kennedy proposed the additional constraint of consistency with tradition as part of the definition of an acceptable resolution of the crisis .
 McNamara objected to the surgical airstrike by arguing that it could not be limited and would entail a full-scale attack on Cuba, with the risk of a spasm military response by Khrushchev . More or less at the same time, McNamara .
 McNamara's objection implicitly imposed the constraint of not placing Khrushchev in a position where a quick military response was likely . McNamara: "McNamara wanted to avoid a quick response"
 The Kennedy-McNamara objections provided a basis for renewing the blockade . The blockade alternative had been proposed during the first meeting after the discovery of the missiles .
 The ExCom was unable to recommend either of the two alternatives to the president, who had to choose between them . However, the constraints on an acceptable resolution of the problem were inconsistent with born alternatives .
 Decision-making-by-objection narrative is better able to account for three characteristics of the decision-making process . Although there are no stark differences between the two .
 Documentary evidence suggests that decision makers confronted an ambiguous, ever-changing set of options . First, the documentary evidence of the initial meetings of the ExCom suggests that the decision makers .
 Sorensen prepared a memo for President Kennedy on October 17 . This account is largely constructive and summarizing the ExCom's deliberations and listing fouralternainterpretive theories .
 Embedded in these alternatives was the further issue of the nature of the warning and political pressure . Embedded into these alternatives, there was also the issue of political pressure on the government .
 It was not until much later that the list of alternatives stabilized, and in the end, only two were presented to President Kennedy . Only two alternatives were offered to Kennedy .
 The sequential style and goal-discovery aspects of the process of decision making by objection would tend to produce the sort of ambiguity found in the deliberations of the ExCom . The sequential . style of the . process of . decision-making by objection .
 The decision-making-by-objection model captures the ambiguity and change in preferred courses of action . Second, the decision-based approach captures the change of course of action in a decision .
 As new goals are discovered, preferences change, and as alternatives are proposed, individuals change the arguments they make . As a result, individuals make new arguments for their beliefs .
 Sorensen's assessment of McNamara's preferences probably reflects his argument against a surgical airstrike rather than a full airstrike . McNamara says he prefers a full strike .
 The model of decision making by objection recognizes the ambiguity in advocacy that follows from the sequential choice style of decision-making .
 Without a clear set of competing courses of action to provide a reference, relating preferences to arguments can be problematic . Without a reference to a reference it can be difficult to relate preferences to argument arguments .
 Dean Acheson's assessment of ExCom's meetings as repetitive, leaderless, and a waste of time . Decision-making-by-objection model, with its emphasis on sequential choice and goal discovery, accounts for his assessment of the ExCom meetings .
 Acheson's assessment appears to be ""sour grapes"" because his advice was not followed . The advice appears to have been not followed by the British government .
 Acheson's preferred operating style as secretary of state was to work out a solution to a problem, in consultation with the president, beforehand . He would allow decision-making groups to comment on, not change, the course of action he advocated .
 The ExCom was not directed, but moved from topic to topic, from binary choice to binary choice without a firm hand to guide it and without a structure implied .
 "It was repetitive and leaderless, though probably not a waste of time," he says .
 The model does not establish that decision making by objection is the dominant mode of decision making in foreign affairs . It does display several attributes that make it an interesting explanation of group decision making .
 The process of decision making by objection produces binary choices as a default . Decision-making by objection, with its emphasis on sequential evaluation of alternatives, produces a binary choice .
 It does not, however, exclude competing alternatives to the initial course of action, and there is a shared recognition that some action is required . There are competing alternatives, which will appear when there are objections .
 Decision making by objection is group decision making via argumentation and debate . Goal discovery will occur as a consequence of the interaction of advocates of opposing views, says author .
 The model of decision making by objection also ties into a broader theoretical perspective . The model is based on a model of objection .
 First, the decision-making-by-objection model is a behavioral description . The model is based on the behavior of a person with an object object .
 Most alternatives to standard descriptions of decision making focus on what the actions of decision makers mean, not explicitly on what decision makers do . Most alternatives focus on how decision makers make decisions, not what they mean .
 This study of decision making by objection is strongly empirical in that it draws on detailed primary-source information about decision making in a real setting . Second, this study draws on primary sources about decision-making in real-world situations .
 Secondary-source reconstructions of the decision-making process may be biased in favor of the standard task descriptions . As a result, analyses that rely on secondary-source reconstruction of the decisions may be bias-biased .
 This study of decision making does have an advantage in being drawn from primary-source material . Although any analysis will be biased toward its prior organizing principles, this analysis is biased toward prior organizing .
 Third, the model of decision making by objection preserves the social information-processing character of decision-making in an organization . The model of objection preserves a social information processing character of the organization .
 The standard approach, as March has noted, has been to use the same task description for decision making whether speaking of individuals, groups, or organizations . March noted that the standard approach to decision making has been the same .
 Decision making in an organization is not simply a biggerversion of the intellectual task facing a solitary decision maker . But making a decision in the name of the organization is a social act . Decision making is a big part of the responsibility of an organization, not just an intellectual task .
 According to the model of decision making by objection, making decisions is a process involving argumentation and debate in an explicitly social setting . Decision making is constrained by the need to justify actions in terms of shared symbols, goals, and objectives . Decision-making by objection is based on the model
 The striking characteristics of the decision-making-byobjection process observed during the missile crisis represent neither blind variation nor random noise but sensible adaptations to the demands of the task environment of decision making .
 In the face of a complex policy issue, decision makers will be presented with a diverse menu of alternatives reflecting the diverse capabilities of the organization .
 "To do anything but make a series of binary choices would overwhelm the limited information-processing capacity of the decision makers," says John Defterios .
 Discovering goals in the course of making a decision avoids the need to specify all goals at the outset and to resolve all goal conflict . Discoveries goals avoid the need for all goals to be specified and resolved all conflicts .
 Objections to pursuing proposed courses of action help define the characteristics of an acceptable resolution of the problem, introduce new goals into the process, and provide a mechanism for limited coordination and control . Objections help define characteristics of acceptable resolution .
 Avoiding alternatives with high probabilities of failure is an inexpensive screening procedure . Screening procedure exploits what little certainty exists, without requiring trade-offs between successes and failures . Avoiding alternative alternatives to high probability of failure can be a cheap screening procedure, experts say .
 In understanding the ways that decision-making behavior reflects the task environment, we are in a better position to understand decision making in complex policy settings and to suggest improvements to policymaking .
 Roger Hilsman, Roger 1972 Human Problem Solving. Newell, Allen, and Herbert Simon Simon Cohen, . Cohen, Michael D., and James G Hilsm, James G. Cohen, and . Cohen D., Michael D. Cohen . Cohen . and James Hils
 Braunstein 1962a ""TCS notes at 11:45m.74 The Cybernetic Theory of Deci. 1971 ""Preferences among gambles meeting on Cuban missile dission. Braunstein" 1962a .
 1976 Administrative Behavior. 1976 . Theodore Sorensen, John F Tversky, Amos Amos, Amos, and Daniel Kahne .