 The U.S. learned that the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases on Cuba because the Soviets wanted to close the missile gap . The United States learned about the bases because of the bases .
 Even though the Soviet Union promised they would not attempt to place nuclear weapons in Cuba, they put them there anyway in hopes that the U.S. would not find out until it was too late to do anything about it . The Soviet Union put them in Cuba anyway .
 The nuclear bases were very near completion when a U-2 spy plane discovered the bases . The bases were discovered by the U.S. U.A. spy plane . They were near completion at the time of discovery .
 "That is not a very comforting thought, knowing that we were so close to a nuclear holocaust," says author . "That's not a comforting thought," she says .
 Kennedy was probably cautious about strikes because of the Bay of Pigs invasion which had failed so miserably just a year before . Kennedy probably was cautious about striking because of his cautionaryness .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was an attempt by the U.S. to remove Castro from office . Castro was overthrown by the United States .
 The hope was that a general uprising would begin, and Castro would be removed from office by his own people, not by any U.S. personnel . The hope is that the general uprising will begin, but not by the United States personnel .
 What cost the success of the mission was that the U.S. neglected to provide air cover for the troops, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 An advantage that the U.S.R. had if we had not found the missile bases in time, would have been the first strike capability. An advantage we had . had if . not found . in time . would have . not been found in time.
 This does not necessarily mean the ability to strike first, needless to say, any country can do that; It means the . ability to . strike first and disarm the opponent at the same time . This means the ability . to strike . first . and disarm .
 If the U.S. had active nuclear missile bases in Cuba, many Americans feared that the Soviets could make an attempt take out our air bases without our even realizing it until it was too late .
 In being so close to the U.S. coast, they could conduct strikes against our B-52 bases undetected by our radar . The U.N. military says it is concerned about the possibility of attacks on U.K. bases .
 "Even when we realized they were attacking it would be to late to do anything. Even when we . realized they . realized that they would . be attacking it . would be too late to . do anything," says Mark Hughes .
 With our ability to counter attack gone, the Soviets could dictate whatever policy it wanted to the U.S., and we would have no choice but to accept their terms . We would have to accept the terms of the Soviet Union's policy, he says .
 A country that has first strike capability knows that it can start a war any time it chooses, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "It's a war that can be started at any time," he says .
 A country that knows that they are not capable of first strike, will not be as willing to start a war . On the other hand, a country that . knows . that they . know that they not . capable of starting a war, will be less willing to do so .
 We believed that the placing of Soviet missiles inside of Cuba’s borders would give them this first strike ability . The Soviet Union believed it would be able to strike Cuba .
 Understanding the Arms Race, sees the Soviets as a people who tried every option possible to get every advantage that they could . Understanding the arms race, understands the Soviet Union's need to be on top of the game .
 Khrushchev believed that putting nuclear missiles in Cuba was the most expedient way to close the missile gap with the U.S. The missile gap was the key to closing it up, he said . The U.K. went to Cuba in 1960s and '60s to
 In Smoke’s opinion, they were willing to risk WW III in order to obtain first strike capability . Smoke: In Smoke's opinion, the U.S. was willing to go on the risk of WW III to get first strike capabilities .
 Kennedy’s first choice of action was to let the Air Force use conventional weapons to destroy the bases . He states that Kennedy's first choice was to allow the air force to destroy bases .
 Kennedy quickly and wisely, in Smoke’s opinion and my own, decided to use this option as an absolute last resort . Kennedy quickly chose to use the option as a last resort, Smoke says .
 Kennedy’s first choice of action was a public declaration that the Soviets must remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy's first choice was to order the removal of the missiles, which he said were Soviet missiles .
 Soviet ships were not allowed to enter Cuban waters . When that plan failed to deter the soviets, he used an alternative plan, which was a naval blockade .
 In Richard Smoke’s opinion, he made a wise decision in choosing the blockade . Richard Smoke: "In Richard Smoke's opinion, the blockade is a good decision"
 The Soviets then had a way out without humiliating themselves . However, it does say that his choice was good because of the way out .
 Even though the U.S. had an easy way out, it still hurt Khrushchev in his political life on the home front . Even though it was a political move, it was still hurt his political career on the ground .
 Just exactly when they arrived in Cuba is undetermined, but the outcome could have been far worse than it was . The outcome could be far worse if it were more serious than what happened .
 International Relations book does not come out and support Kennedy’s decisions; I think it hints that he chose the best option . I believe that even though the International Relations . book . does not support Kennedy's decisions; . I think that even .
 Bruginoi feels Kennedy did the right thing in keeping Eisenhower informed at all times . He says Kennedy was right to keep Eisenhower informed of his situation at all time .
 Kennedy launched the U-2 spy plane that discovered the nuclear bases . Therefore Kennedy launched a spy plane to find out the bases .
 Brugioni believes Kennedy made all the right decisions, but all the reasons he made those decisions were purely political . Kennedy's decision to leave the White House was purely political, he says . Kennedy made the best decisions, he said .
 He states that yielding to the Soviets would seriously undermine U.S. credibility . He says it would undermine the United States’ credibility .
 I believe, along with all the authors mentioned above, that Kennedy did the right thing . I believe that Kennedy made the right decision .
 I have found no authors of text that disagree with Kennedy’s decision, and I do not believe that there are very many if any if any . The author of this article does not believe there are any who disagree .
 A strategic attack on Cuba could have been extremely harmful to our nation’s health . Since there were already missiles in Cuba, a strategic attack would have been very harmful to us .
 If any one thing had been handled differently, it might have resulted in a nuclear war from which the world might never have survived . The world might not have survived from a single nuclear war .
 I believe strongly that if there were any mistakes made in the way we handled things, there were a very few, he said . The former Manchester United star said he was disappointed with the way his team handled the situation .
 There may be some mistakes Kennedy made during this time of crisis, but they are kept well hidden from all of us .