 You'll Laugh, You’ll Cry, Lose Faith in Humanity, and Hopefully You Won’t Get Bored before the End . The film is based on Stephen King’s novel .
 Those who are away from the “Front” cannot be touched by the ‘Front’ can be touched . The connotation has always been one of danger . However, it also denotes a modicum of safety, as those who are not near the front can't be
 This was true back in the days of bullets and bayonets, but bombs have turned this axiom to an illusion . This is true back to the days when bullets were fired at the hands of the enemy, but now bombs have made it impossible .
 It is foolish to believe that anyone can't be safe when one considers the nuclear afterglow of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, where the true destructive capabilities of the atom were revealed . It's foolish to think anyone can be safe in the nuclear glow of Hiroshima or Nagasaki .
 For the first time in humanity’s history, people carry the ability to create an Extinction Level Event . People carry the power to create Extinction Levels Event . The first time people have been able to do this, people will be able to create the event themselves .
 Man finds himself with enormous power but could be without wisdom to use it responsibly . As ability outpaces empathy, man finds power outpacing empathy, he finds it difficult to use responsibly .
 In 1962, Fidel Castro had only been in control of his newly-minted Communist party for about three years . Fidel Castro was only in charge of the party for three years before his assassination .
 During this time, he was suspected of creating bonds with Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, which alarmed the U.S. The United States alarmed the United States immensely .
 The U.S. supported the “Bay of Pigs” invasion and Operation Mongoose (a secret program of propaganda, psychological warfare, and sabotage in Cuba), both of which failed miserably . In response to this proximal threat, the United States supported the Bay of Pigs
 Castro, fearing usurpation, turned to the Soviets, who allied with the Cubans in exchange for the placement of nuclear weapons on their island . Castro turned to them in order to protect his country from invasion .
 The maneuver was a response to U.S. deployment of Thor IRBMs in the UK and Jupiter IRBm in Italy and Turkey, which put Russia firmly within America’s strike zone . The move puts Russia within the United States’ strike zone, the U.
 It was seen as a possible solution to America’s massive lead in missile quantity . It was also seen as possible solution .
 In August of 1962, covert bases underwent construction in Cuba, weapons were shipped in under various guises . The Soviets maintained an impenetrable poker face even as the United States grew suspicious of their ruse .
 On October 14 of 1962, an American U-2 spy plane captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . The U.S. U.2 plane captured the proof of the bases .
 Kennedy and various staff members (formally called the “Executive Committee of the National Security Council” contemplated how to proceed . Political posturing and planning inevitably followed .
 The Committee discussed several different plans, but the one with the most backing was a full invasion of the country and an overthrow of the government . The Committee voted for the most popular plan .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed to this scenario, but Kennedy was concerned that it would paint the U.S. as “trigger-happy cowboys” and give the 5 Soviets an excuse to conquer West Berlin . Kennedy was worried that the scenario would give the Soviets an
 A “quarantine’s” was put in place around Cuba to block incoming ships carrying weaponry . After much deliberation, a ‘quarantine' was put into place .
 The situation reached a stalemate on October 26, as neither country showed signs of backing down . The spectre of Mutually Assured Destruction cast long shadows over both aggressors .
 Soviet spy Aleksandr Fomin arranged a meeting with ABC News’ John A Scali . Fomin was a spy for the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 At the time, it was believed that he was under orders from Moscow, but it has since been determined he was almost certainly acting of his own accord . He was believed to have been acting of own accord with Moscow .
 He outlined a possible way to defuse the situation, which would involve the removal of the Soviet missiles under UN supervision in return for the United States announcing that the U.S. would promise never to invade Cuba .
 JFK and company made some changes to the plan and sent them to the Soviets for approval . JFK sent the plan to the Soviet Union for approval, and it was approved .
 There were a few setbacks and some moments of uncertainty . Both sides eventually agreed to the stipulations of the shaky understanding . It was a shaky agreement .
 The Russian missiles were removed and the United States announced their promise to never invade Cuba . The U.S. never invaded Cuba and the U.K. was never involved in the Cuban crisis .
 They secretly removed their own missiles from Turkey and Italy a year later . Claimed that it was because they were obsolete . They also secretly removed themselves from Turkey, Italy and Italy .
 This allowed them to appease the Russians while saving face in the public forum . It was also a way to appease them while allowing them to save face in a public forum. This was a way of avoiding the Russians .
 The Soviet Union was a paragon of communist ideals, which had been realized in the Russian revolution of the century’s second decade . It was realized in Russia's second decade, the Soviet Union of the same era .
 Fear of the spread of communism reached its apex during the crisis . On the other end of the spectrum was the heavily-capitalist United States, whose fear of communism .
 What had once been a Soviet-USA friendship had now soured to rivalry . The rivalry defined the latter half of the 1900s .
 The bitter echoes of this fallen camaraderie rang loud in 1962, as did the ticking of the atomic clock counting down to midnight . The bitter echo of the fallen comradeship rang loud .
 Both sides could destroy the world several times over, and each of them knew it . Both sides knew each other knew it, and both sides knew it.
 Self-preservation and a sense of global responsibility overcame ideological indignation, and both sides decided to let the world exist for a little while longer . Both sides decided not to kill the world .
 Famous astronomer Carl Sagan once suggested that intelligent species are doomed to destroy themselves . Carl Sagan suggested that the reason humans hadn’t received any communication from alien life was simply that intelligent animals are doomed .
 Technological beings, according to this theory, will always overstep their moral strictures and common sense and subsequently end up dead by their own hands . This theory is based on the theory that technological beings will always be oversteering their moral .
 It also serves as a terrifying lesson on man’s self-destructive capabilities . However, it is also a lesson on the dangers of self destructiveness .
 When it comes to nuclear weapons, all people can do is try to exercise restraint, close their eyes, and pray for silence . "When people can’t exercise restraint," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sidney, a small town in British Columbia, remembers the First World War . The town is home to a group of soldiers who fought for their country during the war .
 Sidney contributed nearly a third of its population to fight at the front during the First World War . It is hardly surprising that this recognition was given to the city .
 Sidney seems an ideal case example through which to investigate the effect of the First World War on a small town in British Columbia . Sidney seems to be an ideal example of how the war affected any small town, seemingly that town .
 Historians often split into two camps when considering the effects of the war on Canadian towns . Historians are often split between the two camps .
 Some argue that the war brought significant change, and thus had a transformative effect on Canadian society and economy . Others argue that it was significant change in Canada's history .
 Others suggest that Canada’s transformation had already begun, and that the war served as a ‘devastating’ disruption to the nation’�s growth . Others say the war was a “devastated’t disruption’
 By examining Sidney between 1914 and 1919, this paper will demonstrate that the town was neither transformed nor devastated by the war . However, by examining Sidney from 1914 to 1919, it will show that the war was not transformed or devastated by it .
 It will be suggested that the war had a formative effect, serving to strengthen and reinforce existing trends while creating new opportunities which were neither radical nor transformative . Instead of radical or transformative, the war served to strengthen existing trends and create new opportunities .
 First World War contributed to the character of Sidney, but neither transformed nor upset the small town . This paper will examine demographic and economic activity, as well as political and social trends .
 The role of the First World War as a turning point in B.C.’s history may need to be revaluated . The paper will conclude by placing Sidney in a larger picture .
 In the history of Canada’s Great War, there is considerable polarization . In the past, there was considerable polarization. In Canada's First World War, the war was divided by partisan factions .
 On one side, some suggest that the First World War transformed and defined Canada as a nation . On the other, some say that it defined Canada's identity .
 David MacKenzie,“Myth, Memory, and the Transformation of Canadian Society,” in Canada and the First World War, ed. P2; . David Mackenzie, “Myth and Memory,’s’the Transformation of Canada,�
 This narrative suggests that the First World War was “Canada’s coming-of-age,” and that it marks the beginning of a new era . In short, this narrative suggests . that the war was ‘Canada's coming of-age’
 Historians have challenged this view, claiming instead that the narrative of identity and transformation is an ‘imaginative version” of the war years . On the other hand, many historians have challenged the view, saying that the story is a ‘imagination version’
 Given the vastness of the country and its many variables, it's not surprising that opposing views have developed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Each narrative seeks to define the Great War as a watershed moment in B.C.’s history . The Great War was a watershed event in the province's history .
 Sidney was a relatively new town upon the eve of the First World War . Sequestered in the rural area of North Saanich, Victoria, about twenty kilometres north of Victoria, Sidney . Sidney was the first town to be established in a rural area .
 Sidney grew rapidly during its first two decades of township growth . Established in 1891, Sidney was the first township to be named Sidney .
 Immigrants from Britain, France, Eastern Europe, and throughout Canada had begun to settle in the North Saanich district as early as 1857 . Many had worked in British Columbia’s interior during the Gold Rush years .
 Between 1895 and 1910 significant industries sprang up throughout Sidney and North Saanich . Agricultural work was the dominant trade during the 19th Century . Sidney was the most prosperous town in the world .
 Sidney soon boasted a sawmill, a brickworks, a canning factory, a cigar factory, and more . The opening of the Victoria and Sidney Railway in 1894 aided industrial growth .
 Electric Line, was opened between Victoria and Deep Cove to cater to the expanding population in the North Saanich area . Electric Line was opened to cater for the growing population of the area . The line is located in Victoria's Deep Cove, Victoria .
 By and large, the First World War has been seen as a disruption to this growth . The war was a major disruption to the growth of the world's economy .
 Daryl Muralt, a historian of the area, has suggested that the war had a ‘devastating’ effect on the local community . He said that the area was devastated by the loss of the British Civil War .
 Muralt's view of Sidney’s war years is perhaps too dramatic . Yet, as will be discussed, it's not too dramatic for Sidney . Sidney's war years were perhaps too much dramatic .
 In fact, for various reasons, a more moderate approach might be taken in order to understand Sidney between 1914 and 1919 . Sidney's life in the U.S. might be best described as 'somewhere in the world'
 Only 60 men from the North Saanich area had left for France in 1915 . By late 1915, only 60 men had gone to France .
 By 1916 other men were returning from the front, either on leave or having completed their tour of duty . By 1916, some of the soldiers were returning to the front .
 While this was still a substantial part of the population, their absence does not seem to have radically affected the town economically .
 Sidney’s volunteers were from a wide variety of occupations . Not following the pal system – which devastated many towns – many of Sidney's volunteers were volunteers from a variety of professions .
 Those in the industrial and agricultural sectors quickly had their positions filled by Chinese labourers who had been pushed out of work during the economic slump of 1913-1914 . Shops which were privately owned were often closed during the absence of their proprietor .
 The absence of the soldiers did not radically interrupt nor transform Sidney’s development . Sidney's development was not radically interrupted nor transformed .
 While their loss was felt throughout the community, economically the burden could be absorbed . The loss of the community was felt through the community but economically it was felt economically .
 Sidney saw industrial growth over the war years . Though a large percentage of the work force was absent, Sidney saw a large part of the workforce .
 The opening of the Canadian Explosives Plant on James Island – just off the coast of Sidney – was an enormous asset to the community . This was in part a direct result of the war, as the plant opened in 1945 .
 Much of the industrial growth which occurred between 1914 and 1919, however, was simply a continuation of projects from before the war began . Much of that growth was simply the continuation of the war .
 Sidney Men are Willing to Fight for their King and Country,” SIR, Aug. Aug. 1915, 1. 1. Sidney Men were willing to fight for their . King and . Country .
 Douglas Horth, for example, returned to Sidney after losing his leg on the front of the front . Horth's leg was amputated after he was hit by a car accident in the war .
 Sidney Historical Museum, Sidney, British Columbia, is home to the Sidney-area museum .
 The introduction of the automobile necessitated infrastructure projects such as paving local thoroughfares . Likewise, the introduction to the automobile required infrastructure projects .
 Sidney Kelp Manufacturing Plant opened in 1915, independent of the war . Sidney Rubber Roofing Company and the Kelp Roofing Plant also opened in the city .
 The Explosives Plant did contribute to production in Sidney, but it only reinforced the existing growth of industry within the town – it did not initiate the trend . Thus, though the Explosives plant contributed to the growth of Sidney, it only added to the existing industry .
 The closure of several major industries during the war years should not be seen as a result of the war . The closure is not the result of a war, but the closure of major industries should be considered a result .
 The V&S Railway, an oft-cited example of the war’s destructive effect on Sidney, had been in financial trouble since well before the war . Sidney had been struggling financially well before .
 By early 1914, the V&S had already racked up a deficit of $25,399 . Ridership was down over 40% from the previous year .
 The V&S was bound for receivership with or without the war . Electric and the CNR– the V.S. were bound to receivership . The CNR and Electric were the last two companies to be in receivership. Electric and CNR were the only two companies
 The closure of the local Cigar Factory and subsequent move to Nanaimo was the result of this inadequacy of service from the V&S . Sidney Lumber Mill, on the other hand, shut down in 1913, sending many into unemployment .
 In 1917, the Mill reopened in 1917 and began production at record setting levels, apparently undisturbed by the war . In fact, production at the Mill began at record high levels .
 Sidney Brickworks also closed during the war years, but as a result of a mishap in production rather than a labour shortage or lack of customers . The Sidney Brick Works also closed in the 1940s, but not as long as the war .
 By 1915 the town seems to have been on an economic upswing in spite of, rather than because of, the war . However, by 1915, it seems to be on an upswing .
 Board of Trade will also Petition Railway Company for a Reduction in Fares to Victoria,” SIR, April 6, 1916, 1.1. 1.2.3.4.5.5 .
 Increased by Four Million Feet Over Last Year; Mill Practically Rebuilt Since May, 1917,” SIR, Feb. Feb., 1920, 1.1.2.1 . “Mill. Increased by four Million Feet over Last Year” .
 The Brickworks was unable to recuperate the loss, and closed . Realizing this mistake too late, the Brickworks decided to close .
 James Island Explosives Plant was a major contributor to the growth of the James Island explosion plant . The plant is now the largest in the country .
 As early as 1915, Sidney’s surrounding areas were used as a training camp for many regiments from the coast before they shipped east . Sidney and surrounding areas have been used as training camps for many of the country's regiments .
 Pool halls, Reading Room, cafes, cafes and other stores were frequented by these soldiers . The Reading Room and the Berquist Event Hall were also frequented .
 Sidney could support two brothels during the war years speaks to the economic stability of the town . Sidney's economic stability during that period speaks to its economic stability .
 After war’s end many new families moved into the North Saanich area as a result of the Federal Soldier Settlement scheme . New families took advantage of the inexpensive agricultural property .
 Sidney has doubled its population over the past decade . By 1921, Sidney had roughly 1200 residents, having doubled population . Sidney had about 1200 residents .
 Sidney had been growing at a similar rate for two decades already . This population growth should not be seen as unusual, however, as Sidney had already been growing .
 Growth rate is on par with Port Alberni and Duncan, similar towns which had doubled their population over the decade . Town doubled its growth rate in 10 years .
 Sidney also saw domestic commercial stability and expansion . Sidney saw industrial growth and commercial stability .
 Local businesses maintained stable hours and continued to import goods, including goods from Britain . Local businesses maintain stable hours .
 New and popular goods included mops, electric irons, and fashionable women's clothes, all unlikely purchases .
 Local businesses maintained stable advertisement slots in the newspaper . Local businesses were able to bring in delicacies and luxuries throughout the year .
 Sidney Restaurant renovated to double its size . The local shoe store opened a second branch on James Island . Sidney Restaurant, for example, renovated .
 Electrical shop in 1916 and creation of several auto-taxi and freight lines . Electrical shop opened in 1916 . Auto-taxis, freight lines and other lines were created .
 Bantams, the 321st, the Seaforth Highlanders, the 67th, and the 143rd to name a few . The 321st and the 321th are the most famous British Bantsams .
 Pay Parrade Camp Sidney, Sidney BC, 1916, by 1916, Sidney Museum Archives, P991.33.33 .
 Turkeys, Geese, Chicken, Beef, Mutton, Veal and Veal, Oysters, and Mince Meats for Christmas,” SIR, Dec. Dec. 1915, 2.2. “SIR, December 2. 1915. Turkeys
 Electric Open New Office on Beacon Avenue,” SIR, April 27, 1916, 1. 11 complemented by agricultural expansion and increased yields as a result of new farming technologies .
 Sidney experienced slow economic growth between 1914 and 1919 . The town was brought out of its pre-war economic downturn . Sidney experienced a slow economic downturn in the early years of the war .
 This growth was aided by the influx of soldiers to the town, but it was not defined by it . The town's growth was not aided by it, as was the growth of the town itself .
 Residents continued to purchase new technologies, buy new products, and support local businesses just as they had before the war, and after it . Residents continued purchasing new technologies and buying new products .
 Sidney grew as a community as a result of population and economic growth . Sidney also grew as an economic and social community .
 War years saw an expansion in Sidney’s sense of identity, he says . Sidney says the war years were not divisive, but instead they were expanding his identity . Sidney: "The war years are not divisive"
 A large part of this community identity was a direct consequence of the war effort . The community identity of the community was a strong part of the WWII effort .
 New societies, like the Red Cross or the Patriotic Fund, fostered an unprecedented amount of community interaction . Weekly meetings, knitting parties, correspondence, and nearly weekly fundraisers brought members of the community closer together over the course of war .
 Fundraisers like local dances and the Red Cross ‘Sock Days’ created opportunities for the town to congregate . Red Cross fundraisers also created opportunities to gather .
 New interest was taken in preservation, beautification, participation, and community action . As a result, new interest has been taken in preserving, beautifying, participation .
 Before the war, community organizations, events, and a corresponding local spirit were already developing . The war was the first major war in the United States .
 Social clubs, unions, work groups, and ladies organizations were all formed before the beginning of the war . Many existing groups merged with or into war effort societies .
 While the war reinforced and perhaps sped this development, it did not transform nor destroy it . The war reinforced the development, perhaps sped it, but did not destroy it.
 Sidney was fostered by the emergence of local leaders who rose through the war effort . In part, community development in Sidney grew in part because of the war efforts .
 Home-front organizers and returned soldiers gained positions of leadership in the community . Given a new degree of prestige or sway .
 Cy Peck and George Pearkes, for example, became leading public figures . 48 Horth, 14; “An Up-to-Date Machine,” SIR, Sept., 1915, 2.2.
 Saanich Pioneers Society, 70. 12, was formed in 1970s and 1980s . Both were instrumental in major projects throughout community .
 Besides these well-known names, a number of lesser-known figures also rose to prominence .
 Campbell, and proprietors of key businesses rose to community leadership roles . Campbell, Campbell and others rose to leadership roles in the community . Campbell was a pioneer of community leadership in the 1960s and '90s .
 These figures had sway with the Sidney Board of Trade, could organize and lead community gatherings easily, and had well-established networks of support . These figures were influential in Sidney, Sidney, and could organize gatherings easily .
 Many pioneered or led new organizations and societies during and after the war, including the Saanich Fruitgrowers Association, the Mount Newton Lodge, the Sidney Literary Club and the Sidney Branch Legion .
 It should be noted that, at least to a degree, women were also included in these local leadership positions .
 To what extent this development of local leaders can be accredited to the war, however, is questionable . It is unclear how much of this development can be attributed to the conflict .
 With a growing population, especially within the town center, and with the establishment of several local political and social groups prior to the war – including women’s political groups – seem to have been slowly on the rise anyway .
 An influx of professionals into the town before and during the war – such as a new doctor, a dentist, teachers, and agricultural experts from the nearby Dominion Experimental Farm – has already been contributing to the group of community leaders regardless of the war .
 The war may have reinforced this development, but it certainly did not radically alter the social dynamic of the town . The town's social dynamic was largely unaffected by the war .
 Between 1914-1919, Sidney began to define itself as a community separate from Victoria . In the midst of these social changes, Sidney became an independent community .
 Prior to the war, local headlines included events and concerns, but during the war the focus of the community turned inwards . During the war Victoria's focus turned towards the war .
 Sidney businesses made pleas for residents to shop locally . Sidney businesses rely on local patronage to weather economic downturn . Sidney business has been in decline for years .
 The separation from Victoria seems to have been the result of the new local leaders discussed above .
 Sidney residents made efforts to develop infrastructure, improve education, and prevent unemployment . With strong leadership and a Board of Trade autonomous from Victoria, Sidney residents have made efforts .
 “Generous Support Given Given Red Cross Society Linen Shower,” SIR, June 17, 1915, 1; “Subscriptions to Patriotic Aid Fund now being Solicited’s Solicited. Elect their Officers,’SIR, March
 “Generous Support Given Given Red Cross Society Linen Shower,” SIR, June 17, 1915, 1. “Red Cross Society’s Officers Elect their Officers” “Elect their Officers,’
 “Light and Power Accounts can now be Paid in Sidney,” SIR, Sept., 1915, 1; “Sends Delegation on Good Roads” alleviating the need to travel to Victoria . “Returned Soldiers to be Welcomed”
 Connections to Victoria appear to have been displaced by a deep connection to Britain . Victoria appears to have a strong connection to the UK, according to reports .
 Before the war, a majority of Sidney residents were either first or second-generation immigrants from Britain . After the war this number increased via the Soldier Settlement scheme .
 Study does little to suggest that the majority of towns throughout Canada did not experience opposite results . Sidney in the Bigger Picture may be argued .
 Its proximity to Victoria, variety of resources, and position as a transportation hub helped sustain the town . The town is located in Victoria, Victoria, and is located near the Victoria airport .
 Sidney should not be seen as the exception which proves the rule . Sidney is not the exception, but he is one of the best players in the world to be a top scorer .
 Sidney shares some fundamental similarities with many of the towns surrounding it . Sidney is one of many small towns around the world . Sidney's experience is not representative of every small town's experience .
 Sidney also grew at a similar rate over the decade between 1911-1921 to towns like Duncan, Port Alberni, Mission City, Ladysmith, and Merritt . Sidney grew at similar rate to several towns throughout B.C. during the war .
 The rise of local leaders and prominent community members was also not unique to Sidney, but occurred throughout B.C. It is also not surprising that the introduction of the telephone, the automobile, and the expansion of rail lines did not only affect Sidney but were omnipresent throughout the province .
 Sidney’s war experience should therefore not be considered atypical, but as relatable . Sidney's war experience is therefore not considered to be an uncommon experience, but relatable. Sidney's experience should be considered relatable, as well as not uncommon .
 Sidney’s history outside the war years, it is clear that the town experienced several transformative changes . The introduction of the Patricia Bay Airport, the opening of the Swartz Bay Ferry terminal, or the closure of the peninsula's rail lines, for example .
 At each of these pivotal points, the community underwent change much more drastic and transformative than any of the changes between 1914 and 1919 . Yet, the narrative of Sidney’s history still places key importance on the war as a chapter, or dividing line, in the town's history .
 The war is upheld as a “turning point around which our entire narrative turns around’s narrative,” says historian McCalla . The war was a ‘turning-point’ in Canadian history .
 Historians and residents tend to polarize on exactly what effect the war did have . Yet, by viewing the war as pivotal in Sidney’s narrative, historians and residents often polarize . The war was pivotal in the narrative of Sidney's life .
 A new narrative of Sidney's history may be constructed, redefining the town’s history according to local-specific transformations and watersheds . Perhaps then, a new narrative could be constructed .
 Sidney’s war experience was not unique, perhaps local histories throughout British Columbia, or throughout Canada, need to revaluate their narratives according to locally-specific periods .
 Sidney made a great contribution to the First World War . Sidney was a great contributor to the Great War .
 Sidney residents at home worked tirelessly to bring the war to an end . Sidney residents sent soldiers to the front and fought tirelessly to end it .
 Sidney remained stable throughout the war years, despite claims that the war devastated or, oppositely, transformed the small town . Sidney was one of the most stable towns in the world during the war .
 Sidney’s economy grew slowly throughout the war, and commercial activity increased . Maintaining steady population growth, Sidney kept a steady population .
 At the same time, the community grew together, and with the assistance of new leaders, began working as a self-sufficient town . The town has since become self-sustained, and is now self-contained .
 These changes, however, appear to have been only reinforced, not initiated, by the war . These changes appear to be only reinforced by war, not by war .
 Sidney’s relatively stable war years, it may be suggested that the town's unique location yielded unique results . Sidney's relatively stable wartime years may have been the result of the war .
 Sidney shared a number of commonalities with several B.C. towns . The experience should be considered at least somewhat familiar with Sidney . Sidney's experience was similar to that of several other towns .
 Sidney's Great War undoubtedly had great consequences for Sidney . But perhaps we undervalue other events in Sidney’s history, such as the Great War .
 Sidney’s example, perhaps by redefining the narrative of British Columbian history according to locallyspecific dividing lines, we may discover much more about our past . Sidney's example is an example of how to redefine the narrative .
 Victor E. Virgin, Victor E History of North and South Saanich Pioneers and District and District . Victor E . Virgin .
 Sidney Museum Archives: Binder Stacks, World War One General, P101,1916 . Sidney Museum archives: World War I General P101.1916. Sidney Museum .
 Sidney Museum Archives: Binder Stacks, World War One General, P127, 12 July 1916 . Sidney Museum archives: P127 was P127 .
 The United States tacitly supported France in the First Indo-China War . Despite the U.S. disapproval of French colonialism, it tacitly backed France .
 By 1954 France could no longer sustain its commitment to a protracted colonial war . However, by 1954 France was no longer willing to engage in a long-running colonial conflict .
 The composition of Cambodia’s government became increasingly dictated by the globalist, geopolitical, and militarily strategic preferences of the United States . During the course of the war the Cambodian monarchy, military, and dissident groups all separately ascended to power primarily through the political, military and
 The coming to power of these groups was not based on the application of U.S. democratic statehood inherent in its rhetoric . The coming of power was based on that rhetoric, the author says .
 Political ascendency was a by-product of U.S. Cold War globalist and military strategy . The rise of political ascendency is a result of the Cold War, military and globalist strategies .
 The violence that defined South East Asia for the duration of the Vietnam War ironically came to a crescendo in its wake . Vietnam War was a time-defining period of violence in the region that defined itself .
 The tragic genocide in Cambodia was a culmination of decades of misled policies of the U.S. and Cambodian governments . Cambodia's nationalism, militarization, and radical ideology that it breaded was the result of the genocide . The United States and Cambodia's governments are responsible for the genocide
 The U.S. began to pressure European states to decolonise their empires in the wake of World War Two .
 These states were often reluctant to fully abandon colonies which were so integral to their political and economic systems . Despite previous pledges, these states often refused to abandon colonies .
 The form of government and ideology of these nations became inextricably linked with the geopolitical, ideological, and strategic interests of competing world powers in the Cold War context . The U.S. government and foreign policy of these countries were linked to each other's interests in Cold War .
 The National Security Council stipulated as early as 1949 that containing communism was central to U.S. policy in the region . Containment of communism was also central to United States policy in Asia .
 Cambodian nationalism was largely repressed during the course of the First Indo-China War . Cambodia was repressed by the war, but was largely successful .
 France granted King Sihanouk nominal independence over Cambodia in the mid 1940s . However, ultimate power continued to reside with France . France granted Cambodia nominal independence in the 1950s .
 France was intent on holding its colonial possessions, while the U.S. was more preoccupied with curbing communist expansion than colonization . The United States was more interested in curbing Communist expansion than colonizing .
 This exclusion of various groups within Cambodia was also evident in the 1954 Geneva Convention . Cambodia was excluded from the Geneva Convention in 1954 .
 Although the Viet Minh were recognised alongside Vietnam’s government, dissident groups within Cambodia and Laos were ignored . Dissident groups were ignored by the Vietnamese government in Vietnam .
 Early recognition of Cambodia’s political regime gravitated towards those who could best represent the U.S. anti-communist policies, rather than those who embodied the legitimate dynamics of Cambodia's varied political spectrum .
 United States policy towards Cambodia was based on a globalist perspective throughout the Cold War . U.S. policy towards the Cambodian people is based on globalist views . Cambodia was ruled out of Cambodia by the United States .
 American administrations perceived emergent states through an overwhelmingly limited security paradigm . Rather then taking into account the intricacies of the multiple forms of South East Asian nationalism, successive administrations perceived these emergent countries through a limited security paradigm .
 President Eisenhower explained the geopolitical importance of IndoChina . Eisenhower explained to a journalist, “You have a row of dominos set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly”
 The bolstering of authoritarian regimes superseded legitimate democratization, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says . He says it's a sign that the U.S. will not tolerate authoritarian regimes in the future .
 The relationship between the two states, however, was not quite that simple . The relationship with the U.S. has been described as one of the most important relationships in history .
 Sihanouk was expected to express strict support for his American benefactors . However, he was still inclined to enhance the independence of Cambodia .
 Cambodia’s precarious position during the Cold War . Herein lays the intricacies of Cambodia's precarious position in the country .
 Sihanouk attempted to remain neutral through the non-aligned movement, utilizing both communist and American aid to develop Cambodia’s institutions and counter ancient regional dynamics with neighbouring Thailand, Vietnam, and Laos .
 U.S. commitment to neighbouring Vietnam in Vietnam forced Cambodia to react . Cambodian soldiers were introduced to Cambodia in 1965 . Cambodia's involvement in Vietnam in 1965 led to the introduction of American soldiers .
 Robert McMahon, Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War, is quoted in Robert McMahon's book .
 Sihanouk’s strategy was “A domestic accommodation, an implicit acknowledgement of the local communists’ important role in the war for Cambodian independence and their potential and incentive to disrupt a more pro-western regime.’
 The Cambodian people, the Khmer, have existed in South East Asia for much longer than the United States. The Khmer people have existed there for much more than the U.S.
 Cambodia has established relationships with its bordering countries . Cambodia's relationship with neighbouring countries has been strained in recent years .
 The globalist perspective of the U.S. failed to take these ancient relationships into account, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Cambodia was fearful of South Vietnam’s violation of its territorial sovereignty . Cambodia was certainly fearful of its violation of the territorial sovereignty of its territory .
 In response to U.S. coalescence to South Vietnam’s repeated border incursions, Cambodia officially recognises communist China . Cambodia diplomatically expressed its frustration by officially recognising communist China.
 Never were the conflicting perspectives of Cambodia and the United States more clearly evident, says Clymer .
 The United States viewed Cambodia only as a part of the larger worldwide struggle against the communist menace . The U.S. viewed Cambodia as part of a larger world struggle against communist communism .
 Traditional anti-Vietnamese sentiment was clearly in the ascendant and much more important than an abstract anticommunism . Anti-communism was clearly more important in Vietnam than abstract anti-communist sentiment .
 The United States perceived China and communism to be the biggest threat to the future of Indo-China . Cambodia was much more worried about its traditional rivalry with Vietnam . The U.S. was more concerned about its relationship with Vietnam than China .
 At the time, the traditional jockeying between these powers seemed much more pressing to Cambodia than abstract communist ideology . Cambodia was more pressing than abstract ideology .
 The centrality of Cambodia’s borders to the progression of the Vietnam War and its internal politics also warrants examination . Cambodia's borders were key to progression of Vietnam War, and its politics also warrant examination .
 South Vietnam and American soldiers waged the counterinsurgency ever closer to the Cambodian border . Cross border incursions became commonplace during the Vietnam War .
 As the border was largely unprotected, anti-government forces would use Cambodia’s eastern frontier as a defensive tactic and for logistical support throughout the war . Anti-government troops would use the border as a defense tactic and logistical support .
 They had long applied pressure on Sihanouk to fight these communist elements . They had been applying pressure on him to fight them .
 Despite millions of dollars in military aid the Cambodian regime was largely unable to impede the flow of combatants through what became known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Cambodia was largely able to stop the movement of fighters through the trail .
 This had indeed determined the way the U.S. viewed Cambodia throughout the war . The United States viewed Cambodia through the war in Cambodia .
 Most Cambodians realized that their economic and institutional needs were secondary to U.S. primary interest, Vietnam . Cambodia's economic, institutional needs are secondary to the United States' primary interest .
 The U.S. increasingly pursued a more aggressive policy towards Cambodia . American public support over the direction of the war continued to decline . As American support for the war against Cambodia declined, the U.K. pursued an aggressive policy .
 Of course, this did not represent a drastic change in its policy towards Cambodia, says CNN.com .
 A military solution to Cambodia’s instability was central since the beginning of the war in 1965 . In fact, a military solution has been central to Cambodia's instability since the war began .
 By the time President Nixon had been in office for nearly a year, the total number of bombs unleashed by the U.S. climbed to nearly half a million tons . The bombs were dropped by more than a million pounds .
 In response to Nixon’s inability to use troops in Cambodia, he increasingly relied upon bombing communist strongholds . Nixon relied on bombing in response to lack of troops in the communist country .
 President Nixon continued to escalate the extent of military involvement in Cambodia to unprecedented levels . Nixon's Vietnam War was the first time the U.S. military was involved in the country's involvement .
 In the late spring of 1970 President Nixon announced the invasion of Cambodia by U.S. and South Vietnam forces . The invasion was announced by President Nixon .
 The use of military force to solve what had increasingly becoming a civil war in Cambodia would remain the dominant strategy of successive U.S. administrations .
 The bombing and invasion of Cambodia certainly had a profound impact on the stability of its internal political environment . Cambodia's internal political stability was greatly affected by the invasion and bombing of the country .
 Lon Nol was unable to quell the unrest that had been growing since the latter half of the 1960s . Yet even Lon Noll was unable .
 A civil war had been ongoing in the countryside since 1967 with the communist Khmer Rouge gaining considerable ground . The civil war was ongoing in Cambodia since 1967 .
 After the U.S. expanded into Cambodia, the situation worsened exponentially . The situation in Cambodia worsened exponentially.
 484. 22 the country, coming into contact with increasingly populated areas, is Cambodia . The country's population has grown rapidly in recent years .
 The bombing campaign drove many into the open arms of the Khmer forces . Many of the bombing campaign's victims were killed by Khmerian forces in Cambodia .
 The U.S. was less concerned with the internal dynamics of Cambodia than they were with the struggle in Vietnam . At this point, the United States was less interested in Cambodia's internal dynamics than its struggle with Vietnam .
 The United States proved how Cambodian nationalism and statehood was subjugated to its ultimate security strategy in the region . Once again, the U.S. proved how Cambodia's statehood and its nationalism is subjugated .
 In the wake of the Vietnam War, the Khmer Rouge toppled the government of Lon Nol and formed a communist government . In the 1970s, Cambodia was ruled by a communist regime following the war in Vietnam .
 Over the course of the war, the United States role in the ascendancy of the Khmer Rouge was certainly central . The U.S. role in Cambodia's rise in the rise of the regime was central .
 It had fuelled civil strife along Cambodia’s border regions through sustained bombing and sponsorship of political repression . The bombing fuelled civil unrest along Cambodia's border regions .
 The government of Lon Nol was unable to defend itself, leaving it unable to protect itself . Furthermore, its departure left a power vacuum, with the government unable to take control .
 In May 1975 the Mayaguez – an American ship – was captured by the newly formed Khmer government . It was captured in May 1975 .
 It was the U.S. first encounter in South East Asia since the end of the war . The United States first encounter was the first encounter since the war.
 The U.S. responded with brute force in an attempt to rescue the hostages, despite Khmer claims that they would release them . The Khmer responded with force in a bid to rescue them, despite claims that the hostages would be released .
 It was a blatant attempt to redress the failures of Vietnam and underline American credibility in the region . The U.S. was trying to redress Vietnam's failures, underline its credibility in Vietnam .
 41 Marines lost their lives in a covert mission to save the 39 hostages . Tragically, 41 Marines were killed in the mission to rescue the hostages .
 It was soon uncovered that these hostages had already been released by the Khmer . Adding to the failure of this mission, it was also revealed that the hostages were already released by Khmer.
 The Mayaguez incident is another example of the flawed globalist perspective of the U.S. during the Cold War . The incident is an example of an American globalist view of the world .
 The United States would continue to choose sides in an attempt to counter Communist Vietnam . The U.S. will continue to try and counter the Communist Vietnam.
 Kissinger would state, “You should also tell the Cambodians we will be friends with them.” In referring to the Khmer Rouge during a conversation with the Thai Prime Minister in the fall of 1975, Kissinger would say . Kissinger would also state, "You should tell the
 The United States failed to effectively harness Cambodian nationalism throughout the course of the entire Cold War . The U.S. failed to harness Cambodia's nationalism during the Cold War.
 Its policy towards Cambodia was based upon geopolitical and security interests, the author says . Cambodia's policy towards the country was based on geopolitical interests, he says .
 The United States interpreted events in Indo-China through a globalist perspective, ignoring the subtle nuances and intricacy of nationalism in the region . The U.S. has been criticized for its approach to the region as a result .
 As it became bogged down in the Vietnam War, disregard for Cambodian self determination further dwindled .
 The intensification of bombing delegitimized the government and increased support for the Khmer Rouge . The intensified bombing increased the support of the government . The government was overthrown in Cambodia in 1972 .
 The unspeakably tragic genocide which followed was also met with intransigence . The unspeakable tragedy which followed the genocide was met with intimidence .
 The United States continued to support groups to balance the regional power of Vietnam . The U.S. continued to help balance the region's power .
 The harsh contradictions of the U.S. globalist perspective continued well into the end of the twentieth century . The harsh contradiction of the United States' globalist views continued well through the decades .
 On the one hand, the Cold War was rooted in the preservation of democracy . On the other hand, it is rooted in preserving democracy . The Cold War has been a two-and-a-half-decade-long struggle for democracy .
 On the other hand, the policies of the United States stifled those very same values it claimed to be fighting for, he says . The U.S. government's policies stifled its values, he writes .
 Menetrey-Monchau, Cecile “The Mayaguez Incident as an Epilogue to the Vietnam War and its Reflection of the Post-Vietnam Political Equilibrium in South East Asia,” Cold War History, 5. Hill and Wang,
 Cosimo de’ Medici was an astute statesman who established the framework for continued Medici success . Isabella Casciola was the founding father of one of the Renaissance’s most storied dynasties .
 He was also a prolific patron of the arts and scholarly learning . He established the basis of Florence’s first public library .
 Florence was Florence’s preeminent private patron of the arts in the first half of the fifteenth century . Indeed, he was Florence's most private patron .
 He paved the way for future patrons of art by extending his patronage to a variety of art media . The artist's patronage included art from all types of mediums .
 Cosimo did not restrict patronage to a local scale by sponsoring renovations upon solely his neighborhood church, as was the custom for wealthy patrons . Cosimo's patronage was not restricted to a neighborhood church .
 Cosimo sponsored works such as the Dominican monastery of San Marco and the Basilica of San Lorenzo . Cosimo died in 1883 at the hands of Pope Francis .
 The portrait of the patron is a framework for understanding the patron himself . But it also provides the modern observer with a framework to understand the patron .
 Through close analysis of several works from Cosimo Cosimo's oeuvre, Cosimo’s major preoccupations become evident . Cosimo was born in Rome, Italy, in 1926 .
 Cosimo’s sponsored works include works by Cosimo and others from Cosimo . Cosimo is the company behind Cosimo's "Dynastic solidarity" The company is proud to support Cosimo through its sponsored works .
 After the rise of the Medici, the periodic collapse of the system “under the pressure of new men families” ceased and did not return . The periodic collapse in the system did not continue, the historian says .
 Given this cycle between popolo and a divided, conflicted elite, it is explicable that Cosimo would be preoccupied with ensuring the continuation of his line .
 This was a society that valued familial allegiance to a great extent; so much so that major conflicts could result from perceived slights to one’s family name, resulting in warring urban feudal factions .
 Ansell, “Robust Action,” 1278 25, developed a family structure that was highly centralized, yet had few relations among followers .
 Medicis under Cosimo developed a top-down structure with a well-defined leadership and chain of command . The Medicis developed a system of leadership that included a chain-of-command .
 Cosimo would have been surrounded by an innermost cadre of trusted advisers that would certainly have been family members . Cosimo's family would have surrounded him with trusted advisers .
 He and his advisers would maintain communication with the various branches and associates of the family . In turn, he would maintain contact with various relatives .
 Cosimo cultivated associations with various elite families wisely by developing close rapports, often through marriage . Cosimo's marriage was the result of his close ties to the elite .
 Cosimo’s son Piero would wed Lucrezia Tornabuoni . Marriages linked the Medici to other prominent families such as the Tornabioni .
 Cosimo Medici's three daughters were wed to members of the Salviati, Serristori, and Gianfigliazzi families . One of Cosimo’s closest advisors was his first cousin, Averardo di Francesco de’ Medici .
 Cosimo himself married Contessina de’ Bardi, a member of the Florentine banking clan . Cosimo was born in Florence, Italy .
 The Bardi extended a large loan to King Edward III of England to finance his endeavors in the Hundred Years’ War, which he had defaulted upon . The Peruzzi, along with the Bardi, extended the loan to Edward III .
 In the fifteenth century, the Bardi remained a large and venerable family . Cosimo’s strategic marriage to Contessina was of great importance to the Medici . The Bardi family was a large family of Italian aristocrats .
 It split Bardi consensus, given that “some of sided with the Albizzi,” the oligarchic opponents of the Medici . The Medici was the first Italian aristocratic family to hold the title .
 Medici's personal loans were extended to the Ginori, Tornabuoni, Cocco-Donati, Guicciardini and others . Economic connections also drew other Florentine houses toward the Medici .
 Medici bank employees were family members, but several in key positions were not . Non-relatives could become established in positions of importance, too .
 The manager of the Florentine branch was Ilarione de’ Bardi, while the Roman branch was managed by Bartolomeo de' Bardi . The Roman branch of the Bardi empire was managed in Rome and Italy .
 The party that developed was more centralized and close-knit than those more representative of elites, with an inner cadre and few direct ties between the rank and file . The party developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Medici bank was the source of Cosimo’s philanthropy . The emphasis he placed on dynastic solidarity becomes understood .
 He sponsored renovations at the Franciscan convent of Bosco ai Frati, in the Mugello, and a novices’ chapel at Santa Croce in Florence .
 The Diestsalvi-Neroni, Ginori and Ginori, and Della Stufa families, like those of the Medici sphere, have an opportunity to exercise patronage . This allows associate families to exercise their patronage in Medici spheres .
 Niccolo Machiavelli, ed. Ansell, “Robust Action,” 1277 . The Medici, Medici and Medici were the subject of a book called Medici .
 Throughout the sacristy are images of John the Evangelist, the patron saint of Cosimo’s father, Giovanni di’ Bicci . Cosimo is Cosimo's son, Cosimo, who was born in Rome .
 Also prominent are images of Cosmas, Damian, and Lorenzo, patron saints of Cosimo and his brother, Lorenzo . Cosmas is Cosimo's patron saint, Damian .
 By displaying these name-saints in a linear order, the genealogical descent of the Medici line from Giovanni di Bicci to his sons can be clearly seen . The Medici family is shown in a chart chart .
 Cosimo may have had a twin brother, Damiano, who died shortly after birth . Damiano may have been born Cosimo . Cosimo was born in 1903 .
 Cosmas and Damian can be seen on altarpieces of Bosma and San Marco, San Marco and the Novitate Chapel of Santa Croce .
 Giovanni and Lorenzo lived together with their wives and children . After Giovanni's death and until Lorenzo’s in 1440, the two brothers lived together . Lorenzo died in 14th century .
 When Cosimo and his sons moved to the new palace, it was only a few doors down the Via Larga . Cosimo's sons moved there from the palace .
 The interior is airy, with many windows, a courtyard, garden and three loggias . The palace’s fortress-like exterior is dramatically offsetting the fortress-style exterior . The interior has many windows and many windows .
 Its fortress-like appearance and rusticated facade were reminiscent of the Palazzo Vecchio . The bifurcated windows were taken from medieval times, while the loggia, popular in the trecento, had fallen out of favor by the 1440s and 1450
 The palace’s facade was decorated copiously with Medicean symbols, designed to communicate the importance of the occupants . The palace's facade was designed to show its importance .
 Medici palace was intended to house Cosimo and his close relatives . It would accommodate the patriarch and his wife, along with his sons, their wives, and their children .
 Cosimo’s preoccupation with dynastic solidarity was through works he was directly involved in . Thus, we can see Cosimo's preoccupations with dynastastic solidarity .
 His benevolence extended well beyond his own quarter and the church of San Lorenzo to the Mugello and Bosco ai Frati . He was also generous to his neighbours .
 He sponsored renovations at the Dominican convent of San Marco and the Franciscan Badia at Fiesole .
 The vast majority of Cosimo Cosimo’s patronized works were religious in nature . Cosimo was known for his religious works .
 Cosimo Cosimo’s motivations for sponsoring religious structures were manifold . Cosimo's motivations were manifold, including his sponsorship of religious structures .
 The Medici fortune was linked to close ties with the Papacy . 63% of the profits from the bank came from papal banking .
 Cosimo may have been concerned about usury, the sin of making excessive profits . Religious patronage might have been viewed as a way to counteract this .
 Patronage was also high-profile way to demonstrate Cosimo’s commitment to religion . Cosimo often attended the parish church, San Lorenzo, often attending the parish .
 We cannot view Cosimo’s works as simply acts of self-promotion, or based solely upon powerful religious conviction . Cosimo's works cannot be viewed as simply self-Promotion or based on powerful religious convictions, we must see them as self-professionals .
 At the Dominican convent of San Marco, Cosimo had a private double cell built for himself . The reservation of a cell for a private patron’s exclusive use was quite extraordinary .
 One depicts Christ on the cross, with the words “Mulier ecce filius tuus” coming from his mouth . The dying Christ is consigning his mother to St. Mary’s St. Louis Cathedral . Another depicts the dying Christ as he consign
 Cosmas, patron saint of Cosimo, is consigned to her care, as she is Cosimo's patron saint . Perhaps this is indicative of a rapport Cosimo felt between himself and Mary .
 Cosimo’s strong religious conviction and of divine intercession. In any case, it is indicative of Cosimo's strong religious convictions . Cosimo is a strong believer in the Bible and the Bible, but not necessarily a believer .
 Eugenius ordered the Silvestrines, a Benedictan order and former occupants of San Marco, to relinquish the property to the Dominicans . It was the former occupant of the San Marco .
 Eugenius suggested that Cosimo spend 10,000 florins on San Marco’s renovation to lift the burden of usury from his conscience . Cosimo spent the money on the renovation of the San Marco .
 On his last evening in Florence, Eugenius reconsecrated San Marco to Cosmas and Damian and spent the night in Cosimo’s cell at San Marco .
 Eugenius organized a council in Ferrara in 1438 upon the issue of conciliar reform . It was intended to reunite the Eastern and Western branches of Christendom . Euganius had organized the council in 1439 .
 Cosimo was influential in persuading Eugenius to transfer the council from Ferrara to Florence . Due to the plague in Ferrara, it was moved in 1439 to Florence due to a plague outbreak .
 He argued that the air was purer in Florence and that the city was ideal for both Eastern and Western delegates . Florence was midway between the Mediterranean and the Adriatic .
 Cosimo’s offer of significant financial support persuaded Eugenius that the transfer would be beneficial . Cosimo's offer of financial support convinced the chronic cash-strapped Eugenius to make the move .
 Medici funding kept the council alive . Byzantine emperor, John VIII Palaeologus, housed in the palaces of figures exiled by Cosimo .
 It was the ultimate display of Medici power, bolstered by international prestige and apparent religious consecration . The Medici family is said to be one of the world's most powerful families .
 Cosimo was acquiring civic authority as well as religious through his association with Eugenius . Cosimo continued to fund ecclesiastical structures and artworks to consolidate his pious reputation .
 Cosmas and Damian are featured on the altarpiece of San Marco . Cosmas, Damian, Mark and Domenic are the saints of the convent and the order it belonged to .
 Clear lines can be drawn between the kneeling martyrs and the Virgin and child, who they face . Clear lines should be drawn, says Pope Francis .
 Cosmas and Damian are also featured upon altarpieces at the Novitate Chapel at Santa Croce and in the Medicis’ private altarpies at the palace and country villas .
 At the Franciscan convent of Bosco ai Frati, Cosmas and Damian appear again upon an altarpiece by Fra Angelico . Cosmas, Damian and Cosmas appear yet again upon the altariece . The brothers appear again in the painting .
 Behind them are citrus trees, referred to at the time as ‘male medica,’ commonly believed to be a cure for illness . Behind the trees, citrus trees were believed to have been a cure .
 Medici is a play on the Medici surname, indicating the family’s role as doctors for civic ill . The Medici family is known for their role as a doctor for the ill .
 Cosimo's piety can again be seen in the public library he founded at San Marco . Cosimo’s piety can be seen again in the library .
 Cosimo surrounded himself with learned men of the humanist vein, including Niccolo Niccoli, who became bankrupt by purchasing manuscripts . Cosimo died in 1783 .
 Cosimo gave Niccoli unlimited credit at his bank, and upon his death, paid off his debts in exchange for his six hundred manuscripts . Cosimo paid off the manuscripts in return for his debts .
 Four hundred texts, almost exclusively religious in nature, were donated to San Marco . The rest of the donated texts were distributed among friends .
 Cosimo consulted Tommaso Parentucelli, who would later succeed Eugenius as Pope Nicholas V, to document what books would be necessary to create a complete collection .
 Cosimo hired a humanist librarian Vespasiano da Bisticci to copy any volumes that could not be purchased . Cosimo then hired a librarian to copy copies of the books .
 Two hundred priceless manuscripts had been copied for public consumption at San Marco . A team of forty-five was hired, and in twenty-two months, two hundred priceless books were copied .
 Cosimo’s authority was increasing, his patronization of ecclesiastical structures also burgeoned . In a time when Cosimo was in power, he patronized ecclesiastical buildings .
 Through examination, we can see Cosimo’s indisputable religiosity . His interest in religion was not simply a political facade, it was a religious interest .
 It is this devoutness and search for theological contemplation prompted him to build a personal cell at San Marco .
 His letter to Ficino tells us that, even in his final days, he was preoccupied with spiritual matters . He was preoccupying spiritual matters even in the final days of his life .
 Cosimo attempted to convey piety, often through patron saints being depicted as intercessors or by sponsorship of public religious institutions, like San Marco . His religiosity is apparent, but we can also see how he attempted to communicate piety .
 Cosmas and Damian, as well as other Medici saints, appeared in Cosimo’s sponsored works . This connection was encouraged by liberal appearances of Cosmas, Damian, Laurence and John the Evangelist .
 As such, piety and political machinations could be fulfilled through patronage without apparent contradiction . As such as patronage, it was fulfilled by patronage without seeming contradiction .
 "One must, however, address the overt political posturing that is oft evident," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure we're going to see it"
 Cosimo Cosimo knew that the key to long-lasting success was a good civic reputation . Cosimo's reputation was important to his success, he says .
 When he had been banished in 1433 by oligarchic enemies, fearful of his meteoric rise, he had carefully noted the public’s unfavorable reaction . He had carefully studied the public's unfavorable reaction to his rise and his exile .
 In a letter written to his cousin and close advisor, Averardo, he recounts how he had been recalled to Florence from Cafaggiulio . He writes “after some time I was told by order of the Signory to go upstairs, and by the Captain of the
 Cosimo’s exile was brief, and he made a triumphant return to Florence in 1434 . Pro-Medicean Signoria, elected in September-October of 1434, was instrumental in his comeback .
 Eugenius was conscious of the Medici role as papal bankers, as discussed previously . The Medici played a role in the papal bankrolling of the Roman Catholic Church . The papal pope was aware of their role in papal banking .
 He was supported during his exile by various ruling families and communes, such as the Baglioni of Perugia, the Bentivogli of Bologna, and particularly Venice . He was received more as an ambassador than an exile .
 Political self-aggrandizement is an element that is prevalent throughout Cosimo’s patronized works . Because of this, Cosimo's works are often patronized by the artist .
 In the courtyard of the Medici Palace, a bronze statue of David by Donatello once stood in the courtyard . The Medici palace was itself a dominating manifestation of Medici power . The statue was created by the Donatelli family of Florence .
 On a high base, it would have been visible from the street when the portal was open . The portal would be visible from a high .
 Donatello's previous marble version now at the palace of the priors . David had long been a symbol of republican defense and of the Florentine republic itself .
 By possessing a private statue of David, it could be seen as a transformation of a public emblem into a private one .
 Cosimo Cosimo had Benozzo Gozzoli paint Procession of the Magi . Medici family members integrated among Magi, on their way to adore the infant Christ .
 The brightly-colored cavalcade wends its way across three walls of the chapel . Medici from across the generations of the Medici include Medici, Medici and Medici .
 Cosimo's other sons, Giovanni, and the illegitimate Carlo, are depicted . Cosimo’s other sons Giovanni and Carlo are depicted. Carlo and Giovanni are also depicted .
 Cosimo’s humanist associate and family tutor, Marsilio Ficino, is part of the procession, along with John VIII Paleologus, the Byzantine Emperor, Gozzoli himself, and two political allies, the Lord of Rimini and Galeazzo S
 It was, as demonstrated previously, linked with piety through the patronage of ecclesiastical structures . It was linked to piety through patronage by ecclesiastical institutions .
 In these structural features, the perpetuation of Cosimo’s legacy was literally set in stone . Cosimo's legacy is literally set to stone, says author .
 Examining works that Cosimo de’ Medici patronized is a valuable way to gain insight into the pater patriae's preoccupations . Examining the works of Medici is a useful way to learn more about the Medici's life .
 It is doubly important when the historical context for his works is considered . The historical context of his works should also be considered .
 Medici success depended on the perpetuation of the line, dynastic solidarity and the formation of a close-knit kin-group would be important design .
 Cosimo allowed associate families to build chapels within San Lorenzo . It was an opportunity for Medicean families to exercise patronage within Cosimo's sphere of influence .
 Given the pious nature of Florence during the Renaissance, it is also explicable why Cosimo would choose to predominantly patronize ecclesiastical structures .
 Cosimo presented himself as a tangible intercessor with the papacy . By portraying the Medici saints Cosmas and Damian as intercessors, Cosimo conveyed a sense of divine authorization .
 Cosimo emerged as a frontrunner in contemporary political self-advertisement . By expanding the boundaries of acceptable patronage, both geographically and financially, Cosimo became a frontrunner .
 Cosimo never forgot the events of 1433-1434, remaining aware that continued Medici success relied on good civic standing and the consolidation of control . Cosimo died in 1434 .
 His political self-aggrandizement was far from subtle, as witnessed in the statue of David and the Procession of the Magi . Although his forays into the polity were largely behind the scenes, he was not subtle .
 He was not above appropriating republican values, such as opposition to tyranny and defense of the fatherland as seen in David, for patriotism . patriotism and republican pride could be harnessed for political gain, says historian .
 For a millennia, the mighty rivers of British Columbia sustained and supported vibrant First Nations societies and cultures . They provided rich and varied food sources as well as important trade and communication networks . Mike Lenaghan is the author of the book, "Rivestuary of the Big River"
 The arrival of the first European explorers marked the beginning of a gradual but dramatic change in perspective . The river became increasingly viewed not as a source of sustenance, but as source of power .
 Alexander Mackenzie described in his journal the awe inspiring power of the Peace River in 1793 . Mackenzie describes the awe-inspiring power of water rushing by .
 First small-scale hydroelectric developments began in the province 100 years ago . Hydroelectric developments are a symbol of modernity, progress and mankind's triumph over nature .
 In the Kootenays, energy demands from a small but thriving mining sector and a growing industrial economy spurred the construction of the Lower Bonnigton Dam in 1897 .
 Electricity generated from damming Goldstream River in 1898 and Jordan River in 1911, provided power to the city's new street car service and expanded urban lighting system . Meanwhile in Victoria, electricity generated from the damming of Goldstream .
 In relatively short order, hydroelectricity grew from a mere novelty to a mature, reliable power generating technology . Hydroelectricity is now a dominant force for development in the province . In recent years, it has emerged as a reliable and reliable source of electricity .
 The insatiable demand for natural resources generated by the Allied war effort during the Second World War resulted in a sustained economic boom in BC . The boom continued unabated after the war's end, continuing unabated .
 Energy demands in the province continued to grow and in response, the province entered into a new era of hydroelectric development on an unprecedented scale . As a result of the province's growing energy demands, energy demands in Canada have increased .
 Harnessing the Power of the Peace and Columbia, 21.5.4.5, is the author of a new book, The Peace of Peace and British Columbia .
 The Kitimat Dam was the largest earth-filled dam in the world at the time of its completion . It was the world's biggest earth filled dam .
 By the late 1970s, hydroelectricity had dramatically transformed the economy and society of British Columbia . The province's economy was transformed by the promise of cheap and reliable energy,8 .
 The rising reservoirs it seemed, had raised all boats, with more soon to follow . The rising reservoir levels have raised all kinds of boats .
 In 1980, they requested that the provincial government approve their proposal, which would allow construction on the project to begin . The proposal was approved in 1980 .
 Site C project was eventually shelved in 1993 after more than a decade of political debate . Site C was the first major hydro project to be pushed forward and approved in Canada . The Site C site was eventually abandoned in 1993 .
 Site C marked an end to the era of high modernist hydro development in BC that had in such short order, permanently transformed the province . Site C was the first major hydro project to be built in the province's history . The death of Site C marks the end to an era of
 In its place emerged new economic, social and environmental concerns culminating in a distinct shift of the values within British Columbian society . In the place of those concerns, the values of British Columbia society were shifted .
 In 1984, BC Hydro completed its last major hydroelectric project, the Revelstoke Dam, and began its institutional transformation from construction to administration . BC Hydro began an institutional transformation to administration in 1984 .
 'Site C' project was laid to rest almost two decades ago, but has been re-exhumed . A new and improved version of the project has been approved by the British Columbia government .
 Proponents of hydroelectric development cite economic and social benefits new dam construction will bring to the province . Proponents say new dam will bring economic, social benefits .
 Site C and other major hydro projects were rejected by the public in the 1980s and 1990s . Site C was built during the latter stages of the 20th Century . Critics of Site C claim that Site C has many negative impacts that ultimately led to public rejection .
 This paper reexamines the negative economic, social and environmental impacts of 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia . Drawing on a wide variety of academic and historical sources, this paper examines the negative social and economic impacts of the 20th century hydro development .
 By highlighting the darker side of hydro development, its aim is to create a more informed and enlightened public debate about the future of Site C . Site C and similar hydro projects in the province are under construction .
 Premier William Andrew Cecil Bennett was a champion of hydroelectricity in British Columbia . Bennett was the premier of British Columbia during the 1930s and 1940s .
 Bennett promised British Columbians that he could transform their province into a highly modern, industrialized and urban society . Bennett promised to transform British Columbia into a modern, industrialized and urban province .
 Energy Privatization in British Columbia, 54. 37 society, is a promise he delivered election after election . The province's energy industry has been privatized since 2001 .
 By the mid-1950s, Bennett had become convinced that hydroelectricity, first and foremost, would be the engine for economic growth and social transformation in the province .
 The premier's “Two-Rivers Strategy’ emerged as the foundation for hydro development during his political career . The plan capitalized on American energy interests on the Columbia to promote simultaneous hydroelectric development .
 As promised, the major hydro developments of the Two Rivers Strategy generated significant economic and social benefits for the province . The major hydro development of the two Rivers Strategy has been described as 'significant economic, social benefits'
 New supplies of abundant, reliable and cheap hydroelectricity quickly turned BC into a world leader in mining and metallurgy, particularly in energy intensive processes like zinc production .
 The economic impacts of such hydro projects also brought tremendous change to local communities . The economic impact of these hydro projects is also seen in communities .
 Hudson Hope is a symbol of modernity in the once tiny 'backwater' town . The Peace Glen Hotel was built to accommodate BC Hydro employees working on the nearby Peace River project .
 Other small and remote communities experienced similar economic and population booms as a result of labour demands from nearby dam sites, resulting in chaotic expansions in local infrastructure and services .
 Many communities located far from the dam sites experienced unprecedented growth throughout the 1960s as a result of new access to abundant electricity . At the same time, many communities .
 Prince George's population for example, more than doubled in size from 13,877 in 1961 to 33,101 in 1971 . The town of Mackenzie was made possible by access to hydroelectricity .
 Bennett was delivering on his promise of 'progress', but the road to modernity was not without its potholes . Bennett's 'progress' was delivered on promise of modernising Britain .
 Throughout the mid-20th Century, most British Columbians generally supported the province's hydro mega-projects, accepting their negative consequences as necessary sacrifices .
 The provincial government and BC Hydro relied heavily on the ethos of self-sacrifice to justify its hydroelectric agenda and the economic, social and environmental dislocation it produced .
 First Nations were forced to evict settlers and First Nations located in the reservoir flood zone . This was particularly in the case when hydro developments required the forced eviction of settlers .
 For the most part, its efforts to shame people in submission were successful . However, however, the province could not eliminate all public resistance .
 BC Studies 142/143 : 163. Modernity, Environment, and Society on the Arrow Lakes . BC Studies: “The Arrow Lakes”
 Locals accuse the government of sacrificing their valleys and livelihoods for the sake of U.S. interests . Only one of the three Canadian storage dams on the Columbia was fitted with generating capacity .
 Despite such outcries however, hydroelectric projects under Bennett are remarkable for their general lack of coherent and sustained public protest, despite the many adverse effects that became apparent as the projects neared .
 The government's uncritical optimism towards hydro development throughout much of the 20th century revealed a sort of religious conviction . Just as God created light where before was only darkness, hydroelectricity would create economic opportunity and growth in place of an economic vacuum, the government said .
 The reality is that such projects did not simply create local economies from scratch, rather they reconstituted existing economies based on the ideals of progress and modernity espoused by government politicians and bureaucrats .
 In other words, hydro development was less about economic progress per se, and more about economic prioritization as determined by a centralized government . Hydro development was not economic progress, it was about prioritizing economic interests .
 Columbia River Basin was a highly dynamic economic area prior to the construction of the Columbia River dams . The Columbia River basin was an ecologically rich area of timber production, recreational and sporting activities .
 The Arrow Lakes region was home to a highly productive and diverse agricultural economy that had developed over decades . The tiny hamlet of Renata alone produced 10% of the province's cherries in 1950 .
 With the completion of the Arrow Lake Dam, Renata and the entire Arrow Lakes agricultural region was completely destroyed by flooding . Renata was completely devastated by flooding after the dam was completed .
 The flooding caused by the hydro-electric development also devastated the forestry sector along the Columbia . The flooding has also devastated a forestry sector .
 The reservoir created by the Mica damn, which severely impacted the region's timber economy, has severely impacted its timber industry .
 It reduced annual harvests by 9% due to land-loss and inundating the 117km Big Bend Highway . It inundated the primary transportation route used by the local logging industry .
 As a result, a new two hundred kilometer transportation route was eventually constructed at great environmental and economic expense, permanently raising operating costs by almost doubling travel time .
 Some of these economic impacts were offset by the growing economic activity in the industrial and mining sector . Not all the promised benefits of dam construction came to be realized .
 As authors Nemetz and Toller have argued, even the predicted benefits to tourism turned out to be wishful thinking .
 By inundating valuable farming, hunting and fishing habitats, BC's dams effectively curtailed or altogether eliminated the ability of many nearby communities to subsist independently of the wider provincial economy . The dams are effectively curbing or altogether eliminating the . ability of . nearby communities .
 Labour demands at dam sites resulted in large population spikes in local communities, creating wage-based economic system that competed with less formal preexisting local economies . The dam site's labour demands resulted in huge population spikes .
 Public and private infrastructure within local communities was rapidly expanded, along with the host government services . Infrastructure was expanded to meet the needs of growing populations .
 The government then used these expanded public services to justify increasing tax rates on the public, thereby further projecting its physical presence and social authority in the area . Thirdly, these expanded services were then used by the government to justify increased tax rates .
 Dams were completed and communities shrank due to job loss . The tax burden on remaining residents increased, forcing many people to seek permanent wage-based employment .
 Local communities grew to resent the added tax burden they were forced to pay as a result of infrastructural and service investments in their area . Ultimately, many local communities resent the tax burden .
 For the provincial government, such developments were part of the success story behind BC's hydro development agenda . By destroying the capacity of remote BC communities for self-reliance, the government effectively forced their assimilation into the wider provincial economic system from which it drew its power .
 Maintaining support for hydro development within democracies generally compels governments to spread the economic and social benefits of such projects as widely as possible . While simultaneously isolating the negative human and environmental impacts, governments must spread the benefits to the widest possible .
 Governments can ensure that the destructive elements of hydro development are borne by communities too small to pose a significant electoral threat to their power . In this way, governments can . ensure that . governments can ensure . that they can . . ensure communities are not threatened by hydro development .
 While cities like Victoria and Vancouver enjoyed the benefits of hydro development with no strings attached, rural communities were often subjected to economic dislocation through the literal inundation of traditional industries such as agriculture and logging . Rural communities located in the shadow of the dams often suffered from economic dislocations .
 As destructive as the economic fallout of hydro development could be however, such concerns paled in comparison to the forced evictions many people faced as a result of dam construction .
 By the mid-20th Century, both the federal and BC governments had a long history of subjecting First Nations to forced evictions . The reserve system was most notably through the imposition of the reserve system .
 It was not until the era of high modernist hydro development that these practices were systematically employed on a large-scale to the province's non-native population . The practice was first introduced in the 1930s .
 High Arrow Dam in the West Kootenays raised upstream water levels by 76 ft., creating a reservoir that ultimately inundated fourteen communities as well as some 25,000 acres of arable land . The Keenleyside Dam was completed in 1953 .
 For these 'hydro refugees', such evacuations were tragic and traumatic experiences . For many of these 'Hydro refugees' such evacues were tragic experiences .
 Provincial government viewed sacrifices as necessary sacrifices for the 'greater good' However, for the provincial government, they were viewed as perfect opportunities to realize the modern social ideal .
 Once the 'primitive and disorganized' original settlements had been evacuated and destroyed, government and BC Hydro officials arrived . They were ready to rebuild idealic 'modern' communities .
 By imposing their plans for a suburban paradise, their aim was not only to reshape the physical structure of communities, but ultimately society itself . By imposing plans for suburban paradise they aim to reshap the physical structures of communities .
 It need not be explained that such impositions from Victoria and Vancouver were not always well-received by the affected communities . Vancouver and Victoria have a long history of anti-immigration policies .
 Government efforts to compensate individuals and communities for land lost to flooding were often conducted with disregard for the needs or desires of the individuals who were affected . Government efforts were often done without regard for the people affected .
 Officials tended to appraise soon-to-be-flooded land as precisely that, fixing value based on its inevitable destruction . Officials tend to value land based on the inevitable destruction of it .
 Many people felt they has not been adequately compensated for the land they had lost . Others felt no amount of money could account for the emotional loss they had suffered . As a result, many people felt the compensation was not enough .
 Some residents resisted initial government offers and attempted to seek redress through the courts . But the government had time on their side, going ahead with the dam and letting the rising water levels force the issue to an inevitable conclusion .
 Only five expropriations were required to obtain the land needed for 26 Windsor and Mcvey, “Annihilation of both place and sense of place,” 152.
 The government's hydroelectric projects had served to assimilate remote regions of the province into the wider economic system . Just as the government's projects helped assimilation, so did they facilitate social assimilation based on an idealized image of a 'proper' society .
 In Hudson Hope, a modern new highway was seen, by the government, as more important than the community's history as embodied in its 1930's log church .
 Two surveys carried out in the region in 1970 and 1981 found that Arrow Lakes residents viewed the area as less livable than the communities they had been forced to leave behind . Despite the expense and length of these efforts however, two surveys found that residents of the Arrow Lakes region view the area
 Many rural and remote communities did not want enlightened change or modernity forced upon them . In reality, despite the high modernist social transformation envisioned by Bennett and his peers in Victoria and Vancouver, many rural communities were not modern .
 Many British Columbians suffered tremendous social and economic dislocation as a result of the damming process . Hydro development had tremendous economic and social benefits for many British Columbiaians .
 Many people lost their jobs, their heritage, their homes and their very way of life . Many people were forced to leave their homes, homes and the very way they lived .
 For the First Nations unfortunate enough to live in the flood zone, the situation was even worse . First Nations people in the area were also affected by the flooding .
 Authors Windsor and Mcvey have argued that hydroelectricity projects are among the most powerful and potent purveyors of 'topocide' employed throughout human history . Hydroelectricity as the New Engine of Colonialism as a powerful tool of topocide .
 The impacts of 20th Century hydro development on BC's First Nations clearly illustrates their point . The impacts on First Nations First Nations have been documented .
 According to archeological evidence, the Rocky Mountain Trench region of BC has sustained human habitation for over 12,000 years . The region includes both the Peace and Columbia Rivers and their many tributaries .
 In this way, the river systems of the Rocky Mountain Trench formed the backbone of First Nations life and culture in the region . The river systems are not lost on government officials, but they are not .
 Before major hydro development began in the region, the Department of Indian Affairs expressed concern on behalf of the federal government . The flooding of certain areas as a result of dam construction would significantly alter or destroy First Nations' lands, the department said .
 Federal government dropped its objections and gave a blanket approval for hydro development in BC on the principle that affected First Nations could be adequately compensated for their losses . Ultimately however, the federal government dropped their objections .
 A new phase of colonialism began in British Columbia, in which provincial and private auditors were able to appraise and commodify First Nations 'assets' through the freemarket . This provided 'appropriate' financial compensation for their assets destruction .
 Putting a financial value on the 'First Nations problem' effectively enabled the provincial government to negate the immaterial impacts of hydro development on indigenous communities altogether, passing them off as collateral damage . Since only physical assets such as land and private property had any 'real value' in the modern economy
 The racist rationalization of hydro development is further revealed by the fact that affected First Nation communities’ received a fraction of the compensation given to their non-native counterparts . The Canadian government has been accused of racism in favouring hydro development .
 In compensation for land flooded by the Kenney Dam for example, Alcan gave non-native settlers in the region roughly $1544 per hectare and paid their costs of relocation . Cheslatta First Nation received an average of $77.22 per kilometre and no assistance in
 The inherent racism with which hydro development occurred in BC was not lost on the province's First Nations people . First Nations say the inherent racism in BC's hydro development is not a thing to be proud of .
 It turned out he had recieved something like $2000 in exchange for the destruction of an important part of who he was . He would completely lose access to his traditional trapping areas because it would be all flooded .
 Both the provincial and federal governments made little or no attempt to prepare for, or assist in, First Nations relocation efforts . The commodification of First Nations peoples was in itself an egregious act .
 Once the decision to dam was made, it seems local indigenous people were all but forgotten . Indeed, once the decision was made to dam, the dam's decision was all but but forgotten.
 In the rush for high ground, many people were forced to leave behind their possessions . Many people had to survive the coming winter in hurriedly constructed makeshift shelters .
 The damming of the Peace River by the WAC Bennett Dam also had devastating long-term impacts for the region's First Nations communities . The Peace River was also damming by the Bennett Dam .
 The Williston Reservoir flooded many traditional hunting grounds, trap lines and berry fields as well as devastated the local animal populations . The reservoir also devastated local animal population .
 The viability of traditional subsistence activities by local First Nations was diminished . As a result, the viability of local subsistence activities was substantially diminished . Local First Nations were affected by the loss of traditional activities .
 Kenney Dam was built to supply Alcan's aluminum smelter in Kitimat with an abundant supply of cheap energy . The Kenney dam was built more than a decade prior to the damming of the Peace .
 On April 3rd, 1952, the Cheslatta residents were told they would have to immediately relocate due to imminent flooding . The Department of Indian Affairs officials did not have any prior consultation .
 On April 8th, the gates on the Kenney Dam were closed, and the area began to flood . White settlers in the region had been notified up to two years in advance that they would be forced to move .
 Alcan encouraged the Cheslatta to leave the area immediately, promising to cover the costs of relocation, collect and transport their valuables, and exhume and relocate the community’s historic burial ground .
 The Cheslatta had little option but to accept in good faith Alcan`s promises and say farewell to their traditional homeland . With the reservoir steadily rising, the reservoir is expected to rise again .
 Alcan failed to honour even one of these promises, and in a matter of days, the history, culture and livelihoods of the Cheslatta were washed away . Ultimately, Alcan did not honour these promises .
 The Nechako Reservoir created by the Kenney Dam forced the Cheslatta to relocate to a new reservation located outside their traditional territory . The new reservation was located some 48km to the north, where the ecology of the area could not support their lifestyle .
 The societal impacts of this forced relocation on the Cheslatta people were tragic . The forced relocation of Cheslata people was tragic, the author says .
 Severed from their land, culture and history, they were unable to continue in their traditional practices, resulting in individual depression and social despair . This led to alarmingly high rates of alcohol and drug-related deaths and suicides, culminating in high rates .
 According to authors Windsor and Mcvey, “by 1990, alcohol use amongst 40,” alcohol use among 40 percent of Americans was high .
 First Nations have achieved considerable political success in opposing further hydro developments such as the original Site C Project . They have also won a number of important legal battles seeking redress for their treatment under earlier hydro projects, such as Site C .
 Tsay Keh Dene Band reached a multi-million dollar settlement with the provincial government and BC Hydro over grievances resulting from the WAC Bennett Dam and the Williston Reservoir . In the 1990s, the Tsay Dene band reached a settlement over grievances .
 Similar legal settlements have continued in the first decade of the 21st Century . These historic injustices are far from being resolved .
 Even if the courts can settle all related disputes however, it is clear that no level of financial compensation or admission of culpability on the part of government can replace the history, traditions and culture which have been lost .
 The same is true of the staggering ecological destruction which occurred throughout British Columbia as a result of 20th century hydro development . Hydro development is responsible for the staggering destruction of British Columbia .
 The environmental destruction caused by 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia cannot be overstated . The Environmental Fallout of Hydro Development can be traced back to the 1970s .
 The deaths of animals, habitat loss and ecological dislocation all occurred around dam sites and corresponding flood zones . The deaths occurred on a grand scale and in high concentrations around the dam sites .
 Many of these ecological impacts are inherent consequences of any major hydro development . They increase dramatically in correlation to the size of the project in question .
 The WAC Bennett Dam, for example, flooded an area five times the size of Lake Okanagan, and as a result, led ecological destruction on an almost unimaginable scale .
 The direct and immediate impacts of dam construction on wildlife populations vary considerably depending on the size, scale and timeline of project construction . The specific ecological character of the affected area, and the extent of ecological impacts were addressed .
 In general, earlier hydro projects in BC proceeded with little ecological concern or understanding, resulting in greater immediate impacts . Earlier hydro projects had little ecological concerns or understanding of the impacts .
 Duncan Dam was the first of the Columbia River Treaty dams to be completed in 1967 and was constructed without fish ladders . The Duncan Dam for example, was completed without fish ladder . Duncan Dam is one of the first to be built in the river system .
 This resulted in the decimation of the local salmon run, with up to 2. million fish being obstructed from reaching spawning ground . Up to 2 million fish were blocked from reaching their spawning ground, according to reports .
 In addition to barring fish migration, dams tend to collect and withhold enormous amounts of nutrients in their flood zones, thereby depriving downstream ecosystems . Dams also tend to withhold and withhold huge amounts of nutrient in flood zones .
 Libby Dam withholds between 45% and 50% of phosphorous that would otherwise travel downstream . The Libby dam is located on the Kootenai River in Montana, south of the Canadian border .
 State fisheries managers began to add nutrient supplements downstream in 1992 in order to maintain ecosystem functionality . To compensate for these impacts, state fisheries managers added nutrient supplements .
 These two examples reveal how ecological design and human intervention can mitigate certain environmental impacts from hydro development .
 The vast majority of environmental damage caused by dams cannot be eliminated . However, the majority of the damage can't be eliminated, experts say .
 When a dam's reservoir begins to flood, the number of animal drownings can be staggering . The number of animals drownings in the reservoir is staggering . Animal drownings are often caused by the dam's dam failure .
 Throughout the 20th Century, many BC residents who witnessed such flooding reported seeing countless animals stranded on small high-ground areas by the rapidly rising water levels .
 The immensity of the reservoirs combined with the shocking amount of debris which rose to the surface of the water once flooding began, made swimming to safety impossible .
 Some local residents operated rescue missions, collecting treed animals by boat and delivering them to the safety of the new shoreline . Some residents operated desperate rescue missions .
 Pen Powell, a long-time resident and local pilot, recalled flying over the Williston Reservoir as it began to fill . Powell: "A large herd of moose were trapped on a piece of high ground by floating debris and pulled-over trees"
 Many reservoir areas remained clogged by floating debris for years following construction, severely obstructing animal migration, human transportation and recreational usage . As a result of this poor effort, many reservoirs remain clogged with floating debris .
 In addition to mass animal drowning, BC's mega hydro projects have also resulted in significant long term habitat destruction for both aquatic and terrestrial species . The projects have caused significant long-term habitat destruction .
 Fish spawning habitats located 49 Nemetz and Toller, “Assessing the Impact of Hydro Development,” 12.2.2 . Fish spawning sites located in the area .
 The widespread destruction of fish habitats has affected fish populations, bird species which depended upon them for food . Bird species which depend on fish for food also lost their habitats .
 Despite considerable knowledge of how hydro projects would affect local ecosystems, efforts to mitigate these impacts were often made half-heartedly by project planners in an attempt to appease troublesome local interest groups .
 BC Hydro constructed an artificial spawning site for trout for the benefit of local fishing clubs, while leaving the other affected species to their fate . The High Arrow Dam will displace large numbers of beaver, muskrat and water fowl .
 In many cases, these delicate ecosystems are unable to re-establish themselves at the new reservoir shoreline due to irregular fluctuations in water levels .
 The result is often a deadened reservoir shoreline characterized by treacherous sinkholes and rotting debris . The deadened shoreline can pose a serious danger to animals seeking access to drinking water .
 In addition to the impacts of upstream flooding, dams also create significant ecological impacts . Dams create significant downstream ecological impacts, including significant ecological consequences .
 The WAC Bennett Dam on the Peace River withheld so much water from downstream ecosystems in early years, that the PeaceAthabasca Delta and associated marshland areas began to dry up during the late 1960s and 70s . The Peace River and associated Marshland areas dried up during
 Aridification resulted in widespread habitat loss and species decline for many animal including migratory water fowl and the endangered wood bison . The aridification has also resulted in species decline including the endangered Wood bison and waterfowl .
 The combination and complex interrelation of population decline and habitat loss due to dam construction has led to some of the most dramatic ecological changes in the history of British Columbia . The complex interreligion of dam construction is to blame for the decline of the species .
 Much of the ecological destruction caused be large-scale hydro developments is unavoidable . Despite a greater understanding of, and concern for, environmental issue, much of the damage caused is unavoidable.
 Net primary production and ecological diversity decrease in the region upstream from a dam site, as highly productive terrestrial and aquatic habitats are destroyed or subjected to high levels of irregular disturbance .
 Low reservoir water levels during dry periods can produce tremendous dust storms that can last for days, resulting in a massive dust storm .
 Massive new reservoirs can affect local precipitation patterns, resulting in increased fog and humidity . New reservoirs can also affect local rainfall patterns, leading to increased humidity .
 The ecological fallout created by Mica Dam provides some indication of the scale of destruction . While it is difficult to fully account for the environmental impacts of 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia .
 Government biologists estimated the project would result in, a loss of 105,000 acres of wildlife habitat, including wetlands, riparian zones, and natural meadows . Prior to the dam's construction, government biologists estimated, that the dam would .
 It was predicted that this habitat loss would cause reductions in populations of moose , deer , elk (40 per cent), and caribou as well as displacement of most aquatic animals and waterfowl .
 Wildlife resources of the Mica Basin were estimated at $10. million dollars before the dam was completed in 1973 and flooding began . Wildlife resources were estimated to be worth $10 million dollars .
 This assessment was reduced by nearly half once the ecological impacts of flooding to the region had been assessed . The ecological impact of flooding in the region has been reduced by almost half .
 Despite a concerted effort by successive provincial governments to carry out major hydro developments in remote areas of British Columbia, the tremendous economic, social and ecological destruction created by such projects eventually made it into mainstream public consciousness .
 First Nations resistance to high modernist projects became increasingly organized and influential within public debate and as a result, within government circles .
 Growing public concern for the treatment of First Nations peoples altered the legal climate in the province . Some communities affected by hydro development have since been able to seek legal redress for their experiences .
 The ecological impacts of hydro development helped give rise to the environmental movement in BC, which demanded change in the way such projects were carried out . Meanwhile, the ecological impact of the hydro development in BC has given rise to an environmental movement .
 By the 1970s, environmental impact assessments had become a fundamental aspect of BC Hydro operations . BC Hydro developed ways of mitigating some of the environmental impacts caused by hydro development such as adding fertilizer to make-up for nutrient loss .
 Loo, “People In The Way,” 191; Stanley, Voices from Two Rivers, 112 . Stanley, ‘People in the Way’s,’ 191; ‘Visible’ 112. Loo: ‘I’m not
 First Nations and environmental groups were instrumental in bringing about an end to 20th century high modernist hydro developments in the province, culminating in the defeat of the Site C proposal . Site C was proposed to be built in Vancouver .
 Site C is back on the table, with Site C back in the picture . British Columbian's should revisit their collective past, and remember why they came to oppose this particular project .
 By exploring the historical economic, social and ecological fall-out of 20th century hydro development in BC, it is hoped this paper will help stimulate a critical public debate on the issue .
 Only by studying the past can we be sure to avoid repeated tragedy in our future, we can avoid repeated tragedies in our lives . Afterall, only by studying history can we hope to avoid repeating tragedy in the future .
 Death is not merely a scientific concept and is, more importantly, a cultural and historical one . It seems appropriate that it should also be investigated by historians because of its shared fate .
 The nonphysical sides of death are and always have been influenced by myriad factors such as religion, politics, and time . This reality means that the nonphysical side of death is influenced by many factors, including religion and politics .
 A group's habits surrounding death are unique and do not remain static . Consequently, a group’s habits around death don’t remain static, experts say .
 One would expect the rate and degree of change to be more dramatic in times of rapid sociopolitical upheaval . The rate of change is expected to be even more dramatic when it comes to sociopolitical change .
 Death in Russia altered significantly under the empire’s last days and the Bolsheviks . However, for various reasons many features persisted, either in tune with their original manifestations -often to the dismay of the government -or as modified versions resulting from official policies and practices .
 The changes, though significant, were not enough to outweigh these preservations . "A revolution in death did not occur. Because of the changes, it was not enough, the changes did not outweigh the prespreservations," he says .
 An investigation of death cannot be undertaken without considering religion's status in it . This consideration is of remarkable importance when examining alterations in death in Russia from the last days of the monarchy to the end of Bolshevism .
 From the time of Russia’s Christianization the Orthodox Church was central, more or less, in Russian death culture . The Orthodox Church played an overall central role in life in Russia . The Church was a central part of the death culture of the Russian people .
 During imperial times religion essentially monopolized the sphere of ritualized death . The death ritual was essentially ritualized in imperial times .
 The major exception to this was the tsar’s funeral where ritual would be focused as much on the dead monarch and political pomp as the proper religious ceremony . This shows that rigid social hierarchy was not only embedded in life but applied posthumously as well .
 Funerary customs were used to reinforce social, economic, and political disparity among the classes . Funeraries were used in the 18th century to reinforce class differences .
 The more urban of the ordinary Russians adhered, more or less, to familiar religious, largely Russian Orthodox, funerary rites . The more . urban of Russia adhered to the familiar religious rites .
 The typical peasant death rites blended centuries-old pagan customs with traditional Orthodox ones . Alternatively, the typical peasant funeral rites blended pagan and Orthodox customs with Orthodox ones.
 The Church, as an entity, was not highly favoured by the peasants, but they did welcome Orthodox doctrine . Orthodoxy was a highly incorporated component and a central constituent of funerals .
 Self-described devoutly Orthodox peasants maintained pagan rituals because they believed the ceremonies did not infringe on their Orthodox belief set . The key reason to maintain pagan rituals was that they fell under Orthodox beliefs .
 The foremost issue of peasant burials, as dictated by Orthodox tradition, was final Judgment Day and the corresponding resurrection of the dead . Orthodox tradition dictates that the dead should be buried at the beginning of the day .
 The decedent’s body was washed so it could be in good condition for its later resurrection and presentation before God . The body of the deceased was washed in preparation for its resurrection .
 It was expected that the place of burial, where future resurrection would occur, would be maintained by the family . It was also expected that it would maintain the burial place for future resurrection .
 The Church forbade cremation because destroying the body blatantly violated the resurrection concept; consequently, everyone was inhumed . Cremation was banned because it violated the body's resurrection concept .
 Official Orthodox ritual included formal prayer for the deceased’s soul and holding ceremonial feast days not just on the day of the funeral, but also on the ninth, twentieth, and fortieth days after the death . Other aspects of official Orthodox ritual were prayer and feast days for the dead
 The funeral itself was held three days following the death and, as mentioned, a final ceremony was held forty days after death . The funeral was held after the death .
 The day of the soul’s withdrawal from earth and the day of its preliminary judgement, respectively. These correspond to the day when the soul's preliminary judgement was made .
 Continued prayer was crucial because it could mean the soul’s salvation upon the final reckoning when all souls would be unalterably judged . Continued prayer is crucial for the soul's salvation, says the priest .
 This included frequent ordinary prayer as well as observance of the more important religious days, such as Easter, and anniversaries of deaths .
 Tending to the grave’s maintenance and leaving food at the grave were important on these days . Although the spirit had departed the earth, it would return intermittently, feeling hungry . The spirit would return to the earth feeling hungry.
 These regular ceremonies benefitted not only the dead but the living, too, as graves functioned as essential places for the living to socially interact with each other and the dead, too .
 A Study of Religion and Atheism in Soviet Russia (Westport, CT: Hyperion Press, 1933), 117), 117.
 The soul does not face final judgment on the fortieth day, as final judgment is the universal day of reckoning when the dead are resurrected and given ultimately sentenced to either Heaven or Hell . Final judgment is final judgment, when the body of the dead is resurrected .
 The first judgment, on the fortieth day after death, is merely temporary and alterable and long as the world exists, until final Judgment Day . The first judgement is on the Fortieth Day after death . The world exists as long as it exists .
 Those present placed a candle in the dying person’s hands, lit the wick, and extinguished the flame immediately following the moment of death . For example, in one’�s dying moments, those present placed the candle in a dying person's hands .
 It was believed that the drifting smoke indicated which way the soul left the body . It is believed that it indicated the way the body left the corpse .
 In instances where the deceased’s eyes were still open the family placed an object -frequently a coin -over them as the open eyes were believed to be looking for an eternal partner for the soul . The coin was placed over the deceased's eyes as they looked for a partner
 Small sums of money were buried with the body to ensure that the soul would be able to feed itself - as the living family could not feed it for eternity - in the afterlife .
 People went to lengths to ensure the deceased did not take them along into death, such as regulating the size of coffins to be just enough room for one body .
 When moving the body from the home to the graveyard, passing the body not out the door but out the window to disorient the spirit . They also sought to prevent haunting by taking precautions .
 Fearing vampirism they would even mutilate and dismember a corpse to prevent it from rising again . They would even dismember it to stop it from re-emerging .
 The peasants confronted death directly and never discounted the fact of its inevitability, peasants did not take it lightly .
 Russian society had a much more casual approach to the non-ritualized part of death . The higher echelons of Russian society, though also performing Orthodox funerals, had a casual approach .
 Tolstoy’s novella The Death of Ivan Ilyich involved denial during life and self-pitying despair along with spiritual and existential agony while dying .
 Death was simply unacceptable to them, an inconvenient interruption in their cushy, distracting lives and therefore was something to be feared . Death was something they feared, and therefore something to them feared . It was something of a distraction to their lives, they said .
 Many aristocrats would avoid use of the word “death,” particularly in writing . Afraid that their own death would be brought by doing so, many aristocrats avoided using the word .
 When forced to address their own mortality because of imminent death, it was quite common for the bourgeoisie to seek comfort not only in priests that delivered final rites but also, and sometimes more importantly, from their servants .
 Servicemen used their attitudes to counsel their masters and help them bravely confront death . These servants came from peasant backgrounds and therefore possessed the more accepting view of death .
 In terms of ceremony and burial, the upper classes held more elaborate, public, and rigidly Orthodox deaths as Church and state were bound together . The closer one was to the top social tier, the more he or she had to adhere to prescribed practices .
 The aristocracy, nobility, and clergy had separate cemeteries . Hecker, Religion and Communism, 16, is published by Hecker .
 These segregated cemeteries, along with seven cost-based funeral ranks, ensured that social hierarchy applied even after death . The segregated cemetery was one of seven funeral ranks .
 New death rites were introduced and expanded with the rise of socialism . This was particularly true in the early 1900s when revolutionary feeling was ever-present .
 These funerals did not replace the traditional ones nor did they adopt radically different forms . The funerals were not replaced by new funerals, they were held in traditional places .
 They essentially used traditional forms but radically altered the symbolism and language to provide atheistic funerals . The funerals were intended to provide an atheistic funeral service .
 Atheism was a natural tenet of socialism as religion, according to Marx, was merely one of the many fruits of economics, the foundation of social life . Those that controlled the economy therefore controlled religion, the economy’s social byproducts, and exploited it .
 Under socialism religion would supposedly be naturally eradicated because the means of class exploitation were to vanish with classes themselves . Under socialism, religion was supposedly eradicated .
 To revolutionaries, traditional funerals were seen as wholly inappropriate and needed to be secularized . Traditional funerals needed secularization, revolutionaries said .
 These public funerals were a means of mourning for fellow revolutionaries who sacrificed themselves for the cause while being used mainly for public protest . These public funeralals were used mainly to mourn the sacrifice of others .
 Because the tsarist government could not censor mourning ceremonies like other public meetings, collective grieving became one of the only admissible types of gathering that allowed for collective revolutionary expression . In Russia, mourning ceremonies were the only public gathering admissible in Russia .
 Red Funerals used legitimate mourning for fallen comrades as an outlet for propagandizing against the regime . The funeral service was used as a propaganda tool to promote the regime's regime's brutality .
 Blazing red banners brandished slogans that, along with revolutionary funeral hymns, expressed grief and political feeling simultaneously . The funeral was held in New York City .
 One of the most popular of these funeral hymns, “You Fell Victims,”26, clearly highlighted the importance of the cause over grief for the individual .
 Symbol and Festival in the Russian Revolution,” in Symbols of Power: The Esthetics of Political Legitimacy in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, ed. ed. “Symbolism of power’s power was a symbol and festival in Russia,�
 These ceremonies drew considerable attention due to their unfamiliar and highly exposed nature and because of their sheer visual impact . Ceremonies were held in a bid to attract attention .
 Hundreds of people dressed in dark coats, carrying bright red banners, walked through the wintry streets of Moscow or St. Petersburg .
 The red against the snow would evoke images of the spilt blood of socialist martyrs . St. Petersburg - the red against snow would certainly evoke images .
 The older, more traditional family members of the dead, though fairly unsatisfied with Red Funerals, did generally appreciate the great honour that was being bestowed upon their loved ones .
 After Tsar Nicholas II’s abdication in 1917, Red Funerals adopted a new meaning . Red funerals became more popular in Russia after the abdicated of Tsaristas .
 Following this they were no longer used purely for protest -monarchical tyranny had fallen after all -but primarily for celebrating the achievements of the cause to date .
 The form was quite similar to older Red Funerals, but the newer ones were grander in scale and powerfully blended lamentation and popular demonstration with military procession . The Bolsheviks would adopt thereafter for prominent party members .
 The first was held for three students of the Military Cyclist Academy on 4 March 1917 who perished during the street fighting the previous month . Three students were killed during the fighting .
 The Provisional Government and the Petrograd Soviet were inspired by this Red burial to hold a massive ceremonial funeral . The Red burial was held in Petrograd, Russia .
 The Burial of the Martyrs was held three weeks after Nicholas’s abdication . It was the first government-sanctioned public commemoration of the February Revolution . The February Revolution was held in February 1918 .
 This burial, though it included members of all classes, was clearly by and for the proletariat as it was still Red . The same red banners with the same slogans flew as the workers sang their funeral dirges .
 The socialists were conscious that the deaths of their brethren could be potent political tools . They never stopped using public funerals and socialist martyrdom as propaganda .
 Red Funerals during the Dual Power were celebrations of revolutionary achievements . However, they were simply reassertions of the Bolsheviks’ power following the October Revolution .
 Annual festivities would suffice by commemorating the older dead, almost reiterating past funerals . May Day and the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution would suffice .
 Many revolutionaries found this exaltation and elevation of heroes to be entirely inappropriate . 27 Merridale, Night of Stone, 108.
 It was not only funerals of exemplary socialists that fell under the new Bolshevik program’s jurisdiction . All funerals, at least theoretically, were under the Bolshevik program's jurisdiction . The Bolshevik program included all funerals .
 During the initial disorder of Bolshevik rule the issue of death went virtually unacknowledged . The party simply did could not afford to waste valuable time pondering death while fighting the Great War, facing impending civil war, and trying to manage the highly unstable political and economic environment .
 The party had ideas regarding death due to their atheistic nature . They adopted death rituals for their own ranks but had no definite intentions for the masses . The party was atheistic .
 The main obstacle to imposing their ideas of death on their people was religion, a subject of considerable debate among party members at the time of the revolution . Religion was the subject of debate among members of the party .
 Some saw it as necessary to attack the Church and outlaw religious expression outright . Others believed religion would gradually disappear as a logical result of classlessness .
 It began in January 1918 with the official separation of church and state .
 All religions were officially equal and religious practices, including funerals, were allowed so long as such practices were mindful of public peace and the rights of others . Funerals were allowed to be held in the United States .
 It did not, however, allow any remnants of religious rites in state affairs . The populace was not forced to secularize, at least not yet, but the state was .
 Many people did adopt the atheistic line, but these were primarily party members and proletarians . Rural dwellers tended to adhere vehemently to their customary religious practices .
 Decree of the Burials was one aspect of nationalization under War Communism . A more significant step towards secularization of death was taken in December 1918 . Decree was one of the most significant steps towards secularizing death .
 The state monopolized the funeral industry, including Church-controlled cemeteries, to secularize it . It made it tougher to perform religious rituals, making it harder for religious rituals .
 The Decree was also, by abolishing cost-based funerals and offering free standardized burials to all, was also a step in establishing egalitarianism .
 Hecker argued that in some cases where people did retain traditional religious ceremonies they did so not out of lasting genuine religious feeling, but rather because of learned tradition . Hecker argues that the religious rites were the only ones they knew how to employ .
 Others may have abandoned their former religious convictions and cultural customs but refused to perform the new ceremonies because they viewed them as dispassionate and uncaring toward the dead .
 The pure logistics of body disposal became an obvious problem for the Bolshevik regime . The body disposal of bodies was a major problem for Bolshevik regime.
 Death was pandemic due to world war, civil war, terror, famine, and disease . People were dying on a larger scale than seen before in Russia and bodies kept accumulating in literal heaps at mortuaries .
 The new bureaucracy is also simply awful at managing death records and body disposal . The new government is also awful at manage death records .
 Initial response was to instigate the use of mass graves, but this solution was far from perfect . The initial response was instigated by the government to use mass graves . This solution was not perfect, but it is now being considered a solution .
 People willing to dig these morbid pits were scarce, and digging them was a slow and arduous process in the cold winter months when the ground was frozen . It was difficult to dig the morbid pits in the winter months .
 The state’s answer to this was cremation, a less expensive and cleaner method of disposal than inhumation, not to mention that it would assist in further undermining the Church . Cremation is less expensive, cleaner and more likely to be used to dispose of bodies of
 No crematorium existed in Russia because, under the imperial Orthodox tradition, any proposal to construct one was disregarded out of disgust . No cremator existed in Russian because of the Imperial Orthodox tradition .
 The Bolsheviks’ attempts to build crematoria in Moscow and Petrograd faced many obstacles, such as site selection and technical difficulties, in addition to persisting religious outrage at the idea .
 The first crematorium, opened in December 1920, was a converted bathhouse in Petrograd . It was meant to dispose of the anonymous dead .
 This experiment was a miserable failure -it was a wood-burning crematorium when wood to burn was scarce, making it horribly inefficient . The experiment was an experiment to burn wood when wood was scarce . It was a waste of wood and was horribly inefficient.
 Not surprisingly, it burned to the ground roughly two months after opening . The restaurant was the last restaurant to survive .
 A working crematorium did not open until 1927 in Moscow, but the government had discerned long before this that cremation was not the remedy it had hoped . The government decided not to use cremation as a replacement for cremation .
 The New Economic Policy re-privatized the funeral industry . This helped to overcome some of the problems associated with the former state monopoly .
 Though religious rites became costly -as only those who provided exclusively secular ceremonies were offered government funding -many overlooked the expense and welcomed the opportunity to openly hold religious ceremonies again .
 By the late 1920s only about one-third of burials were free from religious rites . The other two-thirds retained a religious nature .
 Despite the Bolsheviks’ attempts at secularization, religious funerals were not largely abandoned until Stalin came to power and renationalized the funeral .
 The politics of death was much easier for the Bolsheviks to manage than disposal proved to be . The death of the Bolshevik revolution was a success story for the Red Army .
 The tsars were more masterful at this than the tsars had been . They were highly adept at using something like a high-ranking official’s natural death for their political purposes .
 Lenin’s death was the most important singular death used as party propaganda . Lenin's death was used as a party propaganda for the Communist Party .
 The rest of the party feared that his death would prompt political disintegration, forcing the government to confront its largest hurdle since the chaos of civil war . The rest feared that the government would be forced to confront a political crisis .
 Lenin, as principal legitimating source of the regime, could not be allowed to vanish, so his legacy would have to suffice in his place . Lenin's legacy must have to be sufficient in place of him, says historian .
 The Cult of Lenin began in 1918 following Fanya Kaplan’s assassination attempt . Lenin's death in 1924 intensified the cult of Lenin . The Cult began following Kaplan's assassination attempt in 1918 .
 It became a mass campaign that used emotion to arouse in the people faithful allegiance to the regime to keep them controlled and willing to accept the remaining party members as Lenin's appropriate heirs .
 With Lenin dead and the party constantly bombarding the public with the glory that was Lenin, nobody could see any fault in his leadership . Therefore could not see error in those who claimed to preserve his sublime legacy .
 Lenin would have found the cult of worship conferred upon him abhorrent - it was starkly underscored by language and practices evocative of Russian Orthodoxy and severely undermined the communist doctrine of social equality .
 The funeral itself and subsequent lying-in-state were arguably the most important displays of the Cult of Lenin . The idea of a leader that was physically dead but whose legacy continued to care for his people is reminiscent of imperial funerals in everything from the massive procession .
 Alexander III, the last tsar to perish before the revolution, was embalmed and laid out for the country to see and mourn for three months . Alexander III was laid out in the Russian capital for the three months before his death . The tsar was the last to die before
 Lenin was to be preserved as a constant reminder that he, and therefore the legitimacy of communist rule, survived in his heirs . Alexander's body eventually decayed, giving in to a new tsar’s reign . The Bolsheviks, after careful consideration, chose to embalm Lenin
 The successful embalming and re-embalming of Lenin also helped the regime by proving its scientific prowess to the Soviet Union and the rest of the world .
 Lenin's preserved body defied communism’s anti-religious spirit as it resembled an ‘uncorrupted” body - one requirement of canonization . Lenin’�s preserved body, however, defied communism's anti-religion spirit . Lenin was canonized after his
 Disallowing Lenin’s body to decompose essentially turned him into a communist saint . portraying him as an eternal entity turned him . into a character redolent of Jesus, he said .
 Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square became a massive shrine . Lenin's burial site is now a shrine in Russia's capital .
 The funeral was not quite as grandiose as imperial funerals, but it managed to establish the fact that social equality, though espoused, was absent in Russia as it had been in the past, reenforced by the tsars' funerals .
 This was not new -previous funerals of higher-ranking officials had already used a different form than those of the common dead . Special burial grounds, such as the Kremlin wall, asserted their special status .
 Government-contrived death was also something that the Bolsheviks were much better at than the royals . Death by official design was transformed into a much more streamlined process than ever before .
 Executions were not random, haphazard or used for only occasional political messages under the Bolsheviks but were rather used consistently for keeping order . Executions seen as necessary for political stability under the Bolshevik regime .
 Life was cheap to the Bolsheviks because the cause came first, so it was natural for them to view mass killing of potential opposition -whether real or imagined - as an inevitable measure to be taken for the benefit of the cause . The Bolsheviks viewed mass killing as inevitable measures to be
 The tsars had certainly orchestrated death but did so in a fairly disorderly manner . The extent to which they executed people was much less than the tsars did .
 The tsars chose very particular targets in order to send their political message . The Bolsheviks, on the other hand, offered equal-opportunity terror . No groups were exempt from their highly organized executions .
 Despite what the Bolsheviks wanted and the changes their revolution brought, death was not revolutionized . Death, unlike the many other aspects of Russian culture and society, was not changed . Despite the changes, death is still not a revolutionized aspect of society .
 In the mid-late 1920s, before Stalin ascended to supremacy, death closely resembled what it was during the monarchy’s descent . Most people maintained religious death rites, state funerals still asserted social disparity, and cremation remained on the fringe .
 The most apparent change in death was scale -more people were dying under the Bolsheviks and more bodies piled up, but this does not imply revolution . More people died under the Bolshevik regime than under the Soviet Union, says historian .
 The changes that did occur - including those in state-engineered death - did set the foundation for the more radical transformations in death that Stalin’s “Revolution from Above” imposed . The changes in death were not revolutionary themselves, though not revolutionary .
 Of all the weapons in the vast soviet arsenal, nothing was more profitable than the Avtomat Kalashnikova model of 1947 . The model was the most profitable weapon of the Soviet Union .
 Since the end of the Cold War, the Kalashnikov has become the Russian people's greatest export . Since the beginning of the 1990s, the Russian armed forces have produced more than 100,000 weapons .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union coincided with a flood of Eastern Bloc arms into the world’s conflict zones . The collapse coincided with the arrival of arms from the Soviet Bloc countries .
 Many of these arms, primarily small arms but also heavy equipment such as tanks and helicopters, simply vanished from East European storehouses . These arms were not simply exports of Russia, but they were not just small arms exports .
 The Ukraine is the country where the man who spoke the lines above acquired all of his AK-47s . Arguably playing a more prominent role in this black market trade .
 This essay will focus in on the role the Ukraine played in this underground arms smuggling ring . The Ukraine played a role in helping smuggle arms into the country .
 We will start at the factories and warehouses in the Ukraine, move to the warzones of Africa, and meet the individuals who move the weapons in between . We will begin at the . factories and the warehouses in . Ukraine, then move to war zones of Africa and meet individuals who
 This is a tragic tale, one that shines a spotlight on a decade that in the West was widely touted as one of the most peaceful and prosperous in modern history . In much of the rest of the world, living in the wreckage of the Cold War, was lamented as a time of
 When an independent Ukraine was born in August 1991 it inherited one of the largest and best equipped militaries in the world . Ukraine has virtually inexhaustible stockpiles of tanks, helicopters, artillery pieces, assault rifles and assault rifles .
 The first was that because of the sheer size of the Soviet military behind the Iron Curtain, Ukraine was bound to be left with huge military stockpiles . The second was that due to the sheer number of Soviet stockpiles, Ukraine would have been left with a huge stockpile .
 Through the latter decades of the Cold War the Soviets had maintained conventional armed forces intended to be at parity with the armies of the NATO alliance . Through the 1980s and 1990s, the Soviets maintained a conventional armed force at parity .
 A level of military preparedness this absurdly high was came to dominate the Soviet economy, accounting for somewhere between 17 and 19 per cent of the Union’s GDP in the 1980s .
 Armed forces of four million men, 40,000 tanks and artillery pieces and 10,000 combat aircraft . This investment translated into an armed forces of 4 million men . The investment that translated into a four-million-man force translated into 40,500 tanks and tanks .
 Of these forces, a disproportionately high number were stationed in the Ukraine; a result of Soviet grand strategy . The Ukraine was a key part of the Soviet military presence in the Soviet Union .
 Soviet military doctrine was determined to avoid a rerun of the catastrophe of the summer of 1941 . The bulk of the Red Army’s best divisions, lined up at the shared border with the Third Reich, were encircled and annihilated in a matter of weeks .
 Most Soviet troops were stationed in buffer regions west of the Russian heartland . The buffer regions included Ukraine and Belarus but still back of the border with the Western alliance .
 They could count on 6,052 tanks, 3,602 artillery pieces, 1,650 combat aircraft, 75 attack helicopters and a large (to put it mildly) supply of small arms . They could also count on a large number of combat aircraft .
 For our story, it only became important that the troops were stationed in the Ukraine in 1991 . For this story, the only important is that they were stationed there in 1991, when they were in Ukraine .
 The debate ignited over what to do with the massive military of the former Soviet Union’s now sovereign states . It was then that the debate ignited .
 Russia being in no position to challenge this demand that was quickly echoed by most of the other republics caved . Most of the republics were in no way to challenge the demand . Russia was the only country in the region to challenge that demand .
 Ukraine got a military 780,000 strong with $89 billion worth of the Union's military equipment . When it was set down in a treaty several years later, it was determined that Ukraine got the military . Ukraine got $89billion worth of military equipment with $780,000 worth of
 At the same time they repatriated the 2,500 nuclear 2 International Institute for Strategic Studies . At the time, the IISIS was the International Institute of Strategic Studies in China .
 Brassey's for International Institute of Strategic Studies,: 1993), 86. Brassey was born in New York City .
 10. 62 weapons on Ukrainian soil returned to Russia, wanting nothing to do with nuclear weaponry after Chernobyl . Military Forces in the Soviet Successor States, 10.62 weapons on Ukraine soil back to Russia .
 Elaborating these problems will help us answer the question of what conditions could have allowed for the wholesale theft of billions of dollars of state property from the Ukraine, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In the movie Lord of War, the Ukrainian – former Soviet – General Dmitri Orlov sells a seemingly endless stream of military equipment to the freewheeling arms dealer played by Nicholas Cage . Orlov is a former Soviet-Ukrainian – former . Soviet – general .
 Instances like this, where men entrusted with hugely expensive and deadly equipment blatantly abused their authority, appear to have been commonplace . Instances such as this appear to be commonplace .
 First, the military was plunged into administrative chaos following the creation of the new Ukrainian armed forces . The new armed forces were created by Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin last year .
 Many members of the military were severely disillusioned with the Soviet system and retained little loyalty to the new Ukrainian government . Second, many members of Ukraine's military have been disillusioned .
 Many officers were worried about their job security and looking to make a quick buck . The economic catastrophe that engulfed the country in the decade following independence had a knock on effect .
 The initial creation of the Ukrainian military command structure actually began a collapse in central authority that was mirrored in most of the post-Soviet republics . The collapse of central authority was particularly acute in Ukraine .
 Commanders were left in the dark for lengthy periods about who they were answering to and whether they would even have jobs in the months ahead . As a result, commanders were left wondering if they had jobs .
 The language of the Soviet military had been Russian, but the new Ukrainian Armed Forces Command was to work in Ukrainian even though many of the army’s officers could not even speak it . To further complicate matters, the language was Russian .
 Given these factors, it was unsurprising that the chain of command decisively broke down . The U.S. military has a history of high-ranking military leaders breaking up .
 The claim was denied by the Russian and Ukrainian military authorities . Russia and Ukraine military authorities deny the claim .
 This was the third incident in which such claims have been made since the break-up of the Soviet Union .
 When the Soviet system collapsed there were not many who mourned its passing, least of all in the Ukraine . A referendum on the question of independence was answered positively by 90 per cent of Ukrainian voters .
 Before it was banned in August 1991, the CPU could boast four million members . The CPU was banned from using the CPU in 1991 .
 When it was re-legalized just two years later only 150,000 rejoined – 5 per cent . Just five per cent of those who did not join rejoined rejoined the drug trade .
 Ukrainians had many grievances with the Soviet government, chief among them the mistreatment of Ukrainian troops in the armed forces . Ukrainians were mistreated in the Soviet military .
 Conscripts in the Soviet Army were never treated well . Ukrainians suffered disproportionately compared to their Russian counterparts . Conscriptions in Soviet Army never received treatment well .
 Many Ukrainian units were put at the forefront of fighting in the Afghan War, or quelling hot spots of rebellion across the Warsaw Pact . Ukrainian units have been put at forefront of Afghan War and quelling rebellion across Warsaw Pact countries .
 The new free press brought to light the brutal hazing practices, Dedovshchina, that were endemic in the armed forces . The new press brought the brutal practices to light .
 The other burning issue driving Ukrainians away from communism was the government’s handling of the Chernobyl disaster . Chernobyl was the main reason for Ukrainians to vote against communism .
 The idea of a Ukrainian consciousness has struggled to gain traction in the country since independence . Ukraine experienced negative growth for nine years following independence . Even today the idea of Ukrainian consciousness is not gaining traction .
 More than anything else, the primary enabling factor for the illegal arms trade from the Ukraine was the economic collapse of the country's economic collapse . The collapse of Ukraine's economy was the main enabling factor in the arms trade trade, says David Cameron .
 The end of the Soviet empire dealt a catastrophic blow to an already struggling economy in the Ukraine . Ukraine's economy has been hit hard by the loss of Soviet glory .
 Former government managers sold off the state’s assets en masse, making private fortunes as the economy crumbled around them . Some former government managers made fortunes in the fall .
 The defense industry was hit particularly hard since it employed over a third of the population . One observer contrasted this aggressive, plutocratic form of privatization with Western equivalents .
 Estimates of the size of the informal sector or black market have ranged as high as two thirds of the total GDP . The fact that such a huge portion of the economy went underground, undoubtedly made stealing military equipment easier .
 The economic collapse meant the country had no way to pay for the three quarters of a million men and women under arms . The country had absolutely no way of paying for the troops .
 Initially the government intended to maintain armed forces of around 450,000 and began demobilizing the remaining 300,000 troops . But it was almost immediately apparent that even this was a preposterously high number given the state of the country’s finances .
 Mass demobilizations created more unemployment and gave those who remained in the forces a fatalistic view of their own futures, desperate to find any way to make money . Selling their weapons, often times their only assets, was a predictable response .
 Ukraine's military is currently only 159,000 strong . The Ukrainian military is based in Ukraine's capital Kiev . The country's military has a budget of $1 billion .
 The 1990s was a time of intense civil strife where long simmering ethnic and religious conflicts boiled to the surface . The corresponding weakening of centralized power in Third World states made the 1990s a time for civil strife .
 Since 1991 Ukrainian arms have turned up in the hands of rebel groups, tin-pot dictators and everywhere in-between . It is well documented that since 1991 Ukraine arms have been found in hands of rebels and dictators .
 Taras Kuzio asserts it is public knowledge that “Ukrainian arms were exported to Iraq, Iran, and South Yemen’s Yemen .
 In Asia, they were exported to Sri Lanka, Burma (despite an international embargo in place), China and Pakistan .
 The catalogue of wars, civil wars, genocides, rebellions and violent coups is shocking . The catalogue is shocking. It includes civil war, civil war and civil wars .
 Map shows extent of some of the most significant areas in the world's history . Map shows the extent of these areas . Map is better illustrated by the map below .
 What we are seeing is the decline of the classic African liberation movement and the proliferation of something else - something wilder, messier, more violent, and harder to wrap our heads around . What we're seeing is a decline .
 What is spreading across Africa like a viral pandemic is actually just opportunistic, heavily armed banditry . Banditry is spreading around Africa, but it's not a viral epidemic .
 I've witnessed up close -often way too close -how combat has morphed from soldier vs. soldier (now a rarity in Africa) to soldier vs . civilian . I've seen up close up - often way too close - how combat in Africa has morphed .
 Most of today's African fighters are not rebels with a cause; they're predators . Most of the African fighters today are predators, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The AK-47 assault rifle gave these men – and often children – many times the destructive power than had previously been possible . These weapons, more than anything the assault rifle, were more powerful than previous weapons .
 The majority of the almost four million thought to have died in the Second Congo War from 1998 to 2004 are thought to be killed by a bullet . Almost four million people died from the war from 1998-2004 in the Congo .
 In 1986, an AK-47 could be bought for fifteen cows in the town of Kolowa, Kenya, for 15 cows . One commentator noted that in the same town, the price was fifteen cows .
 The money for these weapons comes from the rich natural resources of the African continent . The money comes from African natural resources .
 The most notorious and well documented instance of African resources for Ukrainian guns was Sierra Leone’s so-called ‘blood diamonds’ in the last decade of the 20th Century .
 In Angola the UNITA rebel movement could still afford delivery of planeloads of small arms and attack helicopters . The narrow strip of otherwise strategically worthless land they held contained a huge diamond mine .
 Many African countries were subjected to UN-backed arms embargoes, but great powers rarely invested in enforcing them . Great powers rarely invest in enforcing such embargos .
 The many parties in Africa clamoring for guns could rely on shadowy middlemen – arms dealers – to skirt any restrictions and meet the demands . Arms dealers are often used to meet demands for guns in Africa .
 Details about Ukraine's illegal arms trade, beyond what’s been described, are sketchy . Details about the arms trade have been described as sketchy, including details about the illegal trade .
 There is no doubt that the Ukraine held thousands of tons of tons in military stockpiles . Many of those weapons have wound up in African conflict zones, many of them .
 How they get there and who was responsible are much more difficult questions to answer . How they got there is still a mystery, but who is responsible?
 Leonid Minin arrested by Italian police in 2000 and Viktor Bout by Thai police in 2008 . Viktor Bout was arrested in 2008 by Thai authorities in Thailand . The lives of two suspected arms traffickers have been profiled .
 He was subjected to fraud and money laundering investigations during the early 1990s . He was a transporter of oil and timber in Latin America, Africa, and Europe .
 As his import/export ventures around the world multiplied, so too did the white collar criminal investigations . As his business grew, the investigations focused on his white collar crimes .
 Minin's name shot to the surface of an investigation into arms smuggling in 1999 . An Antonov-124 transported 68 tons of small arms from Kiev to Liberia, via Burkina Faso . Minin’s name was revealed in 1999 in an arms smuggling investigation .
 French intelligence service were looking to find out how Charles Taylor’s rebel group in Liberia, supported by the Cote d’Ivoire, was getting its hands on arms despite an arms embargo .
 At the time of his arrest he had seven known aliases and five passports . He had been arrested in November 2011 .
 Among the findings in the hotel room was a sheaf of documents detailing Minin’s dealings in illegal arms . The documents exposed the shady business of arms dealing to the Western press .
 Moscow-based air cargo firm, Aviatrend, is run by former Soviet test pilot and friend of Minin’s Valery Cherny . They were to be transported by an outfit run by ex-Soviet test pilot .
 The Ukrainian government decried the arrests, claiming the legally issued end-user certificates specified Burkina Faso – a country not under any arms sanctions - as the destination of the deadly cargo . The country is not currently under any sanctions .
 End user certificates, documents certifying the use of military equipment, were one of the primary tools used by police to enforce arms embargoes . They were used to certify military equipment and what they plans to use it for .
 Arms dealers can sell false end-user certificates for as cheap as $50,000 . Once the weapons arrive in Burkina Faso they can be easily forwarded to embargoed nations .
 Minin was sentenced to two years in prison in 2002 . I could not find any information regarding his imprisonment . He was released in 2004 .
 Viktor Bout dubbed the ‘merchant of death’ by the human rights groups, government officials and journalists who have been tracking him for over the past 15 years . Bout has been tracked down by journalists and government officials for 15 years.
 Bout served in a military air transport regiment in the Soviet Air Force . He acted as an advisor to Soviet client governments in Africa . Bout spent two years in Mozambique .
 Some commentators believe Bout was working for the KGB in Angola when the Soviet Union fell apart in 1991 . Bout is believed to have been working in Angola at the time of the fall .
 After the collapse he bought three huge Antonov cargo planes sitting idle on Eastern European airfields for a measly $120,000 . He almost immediately began moving arms .
 Bout’s previous experience made him well placed to profit heavily from the rapidly developing business of selling ex-Warsaw Pact arms . Bout's previous experience led him to profit from his previous experience . Bout: “I’m not afraid to sell arms. I’
 Arms traffickers inherited not only the Soviet Union's cold-war weapons supply but also its fully operational systems of clandestine transport, replete with money channels, people who understood how to use them and, most important, established shipping pipelines . Robert Gelbard, assistant secretary of state for international narcotics
 Based in the free trade zone at Sharjah in the UAE, the lax import/export regulations allowed him to easily operate under a veil of secrecy . Based in Sharjah, he was able to operate under the strict import/examine regulations .
 As the 1990s wore on it became clear to Western intelligence agencies that Bout was a very big deal in the smuggling of weapons . Bout was one of the world's biggest smugglers of weapons in the 90s .
 Unlike Minin, Bout procured arms from virtually every country once in the Warsaw Pact . Bout had arms from nearly every country in the Soviet Union . Bout's arms were procured by virtually every member of the Communist Party .
 Arms he transported are suspected to have wound up in the majority of the conflict-ridden states depicted in the map above . Arms are believed to have been found in many of the war-torn states depicted here .
 Oftentimes his planes carried other goods -flowers, frozen chicken, mining equipment, even UN peacekeepers - but that was simply a matter of keeping his planes from ever flying anywhere without a profit-making cargo .
 These legitimate flights were often useful as a cover for his illicit and deadly activities . He was often used to fly legitimate flights in order to carry out illicit activities .
 In the interview he makes numerous references to the support his trans-national criminal network received from the Russian government . He makes numerous veiled and not-so-veiled references to Russian government support .
 Russia has reacted angrily to all American attempts to extradite him to the United States for trial as an assault upon their own sovereignty . The Russian government has described the extradition as a violation of their sovereignty .
 Profiles of these two arms dealers paint pictures of complicated international criminal networks that distort the line between legal and illegal, state and non-state actors . Profiles paint pictures .
 The difficult question for the Ukraine is the extent of government involvement in these deals . The Ukraine has been accused of corruption in its dealings with Russia .
 Warsaw Pact countries left with huge military industrial complexes found weapons were their only real source of foreign hard currency . Weapons were the only real sources of hard currency for Warsaw Pact nations . Warsaw Pact states found weapons was their only source of currency .
 If the buyers were under international arms embargoes they could be charged higher prices . If the buyer was under international embargues they could have been charged more .
 The last inventory was taken in 1992 when the independent Ukrainian military was formed; at that time its assets were valued at $89 billion . At that time the Ukrainian military had assets worth $89billion .
 The second inventory took four years, and it was not for lack of effort . It took the second inventory four years to sort out .
 The commission’s head Lieutenant-General Oleksandr Ihnatenko complained bitterly of being blocked by opaque, self-serving bureaucracy and denied access to military installations .
 $32 billion worth of military equipment had been stolen from the U.S. military, officials say . When they finally finished their inventory they concluded $32billion worth of equipment was stolen .
 Ukraine’s total military budget was $550 million in 2001 . In 2001, Ukraine spent $550m on its military budget . Ukraine's military budget is not an insignificant sum compared to $550M .
 Officially, the government of President Leonid Kuchma declined to comment on the issue .
 As for the report it was swept under the carpet, I have been unable to find it or the summary that was published in the Kiev newsletter . I have found it or a summary of the Kiev report .
 The release of the tapes led to political fallout that helped derail Kuchma’s government and contributed to the Orange Revolution several years later . Viktor Yushchenko was elected to power in 2004 after the release of tapes .
 Yushchenko’s rule did not lead to the fresh 34 Dave Gilson . Sadly for Ukrainians, the new president did not live up to his promises .
 He dissolved his cabinet, many of them holdovers from the Kuchmaera, because of accusations of corruption and illegally dissolved parliament twice . He dissolved the cabinet because of corruption allegations .
 His approval rating stood at 10 per cent when he lost reelection last year to Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych was widely seen as Kuchma’s protégé and a strong backer of big business .
 To date no further inquiry has been held into illegal arms smuggling or political murders . Not a single conviction on charges of arms trafficking has been brought in Ukraine in the past 20 years .
 This essay has attempted to shine light on a shadowy business where most of those involved would be much happier without the scrutiny . This essay is an attempt at shining light on the dark side of the business .
 The story is not one that should have come as a surprise to anyone familiar with the Ukraine in the 1990s . But the story should not have been a surprise, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine was turned into a vast military storehouse by Warsaw Pact defensive doctrine . When she became independent she retained all of the equipment and soldiers on her soil .
 When she converted this into a massive national armed forces out of all proportion of her ability to maintain it, the result was predictably chaotic . The result is predictably chaotic. When she turned this into an enormous national armed force, it will be difficult to maintain .
 The cynicism, economic and psychological depression and plutocratic conversion to capitalism all contributed to the disrespect for government property . The cynicism and economic depression contributed to this disrespect, he says .
 The Ukraine was more than happy to oblige with its massive military surpluses . When the rest of the world was clamoring for weapons to settle long simmering conflicts, especially in Africa, the Ukraine responded .
 What she needed, though, was men willing to secrete these weapons out of the post-Soviet bloc . "What she needed was men who were willing to secure these weapons," she said .
 Leonid Minin and Viktor Bout were gunrunners in the 1980s . They were involved in the gunrunning of the Soviet Union . Viktor Bout and Viktor Minin were among the gunrunners behind the scenes .
 They were able to capitalize on the chaos in the Ukraine as well as the leftover Soviet “tubing” to send shipand plane-loads of arms wherever they wanted .
 Ministry of Defence and the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . Ministry . of Defence . General Staff . of the armed forces of Ukraine. Ukraine .
 Russian and Ukrainian officials deny new allegations that nuclear warheads were lost in the 1990s . WMD Insights, May 2006, WMDInsights, published in May 2006 .
 Political scandals can be understood in Theodore Lowi’s definition, that a scandal is corruption and the breach of virtue being exposed . Michelle Legassicke: Political scandals are corruption, and the breaches of virtue are exposed . The scandal was a Cold War scandal .
 In Canadian history, the biggest ‘Sex Scandal’ was the Munsinger affair, an affair which involved an East German and two high level Conservatives, which occurred from 1959-61 but was not publically exposed until 1966 .
 A few years prior to the affair’s exposure, in 1964, the Presidential elections in the U.S. were rocked by the same-sex Jenkins scandal .
 Both scandals threatened national security, as it was perceived in each country . Both scandals threaten national security as it is perceived in both countries .
 Jenkins scandal focused on commitment of homosexual acts, but Munsinger scandal was what transgressed public morality in Canada . Jenkins scandal was the focus in the Jenkins scandal . In Canada, the act of covering up the affair was what was transgressing public morality .
 Although these scandals occurred in the same time period, they each became scandals for different reasons, illustrating the different public expectations of morality towards those holding political power in Canada and the U.S.
 The Munsinger affair and Jenkins scandal are similar, but more differences can be found in how these scandals were treated, and how they came to affect the political system . The similarities are there, but there are also differences between the two scandals .
 In this way, a procedural scandal will always come after a substantive scandal . However, it is the procedural scandal that lengthens the coverage of a serious scandal . In this case, the scandal lengthenes coverage of the scandal .
 In some cases, the procedural scandal can be more controversial than the substantive scandal . The procedural scandal is often more controversial, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Lowi’s framework of substantive and procedural scandals can be applied to sex scandals in Canada and the U.S., he says . Lowi: The framework is similar to that used in the United States and Canada .
 Crucial to the understanding of political sex scandals is taking into consideration contemporary morality, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's important to take into account contemporary morality"
 Something that was considered scandalous in the 1920s, would not garner public attention today . As such, something that would have been scandalous today would not have garnered public attention . Today, something such a scandalous event would not be as scandalous again .
 The Spencer Scandal involved a Vancouver postal worker working as a low level Soviet spy . Lucien Cardin, then Justice Minister under the Pearson Government, was facing pressure by John Diefenbaker over the scandal .
 This accusation “stunned the House of Commons,” as Cardin had publically revealed a scandal that had only been discussed in close circles in Ottawa . Cardin said the accusation ‘stuns’ the Commons .
 The Affair involved Gerda Munsinger, an East German that escaped from the eastern zone in the early 1950s . Gerda was one of the East German women who escaped in the 1950s from the Soviet Union .
 She arrived in Canada in August 1955, after a divorce led her to apply under her ex-husbands last name rather than her maiden name Heseler .
 She was introduced to Pierre Sévigny in August 1959 . Over the next four years, she would work her way up the social ladder .
 Munsinger’s relationship with Cabinet Minister Hees did not last very long . However, the relationship with the Cabinet Minister was short-lived . Hees was the only Cabinet Minister to hold the post .
 Munsinger met at Ottawa’s Chateau Laurier Hotel and the relationship lasted only long enough to get an invitation to the St. Louis St. Genealogy Museum . Muninginger and Gene Seymour met at the same hotel in Ottawa, Canada .
 The affair with Sévigny from September through December was the climax of the affair . The affair between September and December is the climax to the affair.
 By January 1960 Sévigny had heard that Munsinger was ‘loose-lipped in reference to him” leading him to try and remove himself from the situation . The French president tried to take control of the situation by removing him from the role .
 The 1960s were far more tumultuous in the U.S. than in Canada . Canada was in the midst of a tumultuous period in the 1960s .
 National security was defined broadly in the United States, as were actions that could put national security in jeopardy . National security is defined broadly by the U.S.
 Sexual indiscretion was easily used as blackmail, especially homosexual sexual indiscretion . Sexual indiscretions could be easily used in blackmail, says author .
 Cold War mentalities led to many who were involved in ‘deviant’ behaviour being associated with communists . Furthermore, Cold War . mentalities . led many people involved in 'deviant' behaviour to be associated with . communists .
 Political scandals in the U.S. affected individuals involved, but did not always affect the political party they were associated with . However, in the United States, political scandals affected the individuals involved . Political scandals affected individuals but not their political party .
 The Republican campaign “learned of the incident and gave the story to United Press International ”, who were the first to break the News . It quickly became national news .
 The press discovered that Jenkins was found engaging in homosexual activity with a resident of the YMCA . The story broke as a national scandal, it was revealed that Jenkins had a previous arrest .
 Johnson ended up winning the election in a landslide victory . The revelation had no noticeable effect on the election, Johnson said .
 Johnson distanced himself from Jenkins in hopes of protecting his political interests . Johnson was surprised upon hearing the news, Johnson said .
 Politics & the Ritual of Public Shaming (Toronto: Key Publishing House, 2009), 115. Politicians and public shaming are a form of public shaming in the world .
 Sex, Scandal, and Corruption in American Politics from 1702 to the Present , 212. The book is based on the history of American politics .
 Johnson asked immediately for Jenkins’ resignation which ended their 25-year working relationship . Johnson also asked for the resignation of Jenkins .
 The Republicans had hoped that by exposing the story, they could “portray the Johnson administration as “‘soft’ on communism”28 as he had a homosexual working for him, which was believed to be a major security risk .
 The scandal involving Jenkins in the U.S. was discovered and exposed as a scandal immediately . Jenkins scandal was discovered in the United States .
 Abe Fortas did ask the editors of major papers to hold off until Jenkins had the opportunity to inform his family of the matter and resign, but the UPI thwarted this as they broke the story immediately .
 The cover up of the affair would classify the affair as procedural scandal . The cover-up would classify it as a procedural scandal, the author says .
 By hiding the scandal, it made it that much more sensational once it did come into the limelight . However, by hiding it, the scandal was made it more sensational .
 There was also a substantive scandal, the fact that Sévigny and Hees slept with Munsinger, which could possibly jeopardize national security . However, there had been a possible breach in national security which was not publicized . The scandalous event was the fact there had
 Jenkins scandal did not involve procedural scandals; it came to light almost immediately after it occurred, and Jenkins did not try to deny the charges . Jenkins scandal does not involve any procedural scandals .
 The Jenkins scandal was entirely a substantive scandal, where the only issue was the actual breaking of the social norm, in this case, committing homosexual acts while in a high political position .
 Both scandals were equally viewed as national security scandals, albeit for different reasons . Both of these scandals were viewed as scandals, but not as different reasons.
 The national security issue was that there was the possibility that Munsinger had been a spy . Even though this seemed unlikely, she was at the very least involved with many deplorable characters, including organized crime figures she had met in the late 1950s and 1960s .
 In Munsinger scandal, focus was on Gerda as national security threat . But sex was not the primary issue, at least not in the initial investigation . Gerda is accused of being a sex offender .
 The affair came to light only because the RCMP were following Gerda after she had used both ministers as references for citizenship when she applied in June 1960 . This led to suspicion resulting in the surveillance and discovery of the affairs .
 The fear by the RCMP that Gerda could know national security information was one of the major issues in the scandal, there 26.
 Concern with the 'Sex' part of the scandal only occurred once the story broke in 1966 . Concerns with the ‘Sex’ part of it only occurred in 1966. Concerns about the 'sex’ and ‘sexuality’ of the story only occurred after
 It was the general public's interest in the ‘sex scandal’, and their interest in Gerda that led to the popularization of the sexual nature of the scandal . Gerda was the subject of the 'sex scandal'
 The Jenkins scandal focused solely on him, and the fact that he himself was a security threat . The scandal focused on him and his security threat, but he was not a security risk .
 The man he had sex with does not feature prominently in the unfolding of the scandal . He is accused of having sex with a woman who is not a prominent figure in the story .
 The 1960s provided a space in which external events caused Canada and the U.S. to have converging social norms . Lowi believes that norms might not cross countries, but they did cross countries .
 The U.S. was just coming to terms with the Cuban missile crisis, which occurred only two years before the scandal occurred . Jenkins scandal occurred just two years ago .
 Johnson would not want to seem soft on fighting communism, especially in an election year . Johnson would want to avoid appearing soft on communism in the election year.
 Canada was trying to overcome Diefenbaker's short falls in the view of Canada’s allies . Canada was similar to Canada in the 1980s, when it was in power .
 Cold war mentality was a key aspect of why the investigation into Munsinger began in the first place . Cold war is a key part of the investigation .
 Both scandals broke at a time where the major parties in each respective country had tense relations . Both of these scandals broke during a time when the major political parties in both countries were tense relations.
 After the 1963 Federal election, “Pearson and Diefenbaker were still at the head of their parties, and so long as the two remained the bitterness that dominated the daily struggle . 35 Loftin, ‘Political Scandals’, 396.
 The Descent of Canadian Politics from Macdonald to Chrétien (Toronto: HarperPerennialCanada, 2004), 209. Canada's first prime minister, Jean Jean Jean-Jacques, has been in office since 1996 .
 Diefenbaker knew of affair that occurred under his stewardship from August 1959 until early 1961 . Liberals knew of the affair that had occurred under him until 1961 . It was not a surprise that the Liberals knew .
 First mention of Diefenbaker’s accusations that liberals were blackmailing him with the affair . Globe and Mail is the first mention of the affair on the front page of Monday March 7th .
 Accusations of blackmailing did not receive considerable attention as the Canadian public finally had a sex scandal of their own to follow .
 Favreau had approached Fulton, and hinted that the Liberals knew of the affair, and that it would be advisable for the Tories attacks in the House of Commons to stop .
 Favreau pointed to this as evidence that the House of Commons blurt was not accidental . Favreau said this was evidence that it was not an accident .
 Johnson was facing a staunch anti-communist conservative in an election . In the case of Johnson, he was facing an anti-Communist conservative .
 In Johnson's case, his presidential campaign was not affected, but the scandal ruined the political life of Jenkins . Jenkins' political life was ruined by the scandal, but his campaign was never affected .
 Diefenbaker and the Progressive Conservatives received a lot of bad press because of the scandal and their handling of the initial affair, affecting the party politically for quite some time . The Progressive Conservatives were in the midst of a major scandal .
 In Canada, the actual ‘sexual’ act was not seen as breaking any established social norms . It was the procedural method of hiding the scandal that broke the established norms that were expected of those in power .
 Jenkins’ sexual act was seen as breaking the social norms, in that by committing homosexual acts, he did not have the same moral fiber and therefore could not be trusted in a position of political power . Jenkins' sexual act broke the social norm . Jenkins was a prominent member of the
 Both sex scandals affected in some way the political system . The manner in which they are connected is primarily in their status as national security issues . Political opponents used both scandals as tools .
 The scandals differ greatly, as do the public norms that they broke . Otherwise, the substantive and procedural matters of the scandals differ much, as well as the public .
 These examples do show an ability to compare political scandals, at least on a few tangible similarities . These examples of political scandals do show that .
 For many reasons, only some of which are discussed here, the Ottoman Empire was being picked apart by European imperial powers . The Ottoman Empire is now being torn apart by the world's most powerful powers .
 After the loss of Ottoman territories in the Balkan wars of 1912, the empire was made up of only Turkic and Arabic provinces . The empire was only the Turkic, Arabic and Turkic provinces .
 World War One forcibly removed the Arab provinces from the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire remained a solely Turkish state . The Arab provinces were removed from the Empire in 1918 .
 In Anatolia the modern nationstate of Turkey would emerge under the nationalist leadership of Mustafa Kemal, known as Ataturk . The modern nation state of Turkey emerged in Anatolia .
 Arab peoples in Greater Syria and the Arabian Peninsula were separated politically, economically and culturally from Asia Minor . For the first time in four hundred years, the Arab people in Syria and Arabian Peninsula are separated politically and economically .
 The conclusion of this division resulted in the creation of European mandates which brought direct European rule to the region of Greater Syria for the first time . European mandates were created after the conclusion of the division .
 The events of this period led to dramatic changes in the political, ideological and cultural life of the inhabitants of the region . The events in the region led to a dramatic change in political and ideological life of inhabitants .
 Intellectuals, urban notables, and rural leaders of varying importance within and outside of Syria had to re-form loyalties to protect their own interests .
 It is these changes and negotiations of identities that would shape Syria during the First World War and the ensuing French mandate . It would shape the shape of the country during the war .
 The dominant ideology in the Ottoman Empire was Ottomanism, the idea that the best way to defend Islam from the encroachment of European Christian powers was to strengthen and support the Empire . Ottomanism was the belief that Islam should not be threatened by European powers .
 All of the leading political and religious leaders in the Ottoman Empire adhered to some form of Ottomanism or another prior to the First World War . Predominantly all of the . leading political, religious leaders . in the . Ottoman Empire .
 Many leading political figures turned to a new emerging ideology called Arabism . Arabism put emphasis on greater decentralisation within the Ottoman Empire in Arab provinces . After the Young Turk Revolution of 1908 and the overthrow of Sultan ‘Abd al-Hamid II, many leading political .
 Arabist leaders got removed from positions of power by the Ottoman authorities . The most prominent positions were held by adherents to the Ottomanist ideology . The Empire joined the First World War in November 1914 .
 When the Ottoman Empire did lose control of the Arab provinces, Arabism was no longer valid . Arabism and Arab nationalism was adopted as the leading political ideology . The Ottoman Empire lost control of Arab provinces .
 Most successful source of emerging Arab nationalism came from the rural province of the Hejaz in the form of the Arab revolt led by the Sharif Husayn of the Hashemite family .
 In this paper I argue that in the period prior to, during, and after the First World War, identities were reshaped and articulated, particularly among the elite, in the region of Greater Syria to meet immediate political and military needs . I argue in this paper that identity was reshaped
 I argue that regional identities clashed with Sharif Husayn and Emir Faysal’s Hashemite version of Arab nationalism . No notion of panArab identity was agreed upon, says author .
 The fluid nature of identities in Syria during this period would lead to the development of a Syrian Arab nationalism, which included many regional and familial loyalties, to combat French colonial rule .
 I will begin by examining the relationship between Ottomanism and Arabism and the latter’s dominance as a result of Ottoman defeat in the First World War . I will also examine the relationship with the Ottomanism in terms of the Arabism that led to Ottoman defeat .
 I will expand on the Hashemite ideology of Pan-Arabism and the results of the Arab revolt . Then I will talk about the Arab uprising and how it ended up in Syria .
 Faysal’s Arab Kingdom and how it was unable to gain support from Syrian and Damascene notables will be analysed . The Arab Nationalists would eventually take over the leadership from Fayal until the French invasion in July 1920 . Thirdly, how the Arab Kingdom
 Syrian national identity had become more solidified as Syrians combated French colonial power . Lastly, I will look into the beginning of the French Mandate period and how Syrian national .
 Ottomanism expressed along religious lines as the only way to protect Islam from encroaching European powers . Ottomanism was expressed in Ottomanism as a way to keep Islam from European powers from invading .
 Philip Khoury establishes that the Ottoman reforms in the late 19th century benefited an emerging bureaucratic landowning class who took power in Damascus and other Syrian cities . The reforms helped an emerging bureaucracy take power in Syria and Damascus .
 The new Young Turk government increased the use of the Turkish language throughout Arab provinces in the empire . Arab political and religious leaders disliked this wave of Turkification . The Committee of Union and Progress increased the language .
 They blamed the Ottoman government for the weakening of Islam . They thought that the strengthening of Arabs would strengthen Islam . The Ottoman government was blamed for weakening Islam .
 It did imply greater decentralisation away from Istanbul and, after the Young Turk Revolution, an end to policies of Turkification . The Young Turk revolution ended policies of Turinification .
 Arabism prior to World War One cannot be seen as ‘Arab nationalism’ as it worked within the context of the Ottoman Empire . In this sense, Arabism pre-World War One was not ‘nationalist’ in its context .
 Its main tenant was that the Turkish government in Istanbul had lost the ability to properly defend Islam . To reform Islam, further decentralisation of power had to occur, he said .
 Arabism, like Ottomanism, placed Islam and the continuation of an Islamic empire as the center of its concern . Instead, Arabism placed Islam as the future of the Islamic empire at the heart of its concerns .
 Arabism had been promulgated among the ‘ulama and Arabist notables in urban centres in Syria . Ottomanism remained the dominant ideology in the Arab provinces of the empire .
 CUP sought to replace Arabist notables in Damascus and other Syrian urban centres with Ottomanists as they perceived Arabism as a threat to their power . This was largely because of the CUP .
 Syria had predominantly Ottomanist notables in positions of power on the outbreak and during the war . This led to Syria having predominantly Ottomanists in power during the conflict .
 Arabism was unable to achieve its political goals prior to World War One . It would become a necessary ideology after the war because of the failure of the Ottoman state, and therefore Ottomanism, to defend the Arab provinces from European domination .
 Syrians remained loyal to the Ottoman Empire during World War One . Very few Syrian Arabists joined the Hashemite armies until the outcome of the war became evident .
 Few active Syrian Arabists or emerging Syrian Arab nationalists that were in Syria fled the region or were imprisoned by the authorities . The few active Arabists fled the country or were jailed by the Syrian authorities .
 "They did not have a significant role in the Arab national movement that would occur," says the Arab leader . They did not play a major role in that movement, he says .
 An articulate form of Arab nationalism was promulgated by the Sharif Husayn of the Hejaz when he revolted against the Ottomans . An articulate nationalistic form of nationalism was developed by Husayn .
 The Arab revolt occurred outside of Syria is one of the greatest ironies of the development of Arabism and Arab nationalism in Syria . The fact that the Arab revolt . occurred outside . Syria is a country of Arab nationalism .
 Calling Sharif Husayn’s revolt as an ‘Arab revolt’ is problematic as the choice to revolt was made mostly due to political reasons . However, calling the revolt an Arab revolt is problematic because it was made up predominantly by Hejazi and Iraqi warriors .
 Hashemites would come to spearhead the Arab nationalist movement and the transition from Arabism within an Ottoman framework to Arab nationalism and independence . As we will see, as we will .
 Arab revolt has become aggrandised in the memorisation of Arab nationalism . Arab nationalism has become an integral part of the Arab Spring . The revolt has also become an important part of Arab history .
 His framing of the Arab revolt as a purely nationalist movement is misleading . However, he does not reflect the reality of the complicated set of identities and motives that existed on the ground . The Arab revolt was not purely nationalist, he says .
 Antonius presented the Arab national movement as inevitable, and as the Arab people waiting to overthrow their Ottoman overseers . Antonius: The Arab people were waiting for the overthrow of their overseers. Antonius said they would overthrow the Ottoman government .
 The Hashemite revolt was initially framed along religious lines and did not lead to an upheaval in the Ottoman’s Arab provinces . The revolt was framed on religious lines .
 Husayn held one of the most prestigious political and religious positions within the Empire . Husayn was the Sharif and Emir of Mecca . He was the most powerful man in the Muslim world .
 Husayn had originally strengthened his position by expressing loyalty to the Sultan and thus was able to beat out rival families and clans with Ottoman support . Husayn was originally able to strengthen his position with the Sultan's support .
 He legitimated his post by his ability to control the Bedouin tribes . He also protected the pilgrimage route to Mecca and Medina .
 He and his family were fully entrenched in Ottomanism . They believed the Sultan and the Empire were the best way to protect and further Islam .
 Husayn became at odds with the Turkish authorities in Istanbul and their policies of secularisation, centralisation and Turkification . Husayn was one of the most prominent figures in the Ottoman Empire .
 At the beginning of the war Husayn was under the threat of losing his position as Emir and Sharif of Mecca by either Turkish or foreign powers .
 He was a late comer to Arabism and Arab nationalism . He began negotiating with Arab nationalists from Syria and with British forces fighting the Ottomans .
 Husayn-McMahon correspondence of 1915 was agreed to . Husayn was ready to launch his revolt against the Turks .
 The ideology of the Arab revolt did not articulate Arab independence over Arabism . Arabism is not Arabism, it is the ideology of Arabism rather than Arabism. Arabism was a key to Arabism in the Arab revolution, says Al-Ahmad .
 Ottoman government had lost its legitimacy because it could not defend Islam . Arab independence was not a given, and Arab independence wasn't a given . The Ottoman government lost legitimacy because of its failure to defend Islam, says historian .
 Arabs had to take control of responsibility of protecting Islam and governing the caliphate . Therefore, Arabs took control of the responsibility for protecting Islam . Arabs also took over the responsibility of the Islamic state of Islam .
 Arab independence was a by-product of the results of the war, not an inherent objective of the Arab revolt . Arab independence is a result of the outcome of the conflict, rather than an attempt to achieve it, says the author of the book .
 The objectives and goals of the revolt were framed along protecting Islam, not realising Arab nationalist aspirations . The objectives were framed in favour of protecting Islam and protecting Islam .
 Antonius was a universalist Caliphal . Antonius wrote about the usurpation by the Ottomans of the Caliphate from its rightful holders – not the Arabs .
 The revolt would later take on a pan-Arab ideology, culminating in the creation of the Arab kingdom of Syria under Faysal . The revolt later took on an ideology, taking on an Arab ideology .
 As successful as the Arab revolt was militarily, it did not achieve the results that its supporters wanted it to . British military planners in particular, wanted the revolt to succeed . The revolt was successful but failed to achieve the goals of its supporters .
 Regional loyalties to families, clans, tribes or cities still dominate the fluid negotiation of identities in Syria .
 The Arab armies were made up predominately by Hejazi’s and had minimal Syrian and Palestinian membership . Pan-Arab sentiment did not take hold across Greater Syria because of the Arab sentiment .
 Al-Azmeh and Dawn argue that the Arab Revolt was indeed not an Arab revolt, but a Hashemite revolt . Therefore, writers argue that . therefore, they say that . the Arab revolt was indeed . not a Arab revolt .
 The decision to revolt was made because of political reasons by the Sharif Husayn . The revolt was legitimated by appealing to Islamic tradition and continuity .
 See the first and third chapter of his book for expansion of his argument about origin and ideological nature of the Arab revolt .
 Ottomanist notables lost their traditional seats of power when Faysal set up a government . However, they were pushed aside by the Sultan’s supporters . The Ottomanists were pushed out of power by the government .
 Emir Faysal came to power because he led the northern Arab armies . British and commonwealth forces were able to militarily defeat Turkish forces in Syria .
 The Syrians did not want to be ruled by a Hashemite from the Hejaz, which was considered a backwater province of the Arab world . Unfortunately for Faysal’s new government, the Syrians didn’t want to .
 He faced prejudice from Syrian notables and even nationalist supporters, and had to learn the complexities of Damascene political life .
 Faysal’s government was set up on the same premise of how the Ottomans had ruled, and as Sami Zubaida describes it, most Middle Eastern states had been ruled . The government was based on the fact that most of the region was ruled by the Ott
 Hejazi and Iraqi members of his Arab army, whom he owed favours to, as well as pre-war Arab nationalists . Nevertheless, he formed a government consisting of Hejazaz and Iraqi . members of the Arab Arab army .
 As the war turned for the worse for the Ottomans, the Syrian political elite had to change from Ottomanism to Arabism . As Ottomanism was no longer a valid ideology to legitimate political power, political power was lost .
 For notables who had integrated with the Turkic ruling class this was a hard turnover to do . The Turkic majority of notables had already integrated into the ruling class .
 It was exasperated because of the exile or forced removal of Arabist notables prior to and during the war .
 Arabist notables and Arab nationalist intellectuals would have a prominent role in Faysal’s new government, much to the chagrin of traditional Ottomanists . These Arabists and Arab nationalists would play prominent roles in the government .
 Faysal gave government positions to his supporters and he had to greatly increase the bureaucracy to create enough posts . He also had to increase the number of government positions in order to get the government posts .
 The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara , 255. The first king of Syria,’s first king, was the first king .
 By and large, Faysal was unable to gain the international backing he would have needed to protect the young Arab state . He was not able to gain international backing .
 French war aims to gain Syria as a prize for its sacrifice during the war and Britain’s withdrawal of support for Faysal. This was largely due to French aims to get Syria .
 He devoted most of his efforts to obtaining British support . Nevertheless, he devoted most efforts to obtain British support for his campaign .
 First he approached the Zionists to discuss Jewish immigration in Palestine . Then he approached a group of Zionists in order to get them to Israel .
 Faysal met with Chaim Weizmann, the president of the Zionist delegation in Palestine, on June 4 1918 . He arrived in Damascus, Syria, in 1918 .
 The meeting went well and the relationship between the two parties was benevolent, although no actual agreement was made . The meeting was friendly and friendly, although there was no agreement .
 Faysal was aware of the strength that the Zionist community had in lobbying the British authorities, and so wished to gain an ally to aid him in acquiring further British support . Fayal wanted to gain the support of the British government .
 A Jewish national homeland was still on the table for negotiation in 1919 . They later reached an agreement in January 1919 that agreed to increased Jewish immigration, but the question of a national homeland remained .
 Faysal's reputation has been knocked down in Syria by British sympathisers . The agreement put him in a positive light to UK sympathisers, but it also knocked his reputation down .
 Faysal had miscalculated the Palestinian reaction’s reaction, as Palestinians at this time were very aware of the growing Jewish population in Palestine and Zionist plans to create a Jewish state .
 The reaction towards the Faysal-Weizmann agreement is understandable considering the emergence of Arab nationalism . Arab nationalism is focused on protecting the traditional role of Islam in Arab speaking provinces .
 The result was greater anti-Zionist sentiment and agitation in Syria and Palestine, as well as ruining any credibility Faysal could have had with the British .
 This incident reflected the reality of identities and power on the ground in Greater Syria, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This incident reflects the reality and power of the Syrian conflict .
 Faysal’s interpretation of the Arab nation differed from conceptions of the nation held by Syrian and Palestinian nationalists . It appears to be that the interpretation differs from that of the two countries .
 In Paris, Faysal was unable to defeat the French diplomatically, and the French coveted his Syrian state . The French coveted the Syrian state.
 The French perceived Faysal to be a British puppet, and that Britain would still have influence in the region if he remained in power . The French believed that Britain still had influence in Syria .
 It had exhausted its diplomatic resources and essentially made too many promises to many different parties . The United States had exhausted diplomatic resources, it has said .
 The Syrian Congress, which had been elected earlier in 1919 and first convened on June 6th, 1919, was dominated by Arab nationalists . The Syrian congress was elected earlier this year .
 Most of the nationalists were members of al-Fatat, the Young Arab Society, and part of its front party called the Istiqlal party . Most of these nationalists were . part of the . Young Arab . Society, the Arab Nationalist Party, was the front party
 Al-Fatat was an Arab nationalist organisation that had been founded prior to the war in 1909 in Paris . It was founded in Paris in 1909 .
 Arab nationalists in the Syrian Congress declared Greater Syria, which included Palestine, the Independent Kingdom of Syria on March 8 1920 . Faysal was declared it’s King of Syria . The Arab nationalists included Palestine .
 Fearing that the situation could get worse and with British forces out of the region, France prepared to send in an army . The French government is preparing to send an army into the region .
 France’s mandate was set up under international law and by mid-July French troops entered Syria . After the conference at San Remo in April 1920, France entered Syria in 1920 .
 The only monumental battle, the battle of Maysalun, occurred on July 24th, with Faysal’s minister of war, Yusuf al-Azmah, leading a small and ineffective Syrian army against the French .
 On the way to Syrian nationalism in the shade of Islam and Arabism,” in The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara, 136. 90 cultural and religious minorities and played regional elites off of each other to gain loyalty
 The French government was pushed to acquire the Syrian mandate because of politics within France . The Syrian mandate was acquired by the French government because of political reasons .
 French government was willing to invest time, energy and military might to hold onto Syria despite the fact that it was an economic drain . French government invested time and energy to hold on Syria .
 The Ottoman Empire and Emir Faysal’s Arab Kingdom were legitimated by their claim to represent and protect Islam and Arabs respectively . The Empire and Arab Kingdom claimed to represent Islam and protect Arab and Muslim .
 Regional identities would combine with a new Syrian identity to resist French occupation . The French had no legitimising claim among the Syrian populace, and regional identities would, to an extent, combine .
 After the French set up control in Syria, they divided the region into different administrative territories . The region was divided into separate administrative territories after the French took control .
 France gave preference to Christian Maronite population, which France supported during the 19th century . Lebanon region from Greater Syria was part of Greater Syria . France had supported the Maronite community during its support for the region .
 Maronites, Alawites and Druzes were favoured by the Syrian government . They continued this policy of divide and conquer in the rest of Syria, favouring the mountainous minorities .
 They ruled through the traditional Ottoman notable system, with the notables playing the role of mediator between the ruler and the people . Notables played the role as mediators between ruler and people .
 Ironically, the Alawite and Druze minorities would be staunch resisters to the French mandate . Ironically, they would have been staunch resists to French mandate. Ironically, Alawites and Druzes would have opposed French intervention .
 Resistance led by Ibrahim Hananu also came from the countryside surrounding Aleppo, which would be known as the Hananu revolt . Led by Shaykh Salih al-‘Ali, the resistance movement was put down until late 1921 .
 It was the rural Druze resistance in the southern Hawran region which would lead to the Syrian Revolt of 19251927 .
 The revolt would grow, culminating with resistance in the cities, and only after two years of military intervention were the French able to end the revolt . The French were forced to end their two-year military intervention .
 Although the Syrian revolt was ultimately unsuccessful, it would live on in Syrian nationalist discourse as a nationalist movement for independence .
 This removed whatever legitimacy the French might have had in governing Syria, it has inspired nationalist sentiment . The French government has been overthrown in Syria since 2011 . This has led to a surge in anti-French sentiment in Syria, which has been blamed on the loss of sovereignty .
 Development of Arab consciousness prior to and during the First World War, and the strength of a distinct regional Syrian identity, would expand to create a Syrian national identity during the mandate period .
 The shift from Ottomanism to Arabism came slowly as a reaction towards increasing Turkification and Ottoman failures against European powers in protecting and furthering Islam .
 Damascene notables and Islamic scholars began to associate themselves with Arabism . This brought on Ottoman persecution of Arabist politicians . Ottoman persecution brought on Arabist political leaders .
 Arab nationalism in Syria was put on hold until the Arab, or Hashemite, revolt of 1916-1918 . The revolt led to the creation of the Arab kingdom of Syria under Emir Faysal .
 Faysal espoused a clearly nationalist agenda, and his government was made up predominantly of Arab nationalists . But his ideas of pan-Arabism were not accepted in Syria .
 Faysal and his Hejazi and Iraqi followers were deemed outsiders . His form of Arab national identity, or pan-Arab identity, was not compatible with the strong Syrian regional identities, he says .
 The French quickly acted to end the short lived kingdom . Regardless, it was the Arab nationalists who took control of Faysal .
 The multiple different groups within Syria would all resent French colonial rule . The fluidity of identities would allow them to meld into a loose identification with the Syrian nation .
 Syrian identity would shape modern Syrian nationalism . It is this identification that would be the outcome of this turbulent time in Syrian history . It would be this identity that would emerge from this turbulent period .
 On the way to Syrian nationalism in the shade of Islam and Arabism,” in The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara, 123.
 State, Power, and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle East, 3rd edition. State, power, and politics in the making of the modern Middle East. The Middle East .