 Permission is granted to print and copy this page on paper for non-commercial use . Use this page to help people around the world with information .
 Game theory and the Cuban missile crisis by Steven J Brams Theory of Moves . Dean Rusk: "We're eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked"
 Chicken is the usual game used to model conflicts in which the players are on a collision course . Chicken is a usual model of conflict in which players face each other on collision courses .
 The players may be drivers approaching each other on a narrow road, in which each has the choice of swerving to avoid a collision or not swerving .
 In the novel Rebel without a Cause, the drivers were two teenagers racing toward a cliff . The object was not to be the first driver to slam on his brakes and thereby ""chicken out" while, at the same time, not plunging over the cliff .
 While ostensibly a game of Chicken, the Cuban missile crisis is not well modelled by this game . The game is supposed to be based on the fact that the missile crisis was not a game .
 Another game more accurately represents the preferences of American and Soviet leaders, but even for this game standard game theory does not explain their choices .
 The ""theory of moves" is founded on game theory but radically changes its standard rules of play . It does retrodict, or make past predictions of, the leaders' choices . On the other hand, the theory of moves does not retrodict .
 The theory is based on the assumption that players think not just about the immediate consequences of their actions but their repercussions for future play as well . More important, the theory explains the dynamics of play .
 The theory is not just an abstract mathematical model, but one that mirrors the real-life choices, and underlying thinking, of flesh-and-blood decision makers . I will use the Cuban missile crisis to illustrate parts of the theory .
 Classical Game Theory is a branch of mathematics concerned with decision-making in social interactions . Game theory is concerned with decisions in social interaction . It is also concerned with the Missile Crisis .
 The possible outcomes of a game depend on the choices made by all players, and can be ranked in order of preference by each player . Each player has a choice of the outcome of the game, and the choices are ranked by the player .
 Neither player, by departing from its strategy, can do better . This will be true when neither player, nor the other, is able to do better.
 Nash equilibrium is named after John Nash, a mathematician who received the Nobel prize in economics in 1994 for his work on game theory . Two such strategies are together known as a Nash equilibrium, named after Nash .
 Nash equilibria do not necessarily lead to the best outcomes for one, or even both, players . Nash equilibriumria are not necessarily the best outcome for either player or player .
 Players can only rank outcomes but not attach numerical values to them . The games that will be analyzed may not always exist . They may not be analyzed in the future .
 The Cuban missile crisis was precipitated by a Soviet attempt in October 1962 to install nuclear-armed ballistic missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of hitting a large portion of the United States .
 A naval blockade was intended to prevent shipment of more missiles, possibly followed by stronger action to induce the Soviet Union to withdraw the missiles already installed . The blockade was euphemistically called a "quarantine"
 A ""surgical"" air strike to wipe out the missiles already installed, insofar as possible, perhaps followed by an invasion of the island . A 'surgical' air strike may be followed by a possible military invasion .
 The higher the number, the greater the payoff; but the payoffs are only ordinal, that is, they indicate an ordering of outcomes from best to worst, not the degree to which a player prefers one outcome over another .
 Both sides considered more than the two alternatives listed, as well as several variations on each . Both sides consider more than one of the alternatives listed .
 The Soviets, for example, demanded withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey as a quid pro quo for withdrawal of their own missiles from Cuba, a demand publicly ignored by the U.S. The Soviets demanded withdrawal from Turkey in exchange for withdrawal from Cuba .
 Most observers of this crisis believe that the two superpowers were on a collision course, which is actually the title of one book describing this nuclear confrontation . Nevertheless, most observers believe that this is not the case .
 Neither side was eager to take any irreversible step, such as ripping off the steering wheel in full view of the other driver, foreclosing the option of swerving .
 Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union extracted from President Kennedy a promise not to invade Cuba, which seems to indicate that the eventual outcome was a compromise of sorts .
 The strategies associated with compromise do not constitute a Nash equilibrium . But this is not game theory's prediction for Chicken . It is not the only way to predict Chicken's success .
 The U.S. blockades Cuba and the S.U. withdraws its missiles . The S. and the U.N. are at odds over what happens next . The situation is unlikely to be resolved .
 This strategy is not stable, because both players would have an incentive to defect to their more belligerent strategy . This strategy would not be stable, as both sides would have to defect . The U.S. government is trying to win back control of the White House .
 If the players are at the mutually worst outcome of nuclear war, both would obviously desire to move away from it . This would make the strategies associated with it, like those with , unstable .
 Using Chicken to model a situation such as the Cuban missile crisis is problematic not only because the compromise outcome is unstable, but also because, in real life, the two sides did not choose their strategies simultaneously, or independently of each other .
 The Soviets responded specifically to the blockade after it was imposed by the United States . The U.S. imposed the blockade, but the Soviets responded to it specifically .
 The United States held out the possibility of escalating the conflict to at least an air strike . The fact that the initial blockade decision was not considered final that is, the U.S. considered its strategy choices still open .
 The game is better modelled as one of sequential bargaining, in which neither side made an all-or-nothing choice but rather both considered alternatives, especially if the other side fails to respond in a manner deemed appropriate .
 Each side was gingerly feeling its way, step by ominous step . In the most serious breakdown in the nuclear deterrence relationship between the superpowers that had persisted from World War II .
 Before the crisis, the Soviets feared an invasion of Cuba by the United States and also the need to bolster their international strategic position, concluded that installing the missiles was worth the risk .
 They thought the U.S. would be deterred from invading Cuba and would not attempt any other severe reprisals . They thought that the United States, confronted by a fait accompli, would not try to invade Cuba . But they thought that they would not .
 Even if the installation of the missiles precipitated a crisis, the Soviets did not reckon the probability of war to be high . President Kennedy estimated the chances of war between 1/3 and 1/2 during the crisis . The Soviets didn't recklessly risk provoking the United States .
 There are good reasons to believe that U.S. policymakers did not view the confrontation to be Chicken-like, at least as far as they interpreted and ranked possible outcomes .
 World opinion, it may be surmised, would severely condemn the air strike as a flagrant overreaction and hence a ""dishonourable" action of the U.S. if there were clear evidence that the Soviets were in the process of withdrawing their missiles anyway
 Given no evidence, a U.S. air strike, perhaps followed by an invasion, would action to dislodge the Soviet missiles . On the other hand, given no such evidence, the United States air strike would be unlikely .
 In responding to Khrushchev letter, Kennedy said, "If you would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba . . We, on our part, would agree . to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect and to . give assurances against an invasion of Cuba"
 As Robert Kennedy, a close adviser to his brother during the crisis, said, ""If they did not remove those bases, we would remove them,"" which is consistent with Alternative, since the United States prefers to but not to in Chicken Chicken .
 Several of President Kennedy's advisers felt very reluctant about attacking Cuba without exhausting less belligerent courses of action that might bring about the removal of missiles with less risk and greater sensitivity to American ideals and values .
 Robert Kennedy claimed that an immediate attack would be looked upon as ""a Pearl Harbor in reverse, and it would blacken the name of the United States in the pages of history" which is consistent with the Alternative since the U.S. ranks AW next worst a ""dishon
 Alternative provides a more realistic representation of the participants' perceptions than Chicken does . Standard game theory offers little help explaining how the compromise was achieved and rendered stable .
 These are strategies in which players randomize their choices, choosing each of their two so-called pure strategies with specified probabilities . Players randomise their choices to choose between their two pure strategies and their other strategies .
 Mixed strategies cannot be used to analyse Alternative, because to carry out such an analysis, there would need to be numerical payoffs assigned to each of the outcomes .
 The instability of outcomes in Alternative can most easily be seen by examining the cycle of preferences, indicated by the arrows going in a clockwise direction in this game .
 There are no equilibria in pure strategies in Alternative . There is indeterminacy, but not because of multiple Nash equities, as in Chicken, but rather because there is no Nash equilibrium .
 TOM extends strategic analysis of conflict into the more distant future . Players think ahead not just to the immediate consequences of making moves, but also to the consequences of countermoves to these moves .
 Game theory allows for this kind of thinking through the analysis of ""game trees,"" where the sequential choices of players over time are described . Game trees are described in the study of "game trees"
 The game tree tree tree continually changed with each development in the crisis . But the game tree has continually changed since the crisis began .
 The configuration of payoffs of Alternative remained more or less constant . Where players were in the matrix changed, though where the players were .
 TOM describes payoffs in a single game but allows players to make successive calculations of moves to different positions within it . TOM adds nonmyopic thinking to the economy of description offered by classical game theory .
 The rules of TOM apply to all games between two players, here I will assume that the players each have just two strategies . The players will have to choose between two strategies to play .
 Play starts at an initial state, given at the intersection of the row and column of a payoff matrix . The payoff matrix is the matrix of the state and state of a state .
 Either player can unilaterally switch its strategy, or make a move, and thereby change the initial state into a new state, in the same row or column .
 Player 2 can respond by unilaterally switching its strategy, thereby moving the game to a new state . Player 2 will then be able to respond by changing its strategy .
 The alternating responses continue until the player whose turn it is to move next chooses not to switch its strategy . The player whose move is next is next will be followed by the player who is next to move .
 Game terminates in a final state, which is the outcome of the game . When this happens, the game terminates, the outcome is the game's outcome . The game ends when the game is in its final state .
 Payoffs are numerical, rather than ordinal ranks, which players can accumulate as they pass through states . To assume otherwise would require that payoffs be numerical, not numerical, ranks .
 In many real-life games, payoffs cannot easily be quantified and summed across the states visited . But in many real life games, the payoffs are not easily easily quantified .
 The big reward in many games depends overwhelmingly on the final state reached, not on how it was reached . Moreover, the big reward depends on the state, not how it is reached, rather than the state itself .
 In politics, the payoff for most politicians is not in campaigning, but in winning, says David Frum . The payoff for winning is winning, he says, not campaigning .
 Rule l differs drastically from the corresponding rule of play in standard game theory, in which players simultaneously choose strategies in a matrix game that determines its outcome . Rule l is similar to that of the matrix game, which is played by players simultaneously choosing strategies .
 TOM assumes that players are already in some state at the start of play and receive payoffs from this state only if they stay . Instead of starting with strategy choices, TOM assumes players already in this state . TOM assumes this state is already at some point at the beginning of play .
 Based on these payoffs, they must decide, individually, whether or not to change this state in order to try to do better . The state must decide whether to try and do better, whether to change it .
 Players choose strategies from scratch, either simultaneously or by coordinating their choices . Of course, some decisions are made collectively by players, in which case they choose strategies .
 The question is what individualistic calculations led them to this point . But if, say, two countries are coordinating their choices, as when they agree to sign a treaty, the question is whether they are coordinating .
 The formality of jointly signing the treaty is the culmination of negotiations . The move-countermove process preceded the signing of the treaty .
 TOM is designed to uncover the calculations underlying the negotiations, and the calculations, that TOM is meant to uncover . It is precisely these negotiations, which TOM aims to uncover, are to uncover.
 Eventually they may arrive at a new state, after, say, treaty negotiations, in which it is rational for both countries to sign the treaty that was previously negotiated . Eventually the two countries may sign a treaty that they previously negotiated, such as a treaty .
 As with a treaty signing, almost all outcomes of games that we observe have a history . As with treaty signing , almost all outcome of games have history, it will be a repeat of history .
 TOM seeks to explain strategically the progression of states that lead to a outcome . TOM explains strategically how the progression is to a state that leads to an outcome. TOM also explains how the state of the state can influence the outcome of a state . TOM is the first state in the world to
 Play of a game starts in an initial state, at which players collect payoffs only if they remain in that state so that it becomes the final state, or outcome, of the game . Play begins in a state, and the outcome of that state is decided by the player . Players
 They move precisely because they calculate that they can do better by switching strategies, anticipating a better outcome when the move-countermove process finally comes to rest . They move because they want to make sure they have the best possible outcome .
 The game is different, but not the configuration of payoffs, when play starts in a different state . Play starts in different state, but the payoffs are different .
 While condition of this rule needs no defence, condition requires justification . Condition requires justification, condition must be justified, says author .
 It says that if it is rational, after P1 moves, for play of the game to cycle back to the initial state, P1 will not move in the first place . It says if it's rational, for P1 to move, after a move, the game will cycle
 Players use backward induction to determine where play will end up when at least one player wants to move from the initial state . Backward Induction is a form of play that determines where play begins .
 This is a reasoning process by which the players, working backward from the last possible move in a game, anticipate each other's rational choices . This is the reasoning process of which players work backward .
 For this purpose, I assume that each has complete information about the other's preferences . So each can calculate the other player's rational choices, as well as its own, in deciding whether to move .
 This is a game tree, though drawn horizontally rather than vertically . United States starts | Survivor starts at the bottom of the tree .
 Survivor is a state selected at each stage as the result of backward induction . The survivor is a survivor of each stage of backward inductions .
 U.S. must choose between stopping at and moving to which, as I just showed, would become once is reached . Hence, becomes the survivor when United States must choose whether to stop and move to which .
 At the initial state, , because United States prefers the previous survivor, , to , is the survivor at this state as well . Similarly, at the first state, the survivor is also the survivor of the first survivor .
 Players can reverse the process and, looking forward, determine what is rational for each to do . That is, after working backwards from S.U.'s choice of completing the cycle or not from , the players can reverse it and decide what they want .
 I indicate that it is rational for the process to stop at by the vertical line blocking the arrow emanating from , and underscoring at this point . The vertical line blocked the arrow from the arrow, and underscored at the point .
 S.U.U., by acting ""magnanimously"" in moving from victory at BM to compromise at BW, makes it rational for United States to terminate play at , as seen by the blocked arrow emanating from state 2 . S. U.S. starts | Survivor S
 The threat of further escalation by the United States, including the forced surfacing of Soviet submarines as well as an air strike, was incentive for the Soviets to withdraw their missiles . This, of course, is exactly what happened in the crisis . The United States Air Force estimated it had a
 It is less costly for both sides if the Soviet Union is the initiator of compromise eliminating the need for an air strike, it is not surprising that this is what happened . The Soviet Union was less costly to both sides in this case .
 The Theory of Moves renders game theory a more dynamic theory . To sum up, the theory of moves renders game theories more dynamic than game theory .
 Players think ahead not just to the immediate consequences of making moves, but also to the consequences of countermoves to those moves, counter-moves, and so on, it extends the strategic analysis .
 TOM has also been used to elucidate the role that different kinds of power moving, order and threat may have on conflict outcomes, and to show how misinformation can affect player choices . TOM is also used to show the importance of order and order in conflict outcomes .
 These concepts and analysis have been illustrated by numerous cases, ranging from conflicts in the Bible to disputes and struggles today . These concepts are illustrated by several cases, including those in Bible .
 He is the author or co-author of 13 books that involve applications of game theory and social choice theory to voting and elections, bargaining and fairness, international relations, and international relations .
 From Cake-Cutting to Dispute Resolution and The Win-Win Solution: Guaranteeing Fair Shares to Everybody . Alan D Taylor is co-author of both books co-authored with Alan Taylor .