 The Soviet Union was communist and tried to spread communism around the world . It was a failed state of Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Under Soviet communism, the government owned everything and people had fewer rights . Under Soviet Communism, people were owned by the government .
 The United States and the Soviet Union competed for more power in countries all over the world including in Latin America . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union fought for power in Latin American countries .
 "There were many miscalculations and secret communications and miscommunications," says President Obama . "There was many mistakes and miscommunications," he says .
 Leaders at the White House and at the Kremlin in Moscow made the decision . However, the decisions came mostly from leaders in both countries .
 In April 1962, the U.S. had tried to invade Cuba during the Bay of Pigs invasion . The U.N. tried to take over Cuba in April 1962 .
 Cuban premier Fidel Castro failed to drive Cuban premier from power in Cuba . It failed, and did not drive Fidel Castro from power, but failed .
 Afterward, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Castro . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev decided to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to stop any future invasion attempt . The missiles were placed in Cuba in order to stop a possible invasion attempt by the Soviet Union .
 The United States soon discovered that Soviet bombers and other weapons were being brought into Cuba . Construction began, and the U.S. soon discovered it was being built .
 On September 4, 1962, President Kennedy issued a public warning against these actions . Kennedy issued the warning against such actions .
 U.S. U–2 spy aircraft took pictures of missile sites being built in Cuba . Five weeks later, on October 14, a U.2 spy plane flew over Cuba to take pictures .
 President Kennedy had meetings at the White House with Cuban leaders . President Kennedy was in Cuba at the time of the Cuban uprising .
 Some of his advisers wanted an air strike to destroy the missile sites, followed by a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Some of the Cuban missile sites were hit by air strikes and a United States invasion .
 Kennedy advisors wanted just to send warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union . Kennedy advisors also wanted to warn against Cuba and Soviet Union. Other Kennedy advisors were also concerned .
 The president decided to order that Soviet ships would not be allowed to bring weapons to Cuba . The Cuban president ordered that the ships would be banned from bringing weapons to the island .
 On October 22, Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev demanding that all Soviet weapons be taken out of Cuba . Kennedy: "All Soviet weapons must be removed from Cuba"
 The president also went on television that evening to inform Americans of the developments in Cuba .
 On October 24, Khrushchev said that Soviet ships would keep coming to Cuba . Kennedy responded by saying that the ships would continue to come . Kennedy: "It's a war of words"
 On October 24 and 25, some Soviet ships turned back from entering Cuba . Some Soviet ships were turned back on October 24, 25 .
 Others were stopped by United States Navy ships and searched, but no weapons were found . Others stopped by U.S. Navy ships were searched and searched .
 More U-2 ﬂights over Cuba showed the Soviet missile sites were almost ready . Meanwhile, more U-1s were flying over the country .
 ABC News correspondent John Scali reported to the White House that a Soviet agent told him that the Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba if the U.S. promised not to invade the island .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message saying that he was worried about a nuclear war . Kennedy was worried that he might be going to war with the Soviet Union . Kennedy died of a heart attack at the hands of Soviet Union forces .
 Khrushchev wrote, ""Let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot. Let us untie the knot," he wrote . Khrushchevitch wrote .
 Khrushchev sent another message, this time demanding that the United States remove U.S. missiles from Turkey . The next day, October 27, he sent a message to the U.K. asking that the missiles be removed from Turkey.
 That same day, a United States U–2 jet was shot down over Cuba and the pilot was killed . The pilot of the U.S. U-2 plane was killed in Cuba .
 That night Kennedy decided to ignore the second message from Khrushchev and only respond to the first one . Kennedy decided not to respond to second message and only responded to the second one .
 He proposed steps for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under supervision of the United Nations . The U.N. would have to remove Soviet missiles under supervision .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy then met secretly with the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. Attorney General Kennedy then secretly met with Soviet ambassador . The crisis was over . Attorney General then met secret with the Russian ambassador .
 He said the United States was planning to remove United States missiles from Turkey . The U.S. plans to remove the missiles, he said .
 The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would be removed from Cuba . The next day, the Soviet missiles were removed from the island .
 The crisis was over, and U.S. missiles were removed from Turkey in 1963 . The crisis ended, and the United States removed the missiles from Turkey .
 The Cuban missile crisis strengthened Kennedy’s image around the world . Kennedy's image was strengthened by the crisis . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1961 .
 It also led to two other important changes that had an effect on the Cold War .
 Second, having been so close to a nuclear war, both superpowers began to talk about reducing the number of nuclear weapons . Second, after the war, they began talking about reducing nuclear weapons.
 Kennedy advisers wanted just to send warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union . Kennedy advisers also wanted to warn against Cuba and Soviet Union. Other Kennedy advisers didn't want to warn .
 On October 24, Khrushchev said that Soviet ships would keep coming to Cuba . Kennedy responded by saying that the ships would continue to come . Kennedy said the ships will continue to visit Cuba .
 They should never be produced again and all existing weapons should be destroyed . They should be never produced again . All existing weapons must be destroyed, says David Cameron .
 Production of nuclear weapons should be reduced, says President Obama . They are a drastic measure and production of nuclear arms should be cut, he says .
 He gives an important example of how communication between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was not clear .
 He was an important messenger to the president and conveyed Khrushchev's views on nuclear war . He was also a key diplomat for the Soviet Union .
 He was responsible for improving communication between the Soviets and the U.S. during the crisis . He also helped improve communication between Russia and the United States .