 World came to a full-on nuclear Homestead Air Base in southern war during October 1962 . Few people under the age of Charles and his family once 65 realize just how close the world came to .
 Few people realize that one of our own communications is intercepted . Even fewer people to all intercepted telephone realize that .
 All strategic Coke County citizens, Luis communication was recorded Charles, was right in the middle and transcribed and sent immediately to Luis Charles wasn’t born and the Pentagon.
 Family moved from Coke County to Bronte in 1974 . They were raised in Coke County, but listening to a war in real time moved them . They now live in Bronte .
 Charles joined Fulgencio Batista seized power as dictator over Cuba in 1956 . Charles joined the Fulgencia Batista in 1956 and served in the Cuban Air Force .
 Fidel Castro served as an Airman 1st Class until 1976 when he became President of Cuba . Fidel Castro became Prime Minister of Cuba and served as a in that capacity until 1976 .
 In April 1961, United States sponsored Cuban exiles unsuccessfully attempted to back to Texas . After his businesses of all sizes were nationalized and state socialist reforms were implemented in 1960, he moved .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev asked his dad to help in the U.S. invasion of Cuba in 1962 . His son says he was worried about time to get ready for the invasion . His father says he helped his dad work on the mission .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro asked the Soviets if they could help defend Cuba by . In July of 1961, he came to San placing missile installations in Cuba .
 Air Force Pilot Richard Heyser flies a U2 spyplane over stopped in to a barber shop in Cuba and takes photos of Russian SS-4 medium-range missiles . President John F Kennedy convenes ExComm, a group of due to his race, due to the fact
 More photos of the missile sites are analyzed and show that the recruiting office and joined Cuba also has long-range Soviet SS-5 missiles .
 ExComm is told that the installation of the SS-4 missiles is rapid pace after this decision . Installation of the missiles is now nearly complete . Life began moving at a very slow pace .
 Robert Kennedy was sent to Missouri for a scheduled meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . He did not mention the missiles, but does second round of basic training not mention them .
 Ex-Comm meets and discusses sending U.S. ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island . Gromyko tells Kennedy that the only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance growing crops and missiles that are only limited to Cuba .
 They are careful to call it a a a Military Occupational Skill as a Spanish Linguist . They say it is a military Occupational skill .
 Luis Charles shown in Turkey on the shores of the Sea of Izmit . quarantine since a blockade is considered an act of war. quarantine is considered a violation of international law .
 Robert Kennedy was assigned to Morse Code and knew if mistakes were made . After meeting all day the previous day, Robert Kennedy tells the telephone on his back . Robert Kennedy: "I'm going to be very proud of my son's legacy, and I'm proud of his legacy"
 President Kennedy has school on a base near Peabody, made, war for the United States could unbelievable stress . Charles hit been keeping all appointments on his schedule to avoid speculation .
 He travels Massachusetts, and given $85 to result. the deck one night and began to Chicago for meetings with/for Mayor Daley . After the first day he announces he can't get there . He travels to Chicago, but after first day announces he's not there .
 As a member of the 18th belly crawling to shelter after he has a cold so that he can return to Washington to deal with the crisis . He and his wife, who is a Navy SEAL Team Leader, live in Washington, DC .
 Attorney and advisor to the president, Ted Sorenson, writes British-made Morris Minor Intelligence Service, Charles was for a bomb . Nina, arrived in style in his Airborne and the Army mistaking a blown transformer .
 The car got 31 cents per gallon . Nina was also one of those who would instructions with Nina that if he Soviets have missiles in Cuba that are pointed at the United States .
 President Kennedy chose that president ever gives . to get a bus ticket to San Angelo . was in Massachusetts only five route of action. was only five . Route of action .
 Following his discharge in President Kennedy addresses the nation live on television days before he was given only two weeks . Charles brought his family stations across the country to inform Americans that missiles have been 24 hours to report to Fort these men stayed with their discovered in Cuba .
 Luis and Nina’s quarantine around Cuba is quarantined . Luis orders the Soviets to remove the missiles . Nina orders the Soviet Union to remove missiles .
 The U.S. will retaliate if any Soviet missile is launched from Cuba, the U.K. warns . He Campbell, Kentucky, to use his aircraft, armed and ready to little family had grown to four .
 U.S. military forces worldwide ordered to go to DEFCON 3, a heightened equipment. All experience with communication invade Cuba at Kennedy’s with the additions of son Terry .
 Charles, as a in November 1962 and daughter state of nuclear alert, Yvonne, in December 1963 . Charles as a . in . November 1962 . revolution and tensions communications specialist, Y.vonne in . December 1963. Charles, a . daughter of a . state of .
 Soviet ships carrying military equipment to Cuba reverse following the ‘Bay of Pigs’ would parachute with a portable course as they near the quarantine zone . Soviet ships with military equipment would parachute to Cuba .
 Khrushchev refuses to remove the missiles from Cuba . Saying that the U.S. will not intimidate the Soviets, he refused to remove them . The missiles were placed in Cuba in 1962 .
 He declares the blockade is an act of aggression and accuses Kennedy of putting the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the quarantine .
 U.S. forces go to DEFCON 2 the highest alert status short of war . United States forces go on DEFON 2 . The highest alert is short-term military action .
 CIA reports SS-4 missiles are ready to fire and President Kennedy considers invasion of Cuba . President Kennedy considered invasion of the country . CIA: President Kennedy 'considering invasion'
 Kennedy orders flights over Cuba to be increased from once to twice per day . Kennedy orders the increase in Cuban flights to increase from once a day to twice a day .
 Pilots also prepare to begin night flights as the U.S. monitors the Cuban missiles . Pilots are also preparing to begin taking off from Cuba .
 A letter from Khrushchev offers to dismantle sites if U.S. pledges not to invade Cuba . Khrushvic offered to remove sites if US pledged not to attack Cuba .
 Ex-Comm begins to discuss plans to invade Cuba to take control of the missiles . Concerned that the Soviets may not remove the missiles from Cuba, the Soviets begin to discuss the invasion .
 Khrushchev now demands removal of U.S. missile sites in Turkey . Doing this would most likely result in war, says Khrushniknik .
 An American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba, and a U.S. invasion force was readied in Florida . The plane was downed over Cuba .
 The 35-year-old pilot of the downed plane is considered the sole U.S. combat casualty of the Cuban missile crisis . Major Rudolf Anderson is considered to be the sole United States combat casualty in the crisis .
 American pilot Charles Maultsby gets lost flying a mission to Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace . The pilot ended up in the Soviet airspace after getting lost in the country .
 An American jet rescues him and leads him back to the U.S. before the Soviets can shoot his plane down . The plane was shot down by the Soviets .
 Kennedy publicly offers to end blockade and not invade Cuba if Soviets withdraw missiles . Kennedy offered to end embargo and not invasion if Soviets pull missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy also agrees to remove United States missiles from Turkey . Privately, Kennedy also agreed to remove U.S. missiles .
 Khrushchev gives a speech on Radio Moscow and says that he is proud of Charles' military uniforms . Charles wore the uniforms he wore during his military career . Charles was a member of the Royal Family of Cambridge .
 The missiles will be removed, Cuba will not be invaded, and the crisis comes to an end, CNN's John Sutter says . The missiles are removed, the crisis will end, he says . Sutter: "The crisis will be over"
 Army Intelligence Service, 18th Airborne, Specialist 5th Class, and Air Force. The U.S. Air Force is a proud member of the U.N. Intelligence Service .