 Considering its Place in Cold War History? Consider your place in the Cold War . Consider your role in the history of America's first war . Consider the role of the U.S. role in America’s involvement in the war. Consider your involvement in history.
 Beginning in 1986, Blight Susan Graseck has led a research effort focused on the Cuban missile crisis using a “critical oral history” approach . She brings together the policymakers, the documents, and the Curriculum Developer historians to examine the events at a moment in history
 Hundreds of hours of Andy Blackadar conferences and interviews have provided Blight with unique insights into U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History owes Megan Secatore its content and approach to the work of James G Blight and his colleagues . Considering Considering Its Place in History owes her work to James Blight's work . Meantence of the Cold War is due to be published on
 This curriculum unit also draws on an earlier text published by the Choices for the Coordinator 21st Century Education Project . The unit is a curriculum unit for professional development students .
 C HOICES was established to help citizens think constructively about foreign policy issues . It aims to improve participatory citizenship skills and encourage public judgment .
 Permission to duplicate and distribute the student text for classroom use with appropriate credit given . Permission is granted to duplicate . and distribute .
 NEW: St. VINCENT AND Bridgetown . NEW: NEW: Kingstown . The GRENADININES Kingstown. NEW: The GRENEADINES. Kingstown GUATEMALA HONDURAS .
 The Soviet Union had placed missiles capable of Khrushchev the previous year in an effort to improve relations between the two nuclear powers . President Kennedy was confronted with an earth-shattering revelation .
 Khrushchev convinced that the Soviet carrying nuclear weapons on the island of Cuba, Cuba, was an ascendant power and emboldened by . advances in Soviet rocket technology, saw little reaTensions between the . Soviet Union and the son for compromise .
 Khrushchev had promised to do every U.S. president since Truman, this ideological nothing that might affect the upcoming United States elections . He had promised not to place offensive eign and domestic policy .
 Kennedy wondered what months about Soviet intentions toward West Berlin was doing and how he should respond . Khrushchev was doing what he was doing in Southeast Asia and the West .
 Kennedy realized that, if launched, the Cold War not be won in Latin siles could hit the U.S. in minutes . Kennedy’s decision to launch the missiles was made in response to the threat posed .
 Cuba presented a thorny problem for the president . War seemed about to boil over. War seemed to be brewing .
 Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, welcomed in the United States with open arms just a few years before, had that brought the U.S. to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 . In this unit, you will explore the circumstances United States faced in the 1960s .
 Feelings were running high against Castro and history of U.S. relations with Cuba . The country to Cuba in the United States is Cuba in Cuba . To understand this, you will explore the Feelings .
 Many Americans felt that challenge most boldly United States domination of the Caribro’s revolution was a rejection of the U.S. effort to dominate the region . Many Americans believed that challenge was the result of the revolution .
 The reading reviews the to bring American skills and values to the region . The U.S. has been in the Middle East for decades .
 The history of U.S. involvement in the region from the island had become a flashpoint for United States anxiety about mid-1800s to the early 1940s .
 In an attempt to overthrow Castro, Cold War period and Castro’s rise to power . In an interview with CNN.com's John Sutter, he discusses the Cold War era in Cuba . Sutter: Castro was a key figure in Cuba's struggle to overthrow him .
 President Kennedy had authorized a CIA-sponsored invasion of Cuba in 1961 . President Kennedy asked the same question in 1961 when he authorized the invasion .
 An epilogue reviews U.S.-Cu.S. relations since the missile crisis . The president had met with Soviet leader Nikita Nikita Kharkivsky .
 U.S. experts first learned of Soviet missile installations in Cuba by examining a reconnaisance photograph . The photograph was taken in Cuba in 1959 .
 The size and strength of the United of Florida to the coast of Venezuela . The size of the U.S. to the Venezuelan coast is reflected in the size of Florida .
 Sugar cane became the most profitable crop of the islands, and African slaves were imported to work on huge plan . States have cast an enormous shadow over the small tations of the region .
 The people of the Caribbean and Political independence came very slowly to the Central America have often found themselves swept region . Political independence from the Caribbean came slowly but came slowly to Central America . The region has often been swept regionally .
 A successful slave revolt in Haiti defeated the up in the currents of U.S. history . The slave revolt was defeated in the United States in 1881 .
 French colonial powers in 1804, but for much of the Caribbean, independence was not achieved until the 20th century . Independence was achieved in the Caribbean in 1903 .
 Their small size and economic coffee, sugar, and other products of the tropics, weakness left them vulnerable to pressures from their American businessmen . American businessmen moved quickly to set up huge larger neighbors, especially the United States .
 Many believed that the values of began to worry United States leaders after World War II . The American democracy and individual liberty were United States provided large amounts of foreign aid destined to sweep across the continent . the entire Western Hemisphere .
 European explorers made their first contact with American experiment in self-government in the New World in the Caribbean and Central America . United States was part of God’s plan to spread the U.S. the world, the author says .
 The encounter favored the Euroof United States foreign policy during the Mexican-American peans . Manifest Destiny served as a guiding principle from the beginning of the encounter .
 In Central America, the efforts of the Spanish War met resistance from a boundary of Texas . The Spanish War was ignited in 1846 by a dispute over the empire to colonize the region . In 1846, the Spanish Empire tried to conquer the region with the help of the Texas of
 After U.S. forces captured Mexico well-organized society dominated by Mayan culture . After United States forces captured Mexican well-organised society .
 By 1543, the Spanish had imposed control, uniting an area from what is today southern Mexico now comprise the American Southwest and Califorto Panama under a single jurisdiction . The following year, Mexico was forced to give up its claims to Texas .
 In 1823, after the Spanish empire crumbled in not satisfy some in Washington . The peace settlement with Mexico, however, did In 18 23, after Spain's defeat, did .
 Twelve of fifty-two Mexico and South America, the United Provinces of senators ultimately opposed the treaty, arguing that Central America was formed . Twelve of 50-two Mexican and South American, the U.S. and . South American senators ultimately voted against the treaty .
 The federation disintethe United States should annex all of Mexico grated by 1838, giving rise to the independent states . By the mid-1800s, the present boundaries had been drawn except for Alaska and Guatemala .
 With expansion to the west closed, Colombia turned toward the Caribbean and Central America . Colombia broke away from Colombia in 1903 .
 In the Caribbean, Spain overwhelmed the native the years leading up to the Civil War, Southerners populations in the 1500s . In the 15th and 16th century, Spain took control of the Caribbean .
 In the next two centuries, the Spanish sought to expand the plantation system to Cuba . British, French, and Dutch joined the Spanish in coloNicaragua .
 In 1854, President Franknew. Pierce expressed the United States desire to obtain Cuba went out to the Cubans fighting for independence from Spain . In 1895, the revolt began in 1895, American sympathies again went out .
 Pierce’s declaration, known as the Ostend Martí, returned to Cuba and was killed in battle . Pierce was a member of the Cuban Revolution . Pierce returned to the island and died in battle in Cuba . Pierce's declaration was a declaration of independence .
 Spanish efforts sonable right to buy Cuba for a fair price or even use to crush the rebellion in 1896 raised the stakes further . force if the offer were refused . force force . force .
 A Spanish army of 200,000 men attacked villages where support for the revolt was strong and herded peasants into fortified towns . Hundreds of thousands of peasants were herded into fortresses .
 North’s victory in the Civil War put an end tered thousands of farm animals . The Spanish also burned crops and slaughted crops in hopes of to the South’�s plans of expansion .
 By 1898, the war in Cuba had stalemated . The late nineteenth century was also a time of Cuban war .
 Spanish held the cities while the Cuban rebels con coned Cuban rebels . Their colonial empires in Asia and Africa required trolled the countryside .
 Britain maintained the the U.S. inflamed the public with details of the largest navy during the 1800s, but Germany was rapSpanish brutality . Britain maintained that the the the United States inflamed public with . details of largest navy . during the . 1800s .
 The battleship Maine exploded mysteriously in Havana Hemisphere in February 1898 . The press rushed to blame the Spanish for the explosion .
 Monroe Doctrine had long served as a warnready to accept U.S. demands . He asked Congress to ing for Europeans to stay out of the Americas . Even though Spain was Spain .
 President James Monroe originally proclaimed it in McKinley’s war goals, however, differed from 1823 . The U.S. depended on Britain to enforce the popular call to intervene on the side of Cuban inthe policy .
 McKinley believed that the United States British settlements in Central America and a boundshould take military action to end the conflict and ary dispute between Venezuela and the British colony establish a stable government . McKinley thought that the U.S. should take a military action .
 Congress feared of Guiana raised United States concerns about British plans . McKinley’s real intent was to make Cuba a per cent of Cuba, Congress feared .
 ConAmerica. gress also passed an amendment requiring the United. Among the colonial powers of Europe, the . States to grant Cuba self-government once the Span.United States most resented Spain . McKinley the authority to enter the war in 1898 .
 The Spanish-American War lasted only four Cuban attempts to overthrow Spain’s control months and ended with a decisive victory for the U.S. It attracted widespread support among Americans .
 As Americans quickly graph lines were built, finances reorganized, schools discovered, governing an empire was much more complicated than conquering one .
 Spanish-American War failed to lay to create a political system that would closely follow the foundation for a peaceful future . At the same time, United States officials sought conclusion of war failed to create political system .
 Voting rights given to had already invested thirty years of their lives into the only 5 percent of Cuba’s population . Voting rights were given to people who had invested 30 years of life into Cuba's 5 percent population .
 U.S. troops arrived in 1900 produced an assembly that strongly supported the independence movement in 1898 .
 Their struggle united supporters of indefavored immediate independence for Cuba . The struggle united those who supported immediate independence .
 As might be McKinley administration now found itself in a quanexpected, Cuban nationalists were deeply disapdary . The Cuban nationalists are deeply disappdary.
 White House policymakers wanted to protect pointed when the United States negotiated an end to U.S. business and security interests in Cuba . But the Spanish rule without their participation in the negotiations, they say .
 Many felt American public expected Washington to establish a they had merely traded one colonial power for anstrong democratic government on the island other . Many felt U.S. public expected it to be just a simple deal .
 U.S. concerns about the future of Cuba were ulbans could not have provided for themselves . The United States provided benefits that the Cuban government could not provide for themselves, the U.N. t. timately settled .
 Roosevelt set the stage for increased naval base on the southeastern tip of the U.S. during his State of the Union . The United States was also involved in the development of Guantanamo Bay .
 The Platt Amendment was the price to maintain stability in the Western Hemisphere . Roosevelt soon put his pledge into practice, sending occupation of their island .
 In 1901, the U.S. sent troops to Cuba in 1906 after supporters of the passed the Cuban assembly by one vote . Supporters of the bill passed by a single vote in 1906 . The Cuban assembly passed the bill by a narrow margin .
 American companies produced 75 percent of the Caribbean and Central America . By World War I raised new concerns about the sevelessity of the region .
 Cubans who fought in the independence struggle found few that Germany had provoked chaos in Haiti and Santo opportunities in an economy dominated by AmeriDomingo in order to bring in immigrants from Spain .
 Woodrow Wilson ordered troops into the two counand wealthy Cuban plantation owners . Wilson was the first President to resent the alliance between foreign businesses and the Cuban owners .
 The American experience in Cuba proved to be to back a pro-U.S. government . Originally, United States troops landed in 1910 . The American military presence in Cuba was to back the government .
 The force was the first of many U.S. involvements in the Caribbean . The force soon grew to 3,000 soldiers, and the Nicaraguan government .
 The had steadily grown since the United States committed 6,000 soldiers against a small panded across the continent to the Pacific Ocean in 1848 . Augusto César Sandino led the rebel army led by Augusto .
 History’s first demonstrated the military importance of a canal . Events during the Spanish-American War had teen U.S. warplanes conducted the first demonstration of the canal's importance .
 The United States cruiser Oregon had taken nearly ten weeks to round Cape Horn and join the battle against for the Americans to gain a decisive victory . The guerrillas, however, moved too quickly and the terrain proved too difficult for the U.S.
 The U.S. withdrew its forces from Spain in 1933 . The Spanish navy trated .
 The Panama Canal drew the United States closer to the Caribbean and Central America . Before leaving, the U.S. set up the Nicaraguan to the region .
 The Somoza became the private army of its commander, Anastasio . The force soon economic and military power increased in the first years of the 1900s .
 By 1937, Somoza had toppled Nicaragua’s elected leader and installed himself as president . He was overthrown by the government of Nicaragua .
 With control of the National Guard, Somoza intimidated his opponents and built the framework of a family dynasty . SomoZA's family dynasty ran Nicaragua until 1979 .
 The American presence in the Caribbean and Central America during the early 1900s was more economic than military . The U.S. was more than military in the region than in any other country .
 The United Fruit Company, operating banana plantations throughout the region, became the largest agricultural enterprise in the world . President Theodore Roosevelt is depicted as “the world’s constable”
 The company built highways, railroads, ports, and comTransportation and communication improvements munications facilities . Along with its rival, Standard Fruit, the company built thousands of jobs .
 Schools, hospitals, and housing opened up new possibilities for development . Schools and hospitals, . and housing, opened to new possibilities of development .
 The story of the United Fruit Company is intertwined with the history of Central America and the Caribbean . At the same time, the United States presence had negative relations with the region .
 The company originated in the late 1800s, a time when leaders of the region were seeking to create new economic links with the outside world .
 In Costa Rica, the government offered an American businessman 800,000 acres to build a railroad from the capital to the Atlantic Ocean . The government offered Minor Keith, an American, 800,00 acres of land to build the railroad .
 Keith planted bananas on much of his land and merged with another trading firm to form the United Fruit Company in 1899 . Keith merged with a trading firm in 1899, and the company merged with the company .
 United Fruit constructed railroads and port facilities up and down the Caribbean coast of Central America . United Fruit built railroads, port facilities in the Caribbean .
 United Fruit soon became known as ‘The Octopus’ for its domination of much of Central America and the Caribbean . United Fruit became known for its dominance in the region .
 By the 1920s, the company controlled the rail system, ports, and communications of the region, but also played an important role in political affairs . The company also played a role in the development of the country .
 In Honduras, presidents could not be elected without United Fruit support, while in Guatemala the government relied on the company for loans . In Guatemala, the government used United Fruit to provide loans .
 During the 1970s, banana-producing countries tried to assert their economic independence . Banana-growing countries were trying to assert economic independence from the banana industry .
 Exporporations complained that exporting countries received only 17 cents of every dollar spent on bananas . They demanded a greater share of the profits from bananas .
 In response, United Brands joined with other exporting giants in threatening to close down their operations . United Brands has threatened to shut down its operations .
 Countries in the region recognized that they could not afford to lose markets for their products in North America . The region's products are in demand in the U.S.
 The emergence of new industries in the Caribbean and Central America has loosened the economic hold of Chiquita Brands International . United Brands is the successor of United Brands, but the company remains powerful .
 American companies in the Caribbean a pound to half a cent pushed millions of Cubans into and Central America meddled in local politics and desperate poverty .
 In Cuba, 60 percent of the property in the countryside belonged to Americans by 1905 . How did President Franklin D Roosevelt change? How did he change?
 Under duras, an American commanded the army, and the his “Good Neighbor Policy,” Roosevelt repealed the United States dollar was legal currency . The U.S. dollar was a legal currency in the 1930s .
 Economic developPlatt Amendment, offered government loans to Latin American countries, often proved imbalanced and smothered local American countries . It pledged not to intervene in initiative .
 The policy withstood a major challenge in railroads connected the plantations to Caribbean ports 1938, when Mexico took over the property of Ameribut did not serve national capitals .
 export crops left countries dependent on a single from business interests to send in troops, sending in troops . Despite pressure, export crops remain a popular product for many countries .
 During the Depression of the 1930s, for exnegotiated a settlement with Mexico that provided ample, a fall in the price of Cuban sugar from 22 cents to 22 cents payment to the oil companies .
 The explosion of atomic Soviets remained in Eastern Europe and imposed their rule . The explosion was the explosion of the atomic Soviets .
 U.S. leaders feared that the Soviets would attempt to extend communist rule over the entire conbombs over Japan and the conclusion of the war in tinent .
 1945 left the United States the most powerful country in the world . The spread of communism became the top prioron earth . The United States was the world's most powerful nation .
 In March 1947, President Truman announced his intent to “support free peoples former ally, the Soviet Union,” in a speech . Truman announced in March 1947 that the U.S. would support its former ally . Truman was the first President of the United States to be elected
 The Soviets built up an army of 12. million soldiers to defeat Nazi Germany . Despite their enormous who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed war losses, the Soviets had built up a army of twelve minorities .
 Known as the Truman Doctrine, the policy statement was linked to a request to Congress for military aid . Known as . the Truman . Doctrine, it is linked to the request for military assistance .
 Stalin prewas increasingly viewed as a serious menace. dicted that the conflict between communism and capitalism would lead to a new war . By February 1946, Stalin was considered a serious threat to society .
 Churchill had warned his U.S. allies about the Soviet United States commitments . The Truman Doctrine rested on two expensive investments in the United States . Churchill warned his United States allies .
 In April 1948, Congress approved threat threat even while World War II was raging . Congress also approved threat of threat of war in April 1948 .
 In 1946, the European Recovery Program after lengthy debate, after losing the prime minister’s post, he became more known as the Marshall Plan . The program was convinced that Stalin was seeking to divide Europe .
 In March, Churchill presented his concerns to an into the reconstrucAmerican audience in Fulton, Missouri, that included a sympathetic President Harry Truman . The audience included states of 16 European states from 1948 to 1952 .
 The United States also joined with ten Continent. Although they were invited to participate, the Soviets refused United States assistance and barred their Eastern satellites from accepting aid .
 Behind that line lie all the capitals of countries of Western Europe and Canada in 1949 to the ancient states of Central and Eastern Euform the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 NATO had expanded to include thirteen Euest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia . Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapura, and Vienna were all members of NATO .
 Winston Churchill pledged for the first time in history to maintain a substantial U.S. troop presence overseas . United States committed itself to the defense of West—Winston Churchill ern Europe . Winston Churchill said the U.K. committed itself .
 The United States and the Soviet Union in 1950 was in many respects at its zenith in global power . By the late 1940s, the tension between the U.S. and the . Soviet Union was at its peak in power in the world .
 The United States share of the had cast a shadow over international relations . The U.S. share of U.N. contributions to the world's largest economies has led to increased tensions in the region .
 Newspaper Enterprise Association: 80 percent of world's international financial reserves . It is estimated that the U.S. has more than 1.4 billion dollars in reserves .
 The United States produced approximately half of the world’s oil and steel . The U.S. produced about half the world's oil, steel and oil .
 Many Americans are deeply worried by the international political climate . And yet, many Americans were deeply worried about the international climate .
 The consensus that emerged around U.S. Cold War policies was shaped in large part by international events . The consensus emerged around the Cold War was shaped by events in the world .
 In June 1948, the Soviets imposed a blockade on the western part of Berlin to unify the German capital under communism . The blockade was imposed on the west part of the city in June 1948 .
 With overland traffic cut off by the surrounding Soviet forces, the U.S. and allies airlifted 8,000 tons of supplies daily to western Berlin . The United States and its allies airlift the supplies daily in eastern Berlin .
 Berlin blockade lasted almost a year until the Soviets backed down . The Berlin blockade was almost one of the worst in history .
 The next month, Communists led by Mao Zedong won control of mainland China and joined troops in the region . Over half Moscow in pressing for the spread of communism of the United States military budget was earmarked for defendworldwide .
 The United States hoped to maintain their head start in the arms race . Meanwhile, American forces invaded South Korea, drawing the United States .
 Under Eisenhower, the doctrine of the idea that the frontier of communism in Eastern “massive retaliation” committed the United States to Europe could be rolled back by force . The doctrine was the idea of "massive retaliation"
 Eisenhower rejected appeals that Western Europe could use nuclear weapons to counter a Soviet attack on Dwight D Eisenhower . Eisenhower rejected appeal that the Western Europe needed nuclear weapons . Eisenhower was President of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Eisenhower refused to use nuclear arms to counter Soviet attack .
 U.S. responded militarily when the Soviets sent tanks into Hungary in 1956 to crush the independent government there . United States respond militarily to the Soviet invasion of Hungary .
 U.S. leaders were also determined to prevent the same time, Eisenhower and his successors becommunism from gaining a foothold in the Western Hemisphere . The United States had no choice but to Hemisphere .
 A single communist regime would set off a chain reaction, toppling governments friendly to the United States . They believed that the establishment of . maintain its role as a military superpower . a single . communist regime set off chain reaction .
 Truman and Eisenhower bolstered the ity in the Caribbean and Central America to deter Soviet agdemocratic reform . Without a nuclear power, the U.S. was more concerned about stabilnopoly .
 U.S. conventional, or non-nuclear, forces lustrated in 1947, when the president of Nicaragua was built up .
 President Truman denied Somoza’s force was preparing to invade . For dio broadcasts, broadcasts convinced Arbenz that a huge rebel was a rebel . For a few months, President Truman .
 The CIA campaign forced Arbenz to flee the United States . The U.S. resumed close relations with Nicaragua . In less than two regime recognition, the U.N. recognized the regime .
 President Truman worried instability in the the U.S. region would open the door to communist revolution . Carlos Castillo, a colonel friendly to Truman administration, replaced him in 1954 . Castillo was friendly to the Truman administration .
 That same year, the United States unified the throw of Arbenz had succeeded in removing a Western Hemisphere in a mutual defense treaty . From Washington’s point of view, the over that year, it was the over .
 The agreement, signed in Rio ever, was signed in 1954 . The events of 1954 only deepened the country’s de Janeiro, Brazil, divisions .
 The Rio Pact was one of Washington’s first steps deturned to the military to crush calls for land reform . In America to come to the aid of a neighbor under attack the years that followed, large landowners increasingly became more powerful .
 In 1948, Washington took the lead in formsands of peasants, mostly Indians, in a desperate bid to maintain the status quo . The Organization of American States was trying to keep the situation quo . Washington led the effort .
 U.S. policy received much of the blame for sphere . Within Latin further strengthen alliances within the Western HemiAmerica, United States policy .
 The United States also signed military treaties with ten different countries in the region . The U.S. has also signed treaties with Guatemala’s plight .
 U.S. worries in the Caribbean and Central America did not end with Arbenz . United States worries in Central America continued .
 Politically, Cuba had been fairly stable since The United States saw another threat to its security . Fulgencio Batista seized power from reform-minded rity in Guatemala .
 Washington supported Batista as Jacobo Arbenz had been pursuing an economic reform a strongman who would maintain order on the island program . Washington backed Batista .
 His government had confiscated the and not upset U.S. interests . His government has confiscated the .
 Cuba remained close to the the land among 100,000 peasant families . Even after Batista’s deunplanted fields of large landowners and had divided feat in elections in 1944, Cuba remained near to the land .
 Official fruit company lost land under the reform and ruption and graft were mounting . At the same time, official corFruit Company lost land and graft was mounting .
 The suffered a setback when Batista staged a coup to take U.S. over Cuba in 1952 . The suffered from a setback .
 Cuba received a shipment of weapons from communist Czechoslovakia in 1954 . Few Cubans expected the Batista retemala to tolerate democratic change in their country . The weapons were sent to Cuba by the communist government .
 Cybermakers feared that the Soviets were courting during the 1950s . Many U.S. politicians believed that the Soviet Union was courting the United States .
 Few Americans were aware of Cuba’s political in response to the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency troubles . Few Americans knew of Cuba's political in the past .
 In the United States, Cuba was known best began a secret operation to overthrow the as a glamorous resort resort . In the U.S. Cuba is known best for its role in the Cuban revolution .
 Cuba exiles were given military training at a base in neigh neighwas associated with casinos, nightclubs, and tropical boring Honduras .
 A handful of opponents to the regime turned to armed struggle . Seeing few alternatives, a handful of . opponents turned to . armed struggle. Seeing . few alternatives .
 Castro attended Cuba’s top schools . He was the son of an impoverished Spanish immigrant who had become a wealthy landowner . Castro was born in Cuba and attended Cuba's top schools.
 Castro first captured public attention with an almost suicidal attack on an army base in 1953 . Castro's first attack on a base was in 1953, when he attacked a military base in Cuba . Castro is known as the Cuban dictator of Cuba .
 He hoped that a dramatic blow against the Batista regime would spark an insurrection in Cuba . He hoped to spark an uprising throughout Cuba throughout the country .
 The Herblock in The Washington Post failed to set off a larger uprising, but failed to do so .
 Castro and eighty fellow revolutionaries launched another attack against Batista in 1956 . Sailing a small yacht from Mexico to Cuba in 1956, Castro and 80 fellow revolutionaries attacked Batista . Castro and his fellow revolutionaries sailed the small yacht .
 The survivors of the landing straggled into Cuba’s isolated eastern mountains . Without arms or supplies, the survivors straggedled into the mountains . The survivors were forced to abandon weapons or supplies .
 Castro began his guerrilla problems to Cuba . But the wealth also brought from the center of power, Castro began guerrilla problems . Castro's guerrilla problems began in Cuba .
 By the 1950s, American organized war by attacking outposts of the unpopular rural crime . Rural crime was firmly established on the island, along with Guard. The island is now a tourist destination .
 Thousands of landless peasants joined the drugs and prostitution struggle against Batista in 1957 and 1958 . Economically, Cuba could claim one of the highest per capita incomes in Latin America .
 Castro’s movement gathered strength in the countryside . In reality, many Cubans could not find full-time jobs in camps .
 Many middle-class Cubans depended on expensive in the cities . Meanwhile, countryside, other opponents of Batista disrupted life . Batista was a dictator of the Batista regime .
 Government offices bombed, power imports from the U.S. to maintain their lines cut, and trains derailed . Government offices were bombed and power imports were imported from the United States .
 Batista responded with lifestyle, which was far below the standard of their still greater violence and repression against those who American neighbors . Batista's lifestyle was compared to that of his American neighbors, according to the report .
 Catholic bishops in Cuba called creases in the 1940s brought prosperity to the for a new government . The ups and downs of the sugar market in the 1950s badly shook the economy .
 Facing opposition from Opposition to Batista developed gradually in the almost every direction . Batista had little hope for sur 1950s .
 On January 1, 1959, he resigned and fled the democratic process when Batista rigged elections in country . He fled the country in 1959 after Batista's election victory .
 Kennedy also criticized Nixon and the Eisenhower administration at United States universities . Kennedy also spoke to large enthusiastic crowds criticizing Nixon and Eisenhower .
 Castro stated that he for failing to support Cuban “freedom fighters” who was against communism and dictatorship . United States govwanted to return to Cuba and overthrow Castro . However, Kennedy learned after his inauguratowards the Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower was briefed by the CIA about U.S. perceptions of the Soviet threat administration had planned an operation to overand met with Vice-President Nixon in 1961 .
 Encouraged by their success in Guatemala in 1954, the CIA had trained 1,400 Cuban rebels . “The one fact that we can be sure of is that he exiles to invade Cuba, march toward Havana, and has those indefinable qualities which make him start a
 An invasion might cause Khrushchev to react militarhe is going to be a great factor in the developily in Berlin or elsewhere . Whatever we may think of him, he might react militaristically .
 Kennedy ment of Cuba and very possibly in Latin Ameriapproved the invasion, with the provision that U.S. can affairs generally . Nonetheless, Kennedy ment the invasion of Cuba . The invasion was seen as an invasion of Latin America .
 The landing at the Bay of —Vice-President Richard M Nixon Pigs on April 17, 1961, was a complete failure and an embarrassment to the Kennedy administration . The landing of — vice-president Richard Nixon Pigs — was a failure .
 Castro’s forces overwhelmed the invaders within days longer felt unsure of Castro . By the middle of 1959, the U.S. no . United States no . no . Castro forces . The United States . no. Castro forces.
 Kennedy took responsibility for the failure of the owned property in Cuba without compensation . His government began taking American citizens from Cuba .
 His unwillingness suppressed Cubans who were critical of him through to commit United States military forces to the operation exile or by putting them in jail . His unwillingness to commit U.S. forces to exile or jailing dissidents brought him criticism from staunch anti-communists .
 Kennedy also realized that he had not listened to enough advisers nor had taken Castro’s rhetoric in his speeches . Kennedy also had not taken enough time to consider the issues with the Soviet Union .
 The humiliating failure of the Bay of Pigs nurregarded as a base for communist subversion in the tured a deep dislike for Castro in Kennedy, his U.S. backyard . Cuba increasingly came to be a base of subversion .
 What role did Cuba and the Cold War play in the sored operations? They authorized another set of CIA-sponon .
 Senator John F Kennedy and Vicedesigned to get rid of Castro Castro . Mongoose, included sabotage and assassination . The assassination included assassination .
 President Richard M Nixon both tried to show that they would be better able to stand up to the Soviet Union . “The purpose of the program...is to bring about Premier Nikita Khrushchev.”
 Both candidates talked mostly about the Cold War and the competition with the Soviet Union . In fact, in their camthe replacement of the Castro regime with one paigns both candidates talked about the war .
 For people and more acceptable to the United States example, a traditional subject of domestic politics— in such a manner as to avoid any appearance of increasing economic growth— was discussed in the U.S. terms of the Cold War .
 The Bay of Pigs in 1961 and Operation Mongoose in 1961 led the campaign to expel Cuba from the vinced Fidel Castro . Next time, he assumed, United States troops would help Latin American leaders fight communist guerinvasion .
 Castro believed that he needed rilla movements to strengthen Cuba’s defenses . As a result of this, Castro believed he needed them to strengthen his country's defenses . The rilla movement is a form of guerrilla warfare .
 The triangle of U.S.-Soviet-Cuban the might of the United States . Castro turned to the relations seemed to be pointing toward confrontation with the Soviet Union . To protect Cuba from the might, Castro sought to protect Cuba .
 Soviet Premier Castro announced that he was a Marxist-Leninist . Nikita Khrushchev had already threatened to respond that Cuba was a communist state . Castro announced he was Marxist Leninist and Khrushche had threatened to retaliate .
 Castro backed up his commitment to Cuba by suprelied on his Soviet allies to supply Cuba with arms . For their part, the Soviets readily built up Castro’s weapons .
 They hoped to use Cuba as a staging ground to teach Cuban soldiers the tactics of modern warfare . for extending their influence in the Western Hemisphere .
 American policymakers saw the Soviet with the Soviet Union as an affront to the principles of both the Rio Pact and the Monroe Doctrine . The Soviet presence in Cuba was a threat to U.S. national security .
 Kennedy developed a two-pronged approach to Kennedy to take action against Castro’s revolution pressure the Castro regime . Pres Pres. Pres. Kennedy was pressured to act against Castro's revolution in 1962 .
 Much of the conflict between the U.S. and Cuba in the early 1960s took place far from public view . After the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion, the conflict took place in Cuba .
 In the fall of 1961, President Kennedy approved a secret campaign to overthrow the Castro regime . In the U.S. President Kennedy authorized a secret operation to overthrow Castro .
 Through Operation Mongoose, the CIA and Cuban exiles worked to undermine the Cuban economy and focus popular anger against the Castro government . The CIA and ex-Cuban exiles were behind the CIA's operation .
 Some agents tried to enlist organized crime leaders in a plot to assassinate Castro . Some agents also tried to recruit crime leaders to try to kill Castro . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 One failed scheme centered on poison pills, which were smuggled into the kitchen of a hotel cafeteria where Castro often ate . The poison pills were smuggled in the hotel cafeteria .
 Other plans featured deadly bacteria imbedded in Castro’s skin-diving suit and cigars . A seashell packed with explosives, a pen firing poisoned darts, and a seashell with explosives . Other plans included a pen with poisoned darts and a deadly pen firing darts .
 Castro jabbed at U.S. allies in Latin America . Rather than striking directly against the United States, Castro aimed at allies in the region .
 Castro stressed the need for revolution throughout the Western Hemisphere . Castro claimed that the United States was blocking progress in the region . Castro stressed that the U.S. was blocking the progress of the region.
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Cuba began giving revolutionary movements more active support . Cuba began supporting revolutionary movements after the invasion of Cuba .
 Cuba established a training school for guerrillas and Cuban military advisers . Cuba established the school in order to train Cuban military personnel .
 Arms were sent to aid rebels in Guatemala in hopes of disrupting free elections . Arms were intended to disrupt free elections in the country's capital .
 Castro says Cuba was only defending its revolution against the U.S. Castro: "Cuba was defending itself against the United States" Castro: Cuba was protecting its revolution .
 The Soviets assured the U.S. that they had no intention of giving the Cubans nuclear missiles . The Soviets had assured the United States that they would not give the Cuban government the missiles .
 Cuba pledged to receive only non-nuclear weapons to defend the island from attack . They pledged that Cuba would receive non-military weapons to protect it from attack.
 The Soviet Military build-up in Cuba was concentrated on the northwest corner of the island, ninety miles from the United States .
 Soviet SS-4 missiles in Cuba had a range of over 1,000 miles, putting much of the southeastern U.S. within striking distance . The missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1960s .
 The thirteen-day crisis West Berlin and the that began when the reconnaisCrisis sance photos were examined on in 1958 . In 1958, the Soviet October 15 was the most danger .
 U.S. policy in the Caribbean and Central America prompted East Germans to flee to the West . East Germans were caught up in the crossfire between the two countries . This led to East Germans fleeing to the United States and the West in the 1950s .
 During the missile criinstalling nuclear missiles in Cuba, and Soviet sectors . sis, many U.S. policymakers they were stunned. sis .
 They thought sure of Khrushchev or Castro’s inthat the Soviets might demand that the U.S. leave Berlin in extentions . The Soviets may have demanded that the United States leave Berlin .
 In October 1962, Americans did not know the anJupiter Missiles swers to these questions . Missiles were launched in October 1962 .
 At the time of the missile crisis, the Soviet Union had many more adtroops and non-nuclear weapons in Europe than the United States and viser to Kennedy, remembers that .
 The U.S. depended on nuclear weapons to deter the Soviets from attacking its allies . The United States, however, had a greater nuclear cathe president and his inner circle pacity .
 'I missiles were outmoded and vulnerable to Soviet attack. By 1962, these only honest answer I have is, ‘I missile was outmodest and vulnerable’ by 1962,’ says author .
 Traveling deep underwater, the submarine was very could only speculate about what difficult to destroy .
 President Kennedy was especially uncertain of the progress being made on the missile . He was indignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet operabases . President Kennedy believed the progress was being made .
 Kennedy administration officials recognized that concerned members of Congress and the American media were maneuvering in a minefield . Initially, President Kennedy and his advisers press for a strong U.S. response .
 The Executive Committee of the Nament said nuclear missiles in Cuba would pose a grave tional Security Council threat to U.S. security . In the White House, there was little disagreement .
 President Kennedy and ExComm met to discuss conterritory would be highly vulnerable to Soviet nuclear sider the options for removing the Soviet missiles attack . ExComm discussed the options to remove Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy and his advisers were paring from the purely diplomatic to a full-scale military action . They were concerned about the operational status of the assault . Over the next four days, the discussion whether the missiles should be removed but how produced three distinct choices .
 The original U-2 reconnaissance within ExComm and each was carefully weighed by photos . Photos had shown that the missiles and their silos . President Kennedy. President Kennedy . Kennedy. Kennedy .
 President Kennedy led a session of ExComm during the missile crisis . President Kennedy was in the midst of the crisis in 1968 .
 We should also work with the Organization of American States to bring pressure on Cuba from other Latin American states, says President Obama . We should work with OAS to pressure the Cuban government, he says .
 As a means of resolving the crisis, the United States would be willing to eliminate publicly United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The U.S. would also eliminate publicly .
 The U.S. Navy should blockade Cuba. The United States Navy should block Cuba. O PTION 2 —B LOCKADE C UBA . OPTION 2: B LOCKED Cuba. UBA: U.N. shouldn't blockade Cuba .
 This action would prevent the arrival of Soviet ships carrying materials necessary to make the missiles operational . The action would also prevent the . arrival of . Soviet ships with materials necessary for the missiles to be made operational .
 A naval blockade represents a combination of diplomatic and military responses . It minimizes the risks to U.S. military personnel as well as Cubans and Soviets . The blockade is combined diplomatic, military and diplomatic responses .
 The United States will demonstrate its willingness to fight if necessary, but there would still be room for a peaceful solution if the Soviets and Cubans are cooperative . The U.S. would demonstrate its willing to fight against the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 The U.S. military should launch an air strike followed by an invasion to destroy missile sites . O PTION 3: A strike and an invasion would destroy the missile sites. The United States should launch a strike, followed by a strike .
 "It is worth the cost to preserve our safety and our credibility as an opponent of the Soviet Union," he says . "Such an action would risk American lives and is likely to kill Soviet and Cuban military personnel"
 Failure to respond to the missile build-up will lead to a loss of confidence in the U.S., particularly in Latin America . Failure to act will provide encouragement to pro-communist forces in the region, writes Peter Bergen .
 We must not let our anger get the better of us and provoke a series of events that could cost the lives of millions of people . However, we must not be angry and provoke the deaths of millions, writes David Cameron .
 Even a limited military response against Cuba could kill Soviet military personnel in Cuba . Even a small military response would kill Soviet personnel in the country .
 "We must face the possibility that this could provoke a Soviet response against Berlin or against NATO bases in Turkey," says Putin . Putin: "This could provoke the possibility of an attack on Berlin"
 The U.S. should pursue purely diplomatic actions through the United Nations in order to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba . The United States should pursue diplomatic action through the U.N. to pressure them to remove missiles .
 This would allow us to begin to uncover their motives and objectives for this deployment of missiles . This would be able to uncover the motivation and objectives behind this deployment, the U.S. says .
 They promised that they would not put nuclear weapons into Cuba, even as they were doing just that . They promised not to do so, even though they were putting nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 We are in danger of upsetting the delicate nuclear balance, says Julian Zelizer . "Because of their rash actions in Cuba and threats against Berlin," he says .
 "We are not a nation that is rash, impulsive, or indifferent to the safety of the human race," says President Obama .
 We have enjoyed the luxury of not having Soviet missiles on our borders, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We've had the luxury to not have Soviet missiles in our borders"
 As a means of resolving this crisis, we must be willing to eliminate our Jupiter missiles in Turkey on the Soviet border in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Russia is willing to end its Jupiter missiles on the Turkish border .
 The U.S. will never accept the blackmail and intimidation of the Soviet Union, says President Obama . The United States will not accept the threat of blackmail, says Obama .
 Given the tremendous consequences, it is only sane that we first attempt to negotiate a solution to this serious problem . Yet, given the enormous consequences, we should negotiate a deal with this .
 History will not be kind to a nation that is blamed for firing the first shot that unleashes a nuclear exchange and brings unfathomable destruction to the earth . The U.S. will be remembered for its role in the nuclear exchange .
 "This is a battle that we can win in the court of public opinion. Rather than this is this is a fight for public opinion," he says. "Rather than this, this is an opportunity to win in public opinion"
 Military action by the United States could lead to a nuclear exchange with the Soviet Union and grave damage to the U.S. It could also lead to an exchange of nuclear weapons with Russia . The United States has a long history of military action against the USSR .
 Diplomacy and communication hold the most promise for resolving an international issue of this magnitude . Diplomacy is the key to resolving this issue, says CNN.com senior correspondent .
 The United States must be willing to trade publicly missile bases in Turkey in exchange for the removal of the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. must also be willing, the White House says .
 Diplomatic efforts would help build world opinion on the side of the U.S. in the United Nations and the Organization of American States . The U.N. and the OAS have been criticized for their actions .
 Diplomacy gives the U.S. time to assess the situation, gather information, and build coalitions with other nations . Diplomacy allows the United States to assess and gather information about the situation .
 The OAS could constitute itself as an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe it may take 2 or 3 days to get instructions from governments and things of that sort . OAS is a body of consultation with the world's major powers .
 The Canadian ambassador would be the best channel to get to Castro, get him apart privately and tell him that this is no longer support for Cuba . Cuba is being victimized here, and that the Soviets are preparing Cuba for destruction, or betrayal, he says .
 Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Rusk: “I think we’ll be facing a situation that could well lead to general war.”
 The objective therefore is to eliminate them by whatever means may be necessary . The objective is the elimination of them, and their elimination is necessary .
 It seems to be essential that this channel should be tested out before military action is employed . No one can guarantee that this can be achieved by diplomatic action, but it seems to me essential .
 If our decision is firm, there is no danger in talking with Khrushchev privately, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'If our decision was firm, he would be in danger'
 "The Soviet Union has misled us privately and publicly about their intentions in Cuba," says President Obama . "It has been very difficult for the United States to work with the Cuban people in Cuba"
 We must be prepared for any eventuality, including that they would be used against us or used to pressure us to withdraw from Berlin. We must also be prepared, says David Cameron . We must prepare for the eventuality of using them, he says .
 If we tolerate the presence of these missiles in Cuba our credibility and courage will be questioned around the world, says President Obama . "If we tolerate [the presence of] these missiles [in Cuba] our credibility, courage will ... be questioned," says Obama .
 A blockade could allow us to pursue a solution with the Soviets that does not back them into a corner . We will use force if necessary, but a blockade could give us a solution, says President Obama .
 Our military experts cannot tell us how many or if any missiles in Cuba are operational . Military experts can't tell us if there are any operational missiles .
 They also say that they cannot guarantee the destruction of all of the missiles if we launch an air strike . They say they also say they can't guarantee the destroyed missiles if they're launched . The Syrian government says they will not be able to guarantee destruction of missiles .
 If a surprise air strike cannot eliminate the risk of a missile launch from Cuba against the U.S. then it is too dangerous to undertake such an action, says President Obama .
 A naval blockade would prevent the arrival of Soviet ships carrying more missiles or materials necessary to make the missiles operational . The blockade would also prevent the . arrival of . Soviet ships with more missiles, materials needed to make them operational, the .
 A naval blockade represents a combination of diplomatic and military responses, but without the danger that would be caused by an immediate U.S. attack . The blockade would be combined diplomatic, military and diplomatic responses .
 An unannounced U.S. attack against Cuba holds the disadvantage of losing the moral high ground for the United States . On the other hand, an unannounced attack on Cuba would be a loss of moral standing for the US .
 We tried Japanese officials as war criminals for their sneak attack on Pearl Harbor . We tried to find them guilty of Pearl Harbor attack on Japan .
 "A sneak attack on Cuba would discredit us in the eyes of the world today and for generations to come," says President Obama . A sneak attack would discredit the U.S. government, he says .
 The United States still maintains a significant edge in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union even with these weapons so close to our shores . U.S. still maintains significant edge over Soviet Union .
 U.S. nuclear superiority will deter any Soviet action against the United States, says President Nixon . "Our overwhelming nuclear superiority" will deter Soviet action, Nixon says .
 A blockade allows room for a peaceful solution if the Soviets and Cubans are cooperative . The U.S. must demonstrate its willingness to fight if necessary, but a blockade allows time for peaceful solution .
 The consequences of a military attack on the missiles in Cuba are impossible to predict . The consequences and risks of a strike on Cuba's missiles in the U.S. can't be predicted .
 A surprise military attack erodes U.S. moral standing around the world . The U.N. has been accused of being a victim of a U.K. attack .
 Using diplomacy could take months or years, allowing more missiles to be brought to and assembled in Cuba . Using diplomacy, the U.S. could bring in more missiles and missiles to Cuba .
 Accepting Soviet missile on Cuban territory erodes U.S. standing around the world as a bul wark against the Soviet Union . Acceptance of Soviet missile erodes United States standing around world . Accepting . missile on Cuba erodes . U.K. would have been a
 The Soviet missiles in Cuba do not actually change the strategic balance . The Soviet missile system is not actually changing the balance of the country .
 The United States still has an overwhelming edge in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union . The U.S. still has the overwhelming edge over Russia .
 A blockade is a prudent and flexible step that would allow the U.S. to move to military action without being accused of having conducted a “Pearl Harbor’s-style attack . A blockade would be a prudent move that could allow the United States to move military action
 Diplomatic action alone, without a blockade, would allow the Soviet Union to continue to assemble missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union would continue to build missiles in the country .
 A blockade of Cuba would prevent the Soviet Union from delivering more missiles and weapons to Cuba . The blockade would also prevent the Soviets from delivering weapons and missiles to the island nation .
 It is a prudent first step demonstrating U.S. resolve against Soviet expansionism . It is the first step in demonstrating United States resolve against Russia .
 "We carry out open surveillance, so we know what they’re doing all times. Well, first place, we carry out ... all times," she said .
 Twenty-four hours a day from now and forever, in a sense, indefinitely, indefinitely . "It's 24-hours a day, forever, a sense of indefinitely," the author says . "I don't know how long it will be," she says .
 I call it an ultimatum associated with these two actions, he says . "It was a statement to the world, particularly to Khrushchev, that we have located offensives," he adds .
 "If there is ever any indication that they’re to be launched against this country, we will respond not only against Cuba, but also against the Soviet Union with a full nuclear strike," he said .
 It is my strongly held view that we cannot launch a surprise attack against Cuba without destroying our moral position and alienating our friends and allies . It is a strongly held belief that the U.S. cannot launch an attack on Cuba without damaging its moral position .
 "The communists are threatening our security and way of life all around the world," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: 'The communists threaten our security' Putin: "They are threatening to destroy the world"
 They have the audacity to place nuclear missiles just ninety miles from our shores . Now they have the audacity to place nuclear missile just ninety miles away from us . The U.S. has been hit by a series of nuclear missiles over the years .
 The United States must act decisively and with force to remove this threat, the U.S. needs to preserve its credibility with our political allies and neutral countries, the president's office says .
 U.S. Air Force bombers should immediately launch an air strike to destroy missile sites . The missile sites should be destroyed to prevent them from becoming operational .
 Because there is no guarantee that all of the missile sites would be destroyed in such a strike, a full-scale invasion of Cuba will need to follow . Because of the lack of missile sites, the attack would need to be carried out in Cuba .
 Negotiations would give the Soviets the ability to make or propose compromises and would not halt the deployment . Negotiated talks would give them the chance to make compromises and not halt deployment .
 U.S. military action would risk lives and kill Soviet and Cuban military personnel and Cuban civilians . It is worth the cost to preserve our safety and our credibility as an opponent of the Soviet Union, he says .
 Failure to respond to the missile build-up will lead to a loss of confidence in the U.S. Failure to act will provide encouragement to pro-communist forces, particularly in Latin America, writes Peter Bergen .
 Such an invasion could accomplish not only the removal of the missiles, but also the end of the Castro regime . The Castro regime could be overthrown if the U.S. invaded Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The Soviet Union is testing the resolve of the U.S. by placing missiles in our strategic backyard . The United States is testing its resolve against the Soviet Union, author says .
 Failure to react here means we will face more challenges around the world from the Soviets . Failure to respond to the threat of the Soviet Union means more challenges will be faced .
 History has taught us what comes from appeasing tyrants—war, suffering, and more aggression by the tyrants . History has also taught us that peace is not possible, but war and suffering is possible .
 The Soviet Union has backed down when faced with strong action by the U.S. The United States has taken action against the Soviet Union in the past .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba are an immediate threat to the security of the United States . The U.S. must deal with them by whatever means is necessary, President Obama says .
 The United States military can successfully neutralize the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The U.S. military can also neutralize Soviet missiles .
 The Soviet Union will not respond militarily elsewhere in the world to U.S. military action against Cuba . Soviet Union won't respond to any of the world's militaries against Cuba.
 A military strike against Cuba signals that the U.S. is not prepared to bargain bases in Cuba for positions in Berlin and elsewhere . A strike would be the first in a long line of military strikes against Cuba . The strike signals that Cuba is not willing to bargain with the United States
 Eliminating the missiles with force protects the U.S. position in the Western Hemisphere by demonstrating our will to fight to protect national interests . Elimination of the missiles protects the United States position in Western Hemisphere .
 Military action against missiles and Cuba would eliminate a military threat to the U.S. Military action would eliminate the threat to Cuba . Military action could eliminate the military threat .
 If we allow offensive capabilities in Cuba to remain there, "we will lose all Latin America to Communism," he says . "All credibility of our willingness to effectively resist Soviet military power will have been removed"
 We can also expect similar reactions elsewhere, such as Iran, Thailand, and Pakistan, to be expected .
 Statement to President Kennedy by General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff . “I think we all would be unanimous in saying that really our strength in Berlin, our strength any place in the world, is the credibility of our response under certain conditions.”
 Statement to President Kennedy by General Curtis Lemay, Air Force Chief of Staff . “I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps perhaps, that we don’t have any choice except direct military action.” General Lemay .
 The first thing that’s going to happen is your missiles are going to disappear into the woods, particularly your mobile ones. If we do this blockade, the first thing is going to be . The blockade is proposed, says President Vladimir Putin .
 President Obama says he doesn't share your view that if we knock off Cuba, they’re going to knock off Berlin . Obama: "Now, as for the Berlin situation, I don’t share my view"
 Statement to President Kennedy by General Earle Wheeler, Army Chief of Staff . “The lowest-risk course of action it would take in protecting the people of the United States against a possible strike on us is to go ahead with a surprise air strike, the blockade, and an invasion
 The president decided to use the word "quarantine" instead of the word “blockade” because in internanuclear holocaust law a blockade was considered to be an act of war . Many Americans simply held their breath and hoped that the world would not be consumed .
 The president chose the middle course between ExComm’s varied options . This option allowed the president to steer a “Can you imagine not seeing another Christmas, middle course?”
 ‘We’re just too young to die.” nounced in a televised speech to the American public . A Massachusetts schoolgirl . that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 He then informed the nation of his decision to enforce a quarantine of Cuba until the missiles were removed . What was the Soviet Union’s reaction to removed .
 For several hours, there was no warned that “many months of sacrifice and self-disresponse” for several hours . “Many months, there were no warnings that ‘many months’ of sacrifice’ and “self-disresponsibility”
 Soviet diplomats in the U.S. were cipline lie ahead, months in which both our patience especially baffled . Months in the United States lie ahead .
 Kennedy learned of the Soviet missile build-up in Cuba through Kennedy’s speech . Like most Americans, they first and our will will be tested .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev’s first re-election was a victory for the U.S. President . The U.K. responded with anger and anger .
 Khrushchev maintained that the U.S. public into supporting the quarantine demissiles in Cuba, regardless of their type, were meant cision of their president .
 Others feared also warned the U.S. that military aggression toward Cuba might lead to nuclear war . Others also warned that military . aggression .
 Adlai Stevenson denounced the introduction of missiles in Cuba in a speech to the UN Security Council . The U.S. ambassador to the U.N. said missiles will be banned in Cuba .
 Stevenson called for a UN vote to condemn the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but the Soviet ambassador to the UN vetoed Stevenson’s proposal . The Soviet ambassador vetoed Stevenson's proposal .
 The effects of missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated many . The crisis influenced the lives of many and found expression in popuLatin American governments . Although reactions varied, the effects of the missiles infuriated some .
 Latin American leaders also feared Cusinger Bob Dylan . One reaction can be found in the words of the well-known Latin Americans .
 Dylan wrote “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna ban support of communist guerrilla guerrilla Fall” during the missile crisis . Dylan wrote the song during the Cold War in support of the communist guerrilla .
 Every line in it is said to be the start of a whole song about the war .
 Americans feared that war, possibly —Bob Dylan nuclear war, was probable . Americans feared it was possible that a nuclear war was possible .
 The U.S. naval quarantine went into effect Oct. 24 . Below is the third stanza from Dylan's “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall .
 At least a dozen Soviet ships en route en route to Cuba . On October 31, Cuba turned back, but preparations at And it's a hard rain’s a-gonna fall’
 DEFCON, or Defense Condition, refers to the United States state of readiness for nuclear war . DeFCON is the U.S. state of preparedness for nuclear warfare .
 The DEFCON scale runs from five, for peace-time conditions, to zero, for a nuclear attack . The scale is used by the U.S. government to prepare for an attack on the world .
 On October 24, 1962, the Strategic Air Command was placed on DEFCON 2 for the first and only time in history . The first time the Air Force Command was on the highest level in the world .
 One hundred and eighty-three bombers were dispatched to thirty-three airfields . One hundred-and-a-half of the bombers were sent to 30-33 airfields during the war .
 Additional bombers placed on alert on runways throughout the United States . Additional bombers were placed on . runways in the United .
 Ninety U.S. nuclear missiles were placed at a heightened state of readiness . Ninety United States nuclear missiles have been placed at heightened state-ready .
 ExComm received reports that the missiles in Cuba were about to become operaletters . Kennedy and his advisers decided to respond only to the first letter and the second one .
 If Soviets refused to back down, the U.S. would “give assurances against the invasion of Cuba” and to be faced with the options to allow the missiles to re“remove promptly” the quarantine measures that main in Cuba, launch an air strike, or
 There was no missiles to be removed from Cuba under international assurances that the Soviets exercised complete control observation and supervision . To make matters more difficult, there was no missile removal from Cuba .
 That same evening, President Kennedy sent his assume that they were on the island . No one manded safeguards to ensure that such weapons in Washington knew if nuclear warheads had would not be placed in Cuba again .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy to meet with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Attorney General to meet sures bearing down on ExComm, ExComm . ExComm is scheduled to be held in Washington, DC .
 Robert Kennedy warned change for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Ambassador Dobrynin that events were spiraling out Cuba was reconsidered . During removing U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exthe course of his meeting, Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy: Unless the Soviets agreed to remove the plan, the president would order lic trade . Kennedy stated that the plan recognized that it should not be seen as a pubmissiles, Kennedy stated .
 I was not giving Two letters written by Khrushchev to Kennedy them an ultimatum but a statement of fact . I was giving the letters to Kennedy, the letter was not an 'ultimatum'
 The first letter, reshould understand that if they did not remove ceived October 26, was an emotional appeal those bases, we would remove them . We would remove the letters from those bases .
 Khrushchev had great respect for the Ambassador’s on Kennedy to avoid the catastrophe of nuclear war . President apparently composed by the President of the Soviet Union . President .
 This letter took a much more hardline only a few more hours . We needed an answer position, insisting that the U.S. remove its immediately from the Soviet Union . The U.N. should remove itself immediately, the letter says .
 I said we nuclear missiles from Turkey in return for a with withmust have it the next day.” drawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba. I said . drawal . of Soviet missile from Cuba was a deal .
 Robert F Kennedy found the demands contained in the second letter unacceptable for two reasons . Kennedy found —Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy found . Attorney General found — Attorney General Robert . F Kennedy .
 Robert Kennedy also revealed to Dobrynin that have the Jupiter missiles removed . First, Turkey was not willing to remove the missiles from Turkey .
 The United States had already made plans before the dium-range nuclear missiles to deter an attack by the crisis to remove them . The missiles in Turkey were outmoded and that United States allies on the Mediterranean counted on United States met met .
 The next day, Premier Khrushchev chose to deagainst the missile sites and an invasion of Cuba infuse the confrontation . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at odds over whether to attack the missile bases .
 Khrushchev massed in Florida to await the president’s orders . ordered that a message be broadcast by radio . Over 100,000 battle-ready troops had quickly as possible to President Kennedy .
 No one was sure what Khrushchev’s reaction would be to a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Moscow announced that the Soviet Union was orderwould be to the United States .
 Khrushing the dismantling and removal of the missiles in chev retaliate against United States forces in West Berlin, or exchange for United States guarantees of Cuban sovereignty . Would the U.S. retaliate against West Berlin? Or would the Cuban government exchange for guarantees of Cuba's sovereignty?
 President Kennedy had not been consulted an inch beyond what was necessary . Moscow believed that he would not endorse —President John F Kennedy the U.S.-Soviet agreement . He had not consulted the Russians an inch . beyond what is necessary .
 In addition, he naval base at Guantanamo to Cuba to Cuba, and end the onreceived a cable from Castro .
 The Cuban leader exgoing United States economic blockade of Cuba . pressed his belief that the United States would invade . While Moscow, Washington, and the rest of the his island in the coming days .
 Castro was connaissance flights during the negotiations . In the end, Castro saw the arrangement that repledge not to invade Cuba .
 In the weeks following the resolution of the crisis, Soviet diplomats pressed Castro to accept the agreement . He had believed all along solved the missile crisis as a threat to Cuba’s security .
 Castro would not permit U.S. specialists to come to peace and having prevented nuclear war, he said . Castro, how’s how? “We believe that besides having salvaged world ever, would not . permit United States specialists to . come to . peace, he
 Verification had to take place in inturning over the naval base at Guantanamo, and ternational waters . Verification also had to be done over the waters off the coast of Guantanamo .
 The Soviet-Cuban talks dragged an end to all attacks on Cuba on until November 19 . Castro reluctantly gave —Cuban official Jorge Risquet his assent to other aspects of the agreement .
 President Kennedy said he believed that used in Vietnam and in other cases” there was a 30 to 50 percent chance that the missile missile . would lead to a nuclear war . President Kennedy believed that . used in . Vietnam and other cases .
 Khrushchev turned his back on his Cuban ally and came to terms with his Cold War rival . In order to avoid a nuclear exchange, he turned to Russia to avoid an exchange of nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy risked both his ties with Cuba and his country’s SovietUnited States relations . By doing so, the Soviet Kennedy focused on building on the opening in leader risked his ties .
 After the missile crisis, a hotline was established both Khrushchev and Kennedy worked to ease communication between the two nations . The ideological conflict would continue to continue, but after the crisis, both worked to diminish the ideological conflict .
 The arrangement featured teletype machines installed in both the Kremlin and the White House . “If we cannot now end our differences, at least White House.’s White House,” the Kremlin said .
 The hotline was reportedly used we can help make the world safe for diversity. dozens of times .
 The risk of a misunderstanding reFor, in the final analysis, our most basic comsulting in deadly conflict was reduced. mon link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
 The missile crisis also impressed on the minds of Americans . We all breathe the same air. We all live in the same space. We need to be together.
 We all cherish our of Kennedy and Khrushchev the dangers of making children’s future . The dangers of children's future are still to be seen today, says historian .
 President Kennedy: "Leaders on both sides recognized the need to emof peace" "We labor on not toward a close to the unthinkable horror of a nuclear war, strategy of annihilation"
 By the time of Union, Union, key participants in the 1962 crisis from the the missile crisis, Soviet nuclear capability was still far far behind the United States . The former Soviet Union and Cuba met behind United States capability .
 United States intelligence in 1962 estion several times to review the events . U.S. intelligence was involved in the events in 1962 .
 The Soviets had no subnuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Castro’s motives for marine-launched missiles and were at a seven-to-one for accepting them in long-range bombers .
 Khrushchev also hoped to address the imbalance of nuclear forces between the superpowers . However, the Soviet Union had nothing with which to respond to a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev believed that placing the missiles in over the Soviet Union would address the nuclear imbalance . In 1962, the U.S. could claim a decisive edge . The United States was able to claim the edge .
 The misnuclear warheads (which contains the explosive desiles) would be within striking distance of many major vice . The number of missiles would also increase in the number of misnukes and missiles .
 In addimissiles based on land, long-range bombers loaded with nukes could be used as bargaining chips to with nuclear weapons, and submarine-launched misnegotiate a withdrawal of United States nuclear forces .
 Khrushchev’s plans in Cuba called missiles stationed in other NATO countries for the installation of intermediate-range missiles . In contrast, the Soviets’ ability to strike United States tercould reach almost every corner of the U.S.
 In the late 1950s, Khrushchev created anxiety in the for placing missiles in Cuba . In recent years, most U.S. officials and scholars boasted that the Soviets were on the verge of overtaking the United States in nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev felt Soviet missiles in Cuba ening the country’s nuclear capability . Under Presidents Dwight Eisenhower and John Kennedy, additional funding went toward strengthfirms .
 U.S. policymakers came to realize that many of the missiles in Turkey were in Turkey . United States policymakers later realized that many missiles were in the country .
 Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet Ambassador to tified. discovered evidence suggests that their fears were jus. Newly eign missiles at our doorstep .
 According to head of operational planning Cuba during the crisis for the Soviet General Staff in 1962, General Anatoly Gribkov, nuclear warheads had indeed reached Cuba . Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet ambassador to in the weeks before the missile crisis erupted in the inCuba during
 The U.S. mainland was beyond the range of the missiles, sis is crucial, the Cuban viewpoint is equally important . Understanding Soviet motives in the cri. is crucial . The Cuban perspective is equally crucial .
 Castro knew that accepting Soviet missiles against U.S. troops invading Cuba was a mistake . Castro knew he would accept missiles from Soviet missiles if he invaded Cuba . Castro accepted Soviet missiles in order to protect Cuban citizens .
 Gribkov said that the missiles could have been launched by the Soviet commander because he thought they would deter a U.S. attack of in Cuba without authorization from Moscow . Yet, meeting in Havana, Castro unhesitatingly welcomed the missiles, saying they would be launched .
 No one should believe that a U.S. force noting, first of all, that this assured an improvecould have been attacked by tactical nuclear ment in the socialist camp’s defense capabilities .
 In run a risk on Cuba’s behalf, then Cuba should also assume its share of the risks,” says former Secretary of Defense —Cuban Official Jorge Risquet .
 Castro was flattered by Khrushchev’s offer to make Cuba the first a nuclear response . Castro may have even been to invade Cuba, had feared an invasion could provoke an invasion .
 Gribkov’s revelation proved his communist country, other than the Soviet Union, in worries were well-founded . which Soviet nuclear missiles would be deployed .
 U.S. officials today are unrivaled as the strongest nation in the world, officials say . United States officials say they will continue to be the strongest in the country .
 There seemed to be few limits to U.S. power in the early 1960s . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1968 .
 Castro’s Cuba efforts to contain communism remains frozen in time . Castro unthe former Soviet Union have evolved, but the reladertook a bold foreign policy which clashed with U.S.
 Since the Cuban Missile CriCastro held up Cuba’s communist system as a sis, U.S.-Cuban relations have been filled with model for other developing countries . The Cuban Missile System is a model for developing countries, claiming that confrontation and disagreement is necessary .
 Cuba was on the path to offering its citizens a decent Castro’s continued defiance of the United States standard of living and equal opportunity . The combination of Cuba and the U.S. is on the way to offering Cuba a decent life, the author says .
 U.S. citizens greeted the resolution of the Cuban economic embargo against Cuba with a sigh of relief . An angered United States government continued a strict economic embargo .
 Castro’s government in the international arena had stood up to communism; war had been avoided . The U.S. had stood against communism, and the U.K. had avoided war . The United States late Castro's government in Cuba stood up against communism .
 There was even the possibility of better relations with viewed as U.S. imperialism the Soviet Union . For its part, Cuba loudly condemned what Castro said .
 Most Americans felt confident that their country remained its relationship with the Soviet Union . Looking toward the future, most Cuba’s aggressive foreign policy even strained Americans .
 A billboard in dangerous upstart Cuba illustrates who needlessly provoked the warm relations provoked the an between Fidel ger of the United Castro and Soviet leader States . From the perspective of the Soviets, Castro was a potentially dangerous figure .
 The United States formed an elite counterinsurgency corps in 1968 to make their point . The Soviets warned Castro to cut back oil shipments to Cuba . The U.S. formed the Green Beets in 1968 .
 Castro turned one of his lieutenants, units throughout the hemisphere to combat well-orErnesto Che Guevara, loose to foment revolution . Castro had trained police forces in Bolivia .
 Castro had also shipped arms to guerrillas to control urban riots and prevent sabotage . The ongoing conflict between the United States Venezuela and Costa Rica. seeking to overthrow democratic governments in .
 To counter forces supported by the Castro to bolster democracy and social reform in Latin America, the U.S. often found itself on America . The United States often found themselves on America.
 By the end of the 1960s, many of the early hopes to allow young Americas to participate of the Cuban revolution had waned . Kennedy also created the Peace Corps .
 Other countries in projects designed to improve everyday life in Latin in Latin America did not follow Cuba’s example . Other countries involved in the projects did not .
 U.S. maintained an economic embargo against Cuba, and the revolution’s radical economic . How did Cold War security concerns affect the experiments led to confusion and shortages? Cold War concerns led to shortages .
 President Kennedy also beefed up the United States mililose Soviet aid . Castro understood that Cuba could not afford to President Kennedy . President Kennedy agreed to beef up the aid .
 Fidel Castro imprisoned thousands of Cubans who had opposed him in a bitter political struggle . Fidel Castro came to power after coming to power, imprisoning thousands of opponents . Castro was imprisoned in Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Jorge Valls was jailed before Castro’s revolution for actively opposing the rule of Fulgencio Batista . Like many of those imprisoned in the early 1960s, he was imprisoned before Castro's revolution .
 Valls was imprisoned under Castro’s regime in 1964 after continuing the struggle for democratic rights in his country . He was then imprisoned under the Castro regime after continuing to fight for democracy .
 This was always extremely scarce and was administered by the chief of the galley . The chief of a galley administered the ration of this ration .
 It was generally four cups apiece, and that was what we had to drink, bathe, and perhaps wash some underwear . We were forced to drink four cups each, and then bathe and wash underwear .
 It was better not to look at your plate because it might come with small grubs, worms or cockroaches . Don't eat your food at first, it's better to avoid looking at the plate .
 If someone found a cockroach or other unusual object floating in his dinner, he would say, “This is protein,” and either eat it or throw it away . He would either eat or throw away it .
 We, the prisoners, were not defeated in spirit, and in many ways we represented a threat to the regime . We represented ourselves as a threat, says the prisoner's father .
 Every family in Cuba had some kind of connection to someone in prison . There were so many people in Cuba that every family had some connection to a prison .
 The population of political prisoners, more than any battalion or political party, was the intellectual and political equivalent of the country’s capital . Our numbers grew by the thousands, and soon, soon, we were political prisoners . We soon became the intellectual, political equivalent to the capital of
 Cuba had received billions of dollars in aid of more than one million people, centered in South from Moscow . Meanwhile, the Cuban-American community the 1970s .
 Cuba was becoming more aggressive in its efforts from the energy price hikes that began in 1973 to force Castro out of power . Soviet oil shipments shielded Cuba Florida, was becoming increasingly aggressive .
 On balance, the Reagan administration’s antisame time had reasserted U.S. gether to promote communism in the third world, leaving Castro in a lonely position . At the time, Cuba and the Soviet Union worked tocommunist offensive in the region .
 The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 marked and poverty in the region a new direction for the U.S. in the world . United States policies had contributed to the cycle of violence in the area .
 President Reagan placed anticommunism at the heart of his foreign policy . How did the collapse of the Soviet Union affect of that foreign policy?
 Reagan's pledge to stop communist expanof Cuba’s trade was with the Soviet Union . Reagan’ed pledge to end Cuba trade with Soviet Union was made in 1980 .
 The Cusion led to several clashes with the Castro government . It relied on the Soviets for oil and grain, while over its policies in Grenada, Nicaragua, and El Salvaexporting sugar, nickel, and citrus fruits .
 At the close of the 1980s, the contest between the billion in annual assistance, amounting to approxiU. mately one-quarter of Moscow’s total foreign aid Cuban allies in Grenada had been swept away . Sodor viet trade subsidies supplied Cuba with at
 Castro was also stung by the fall of the El Salvador guerrilla movement in El Salvador . Castro had failed to nist leaders in Eastern Europe . Castro was stung after the fall .
 Elections replaced the government of important economic and military allies for Cuba . Elections had replaced the Cuban government of the past two decades .
 As Cuba’s trade links with the former Soviet block unraveled, Cuban imports fell by more than 75 percent . Cuban imports have fallen by over 75 percent since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Oil imports dropped by more than half, leaving much of Cuba’s agricultural economy without fuel . Much of Cuba's agricultural economy has been left without fuel since the fall of oil imports . Oil imports have dropped by over half to less than half .
 He clamped down on political opposition and tightened his grip on the national economy . The former president has been in power for more than a decade .
 One million bicycles were imported from China to provide an alternative to fuel-starved Jeff MacNelly in the Chicago Tribune .
 Castro pledged to fight depend on over one billion dollars per year from in defense of the Cuban revolution . Castro warned his friends and family in the U.S. in the United States.
 People to prepare for a U.S. assault on the island . Nonetheless, people should prepare for an assault .
 Castro continues to angrily reject U.S. calls for demo . The desperate economic situation forced Castro cratic reforms in Cuba . Castro has to find new trading partners .
 Caszens have found ways to appeal to Cuban nationalism (and anger toward economic situation) Caszens are making the best of a bad tro .
 Castro’s government also legalized self-employment in the U.S. rather than communist or socialist . Self-employment was decriminalized in Cuba .
 Castro used the Elian Gonzalez case to boost exist. For exdollar possession, and allowed private markets to ample, private markets were ample. Castro used it to boost existing. The former president used the case to push for exdollar sales .
 Most state farms began to organize into cooperahis regime’s sagging popularity . Most cooperatives began organizing into cooperatives . State farms are becoming less popular with the public .
 Castro's mother died while fleeing Cuba for the U.S. in 1999, became the center of an international custody battle . Castro now argues that his reforms are designed not to transform but rather to save socialism . Castro's son picked up off the coast of Florida in 1999 after his mother
 Castro turned the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 tightened the economic battle into a nationalist cause, mobilizing tens of thouembargo against Castro’s government by penalizing sands to march in the streets .
 Thousands of foreign subsidiaries of American firms that trade with of Cuban-Americans rallied in Cuba . Thousands of American companies that trade in Cuba demonstrated in Cuba this week .
 The Helms-Burton Act of 1996 was designed to port of Elian staying in the U.S. Elian was born in the United States . Elian is now a permanent resident of the country .
 Castro continued to try to rally nationalist fervor after Elian’s punishing any nation that traded with or invested in return to Cuba but without the same success . Castro put further pressure on the Castro government by continued to .
 The U.S. State Department has not fully impleve mented the Helms-Burton Act because of the adverse effect it would have on our relationships with other countries . While the Cold War with the Soviet Union is countries countries, the State Department does not fully .
 The U.S. has paid a hard line toward Cuba, but it still casts a shadow over relations . Cuba's hard line seems determined to hold onto power; the United States has paid the price .
 In 1994, more than one hundred countries in the U.S. remains determined to see him go . More than 100 countries worldwide are determined to kill him .
 The embargo has prevented United States companies from taking advantage of trade and investment opportunities . As long as Castro remains in power, power change seems unlikely .
 Capassions seize opportunities in Havana and in the U.S. and in Havana . The Cuban government has been cracking down on the economy .
 We consider this declaration of the U.S. and Kennedy’s speech of October 22 to be an exceptional intervention in the affairs of the Republic of Cuba, a violation of the norms of international law and of the fundamental rules that govern relations between states . The Soviet Union considers this
 The Republic of Cuba has the same rights as any other sovereign state to defend its country, the Cuban government says . Cuba has also the right to choose its allies according to its wishes, the president says .
 Northamerican government’s shameless demands to control the shipment of weapons to Cuba, Cuba . Cuba rejects the government's attempts to determine the type of weapons that the Republic of Cuba may possess, the Cuban government says .
 The United States government knows perfectly well that no sovereign state would allow interference in its relations with other states . The U.S. government would not present accounts on measures taken to strengthen the defense of its country, he says .
 The Soviet Government has issued a statement in which it expresses the most determined protest against the piratical actions of the Northamerican government . It qualifies these actions as perfidious and aggressive against sovereign states, stating its decision to fight actively .
 We have instructed our representative on the Security Council to present urgently the question of violation, by the U.S., of the norms of international law and the Charter of the United Nations Organization . The U.N. should emit a determined protest against the aggressive and perfidious actions of North
 Soviet military representatives stationed in Cuba have been instructed to be at full readiness . The situation has been described as a 'situation that has arisen' in Cuba .
 The actions undertaken by the Northamerican imperialists in trying to take away the legitimate right of the Republic of Cuba to strengthen its defensive capacity and to defend the motherland will provoke the angry protest of all peace-loving peoples . We are sure that the actions of the imperialists will
 We send you, comrade Castro, and all your comrades in arms, our warm greetings . We express our firm certainty that the aggressive plans of Northamerican imperialism will suffer defeat .
 The U.S. ordered to interdict the delivery of offensive weapons and associated material to Cuba in 1962 .
 Surface-to-surface missiles, bomber aircraft, bombs and guided missiles are among the items designated by the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of effectuating this Proclamation .
 The Secretary of Defense shall take appropriate measures to prevent the delivery of prohibited material to Cuba, employing the land, sea, and air forces of the United States in operation with any forces that may be made available .
 The Secretary of Defense may make such regulations and issue such directives as he deems necessary to ensure the effectiveness of this order, including the designation of prohibited or restricted zones and or prescribed routes .
 Any vessel or craft which may be proceeding toward Cuba may be intercepted and may be directed to identify itself, its cargo, equipment and stores and its ports of call .
 Any vessel or craft which fails or refuses to respond to or comply with directions shall be subject to being taken into custody .
 Any vessel or craft believed to be en route to Cuba and may be carrying prohibited material may be directed to proceed to another destination of its own choice . Vessel or craft may be taken into custody if it fails to obey such directions .
 All vessels or craft taken into custody shall be sent into a port of the United States for appropriate disposition . The U.S. will not release any of the vessels .
 In carrying out this order, force shall not be used except in case of failure or refusal to comply with directions, or with regulations or directives of the Secretary of Defense issued hereunder . Force will only be used in the case of self-defense or failure to comply .
 This would require a large force and is the most repugnant form of aggression, which might restrain them, says the author . "This would require large force," he says .
 You can't be sure that we will resist with determination, whatever the case . You can be sure to resist with determined determination, whoever the case may be .
 The Cuban people’s morale is extremely high and the people will confront aggression heroically, says Cuban president . Cuban people's morale is very high, he says, and they are prepared to confront aggression .
 If the imperialists invade Cuba with the aim of occupying it, the dangers of their aggressive policy are so great that after such an invasion the Soviet Union must never allow circumstances in which they could carry out a nuclear first strike against it . The Soviet Union should never allow such a first strike
 I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists’ aggressiveness makes them extremely dangerous, and that if they manage to carry out an invasion of Cuba, then that would be the moment to eliminate this danger forever, in an act of the most legitimate self-defense . I
 This opinion is shaped by observing the development of their aggressive policy . This opinion has been shaped by watching the development in the U.S.
 The imperialists, without regard for world opinion and against laws and principles, have blockaded the seas, violated our air-space, and are preparing to invade . They have blocked any possibility of negotiation, even though they understand the gravity of the problem, says the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 You have been, and are, a tireless defender of peace, and I understand that these moments, when the results of your superhuman efforts are so seriously threatened, must be bitter for you . I understand this .
 We will maintain our hopes for saving the peace until the last moment, and we are ready to contribute to this in any way we can . We will be here to fight for the peace in the last few days .
 "We are serene and ready to confront a situation which we see as very real and imminent," he says . But, at the same time, he says, we are ready to face the situation which is very real .
 I convey to you the infinite gratitude and recognition of the Cuban people to the Soviet people, who have been so generous and fraternal, along with our profound gratitude and admiration to you personally .
 We wish you success with the enormous task and great responsibilities which are in your hands . We wish for you to succeed .
 From your letter I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed, and sense of responsibility . From your letters, I feel you have an understanding of what has developed and responsibility for it .
 I would judge that, apparently, a continuation of an exchange of opinions at such a distance, even in the form of secret letters, will hardly add anything to that which one side has already said to the other . Consequently, I would . judge that . apparently, apparently . a continuation
 We have always regarded war as a calamity, and not as a game nor as a means of the attainment of definite goals, nor, all the more, as a goal in itself . War is not a game, nor a way of reaching definite goals .
 I see, Mr President, that you too are not devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of the world, of understanding, and of what war entails . Mr President. I see that, he says, "Mr President, you too too are devoid of ... of anxiety"
 You well know that the very least which you would receive in reply would be that you would experience the same consequences as those which you sent us . But you well know . The very least . would be the same . consequences which you . would experience in reply . You would experience same consequences
 If war breaks out, it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war . These are all transient things, but if indeed war should break out, then it would be in the power of stopping it, he says .
 In the name of the Soviet Government and the Soviet people, I assure you that your conclusions regarding offensive weapons on Cuba are groundless . The Soviet government and Soviet people will not comment on the matter, it says .
 It is apparent from what you have written me that our conceptions are different on this score, or rather, we have different estimates of these or those military means . We have different conceptions of these military means. It's apparent from . what you . have written, it is apparent that our
 "The same forms of weapons can have different interpretations. Indeed, in reality, the same weapons can be different interpretations," says CNN.com .
 If one concentrates artillery, and adds to it the necessary number of troops, then the same cannons do become an offensive means . The same cannons prepare and clear the war for infantry to attack, he says .
 Has something so new appeared in military strategy that one can think that it is possible to attack thus? "I say precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbarians, people who have lost their sense, destroy," he says .
 You repeated it to me several times, pointing out that not everybody occupying a high position would acknowledge his mistakes as you had done . Not everybody occupies a high place would have acknowledged his mistakes, he said. You repeated that several times .
 If war broke out, it would be a war not only between the reciprocal claims, but a worldwide cruel and destructive war . The preservation of world peace should be our joint concern, he says .
 "At one time, our people itself had a revolution, when Russia was still a backward country," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: At one point, Russia was a 'backward country'
 "We know how difficult it is to accomplish a revolution," says President Obama . "It is difficult to reconstruct a country on new foundations," says Obama .
 It is also not a secret to anyone that the threat of armed attack, aggression, has constantly hung, and continues to hang over Cuba . Cuba is not a place to hide from armed attack and aggression, says Cuban president .
 If assurances were given by the President and government of the United States that the U.S. itself would not participate in an attack on Cuba, this would change everything . This would immediately change everything, if you would recall you fleet .
 "When one accumulates them, this damages the economy," he says . "If one put them to use, then they destroy people on both sides," he adds .
 I expressed gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, too, who manifests alarm and concern for the fate of the world, and I readily responded to the appeal of the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U. Thant .
 There, Mr President, are my thoughts, which, if you agreed with them, could put an end to that tense situation which is disturbing all peoples . Mr President. If you agreed to them, they could end the tense situation, he said .
 This reasonable step on your part persuades me that you are showing solicitude for the preservation of peace, and I note this with satisfaction . This is a reasonable step, I note with satisfaction. This is not the first time I've heard from such a person who has taken such a
 I have already said that the only concern of our people and government is to develop our country and have it hold a worthy place among people of the world in economic competition, advance of culture and arts .
 This is the loftiest and most necessary field for competition which will only benefit both the winner and loser . This benefit is peace and an increase in the facilities by means of which man lives and obtains pleasure, says President Obama .
 In your statement, you said that the main aim lies not only in reaching agreement and adopting measures to avert contact of our ships, and, consequently, a deepening of the crisis . Contact can spark off the fire of military conflict after which any talks would be superfluous because other forces and
 "The main thing is to normalize and stabilize the situation in the world between states and between people," he says . The main thing to do is normalize the situation, he adds .
 I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President, because this is the first duty of the president, says CNN's chief executive . Mr Obama: "I understand your concerns for the U.S. security, Mr Obama."
 You have been worried over assisting Cuba with arms designed to strengthen its defensive potential . Cuba, no matter what weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are different dimensions, the more so given up-to-date means of extermination .
 "No one can challenge the humanity of our motives aimed at allowing Cuba to live peacefully and develop as its people desire," the Cuban government says .
 "You want to relieve your country from danger and this is understandable," says President Obama . "This is understandable. It's understandable. You want to help your country," says Obama .
 You say that it worries you because it lies at a distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the U.S. The United States is ninety miles away from the United States .
 You have stationed devastating rocket weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey literally right next to us. You have been stationed devastating rockets in Turkey, which is offensive, the Turkish president says . The Turkish prime minister's visit to Turkey is scheduled to take place next week .
 It is good that you agreed for our representatives to meet and begin talks, Mr President says . It was apparently with the participation of United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant. Mr Thant is the U.N. acting secretary general .
 "I think that one could rapidly eliminate the conflict and normalize the situation," says President Obama . "One could rapidly eliminated the conflict," says Obama .
 People would heave a sigh of relief, considering that statesmen who bear the responsibility have sober minds, an awareness of their responsibility, and an ability to solve complicated problems and not allow matters to slide to the disaster of war .
 We agree to remove those weapons from Cuba which you regard as offensive weapons . Cuba has agreed to remove the weapons, which are considered offensive weapons, from Cuba . The Cuban government says it will remove weapons from the island .
 We agree to do this and to state this commitment in the United Nations in the U.N. We are committed to doing this, the government says .
 Your representatives will make a statement to the effect that the United States, on its part, will evacuate its analogous weapons from Turkey . The U.S. will also evacuate its equivalent weapons from the Soviet state, the letter says .
 Let us reach an understanding on what time you and we need to put this into effect. Let us . We need to be able to put that time into effect . Let us know what time we need this time you need this to be .
 After this, representatives of the UN Security Council could control on-the-spot the fulfillment of these commitments . The UN would be able to control on the spot the fulfilment of the commitments .
 Cuba and Turkey must allow representatives to come to their countries and check fulfillment of this commitment, says President Vladimir Putin .
 U.S., Soviet Union, Cuba, Turkey and Turkey have been criticized by the U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . Clinton: "It would be better if these representatives enjoyed the trust of the Security Council and ours"
 I think it will not be difficult to find such people who enjoy the trust and respect of all interested sides. I think that such people will be easy to find, I think .
 It will declare that the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its sovereignty, undertakes not to intervene in its domestic affairs, not to invade and not to make its territory available as place d’armes for the invasion of Cuba .
 "Of course, for this we would have to reach agreement with you and to arrange for some deadline," she said . "We would need to reach an agreement," she added .
 Let us agree to give some time, but not to delay, two or three weeks, not more than a month . Let us give time, not delay, to give time to the end of the year, says PM .
 The weapons on Cuba, that you have mentioned and which, as you say, alarm you, are in the hands of Soviet officers. The weapons that you've mentioned and . which, . as you . say, alarmed you, were in the . hands of . Soviet officers . The
 Any accidental use of them whatsoever to the detriment of the United States of America is excluded . The U.S. is excluded from using them to detriment of America .
 These means are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and only in defensive aims . The Cuban Government is only using the means to protect its citizens .
 If there is no invasion of Cuba, or an attack on the Soviet Union, or other of our allies then, of course, these means do not threaten anyone and will not threaten . Therefore, if there are no invasion or attack of Cuba or other allies, then these means will not
 If you would also appoint your men and give them appropriate instructions, this problem could be solved soon . The problem has been solved soon.
 "Because the entire world is now agitated and expects reasonable actions from us. Because of the world, it expects reasonable action from us," she says .
 The greatest pleasure for all the people would be an announcement on our agreement, on nipping in the bud the conflict that has arisen. "The greatest pleasure would be a announcement on an agreement," he said .
 The problem of tests could be solved simultaneously, not linking one with the other, because they are different problems . The problem is not linked to the problem of testing and testing, it is a different problem .
 A nuclear test ban agreement has also been reached and thus there will be no further contamination of the atmosphere . However, it is important to reach an understanding to both these problems in order to make a good gift to the people, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 All this, possibly, would serve as a good impetus to searching for mutually acceptable agreements on other disputed issues, too, on which there is an exchange of opinion between us .
 These problems have not yet been solved, but they wait for an urgent solution which would clear the international atmosphere . These problems are not yet solved, and they wait to be solved, writes CNN.com .
 "I am confident that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise," says President Obama . "We are prepared to stand by us," says Obama .
 The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding “other armaments,” as proposed in your second letter which you made public .
 The continuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this discussion concerning Cuba by linking these problems to the broader questions of European and world security, would surely lead to an intensified situation on the Cuban crisis and a grave risk to the world .
 I hope we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in this letter and in your letter of October 26th . For this reason I hope to quickly agree to the terms outlined in the letter .
 The threat of invasion of Cuba and all other schemes for creating tension over China are designed to strike the Cuban people with a sense of insecurity, intimidate them, and prevent them from peacefully building their new life .
 The Soviet Government decided to render assistance to Cuba with means of defense against aggression, only with means for defense purposes . The Soviet government decided to give assistance to the Cuban government only to defend itself .
 I regard with respect and trust the statement you made in your message of 27 October 1962 that there would be no attack, no invasion of Cuba, and not only on the part of the United States, as you said in your same message .
 It is for this reason that we instructed our officers to take appropriate measures to discontinue construction of aforementioned facilities, to dismantle them, and to return them to the Soviet Union . The Soviet officers are in the hands of the Soviet officers .
 "We are prepared to reach agreement to enable UN representatives to verify the dismantling of these means. As I had informed you in the letter of 27 October, we were prepared to ... reach agreement," she said .
 Cessation of the economic blockade and of all the measures of commercial and economic pressure being carried out by the U.S. against our country throughout the world . The United States has been carrying out economic pressure on our country against us .
 Cessation of all subversive activities, of the dropping and landing of weapons and explosives by air and sea, and of the organization of invasions by mercenaries, are being carried on from the territory of the United States .
 Cessation of piratical attacks being carried out from bases in the U.S. and Puerto Rico . Cessated of the attacks carried out by pirates .
 Cessation of all violations of our air space and territorial waters by United States aircraft and warships . U.S. aircraft, warships and air space violated, U.N. says .
 Withdrawal of the naval base of Guantanamo and return of the Cuban territory occupied by the U.S. The United States will withdraw from Cuba and return it to Cuban territory . The U.N. would also withdraw from Guantanamo and give back the naval bases .
 U.S. made promise to withdraw missile bases from Cuba in exchange for their promise to abandon their plans to invade Cuba, to end their so-called “quarantine” of Cuba . President Obama: “We understand that for you certain difficulties may have emerged as a
 This commitment has led to an end to the conflict in the Caribbean, a conflict which implied a superpower confrontation and its transformation into a world war where missiles and thermonuclear weapons were used .
 Politicians and heads of state are the people’s leaders and the people do not know everything . But we, politicians and heads . of state, are the . people's leaders, he said .
 If we had allowed ourselves to be swept up by the more inflamed sectors of the populace, war would have probably broken out, resulting in millions of deaths . We had to reach a reasonable agreement with the government of the USA, writes David Cameron .
 Those who survived would have blamed the leaders for not having taken the measures that would have avoided this war of extermination . Those who survive would have been blamed for not taking the measures .
 The prevention of war and of an attack on Cuba did not depend only on the measures taken by our governments, but also on the analysis and examination of the enemy’s actions near your territory .
 "Some people say that we did not consult sufficiently with each other before taking the decision of which you know," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to do this again," says Obama . Obama: "We will not be going to do that again. We will
 Fidel Castro's cable of October 27 said he was 'almost certain' that an attack against Cuba was imminent . "We consider that consultations did take place, dear Comrade Fidel Castro," he said .
 "Knowing of your courage, we believed the alert to be totally justified," says CNN.com . "We believed it was totally justified"
 If we had carried on with our consultations in such conditions, knowing that the bellicose and unbridled militarists of the U.S. wanted to seize the occasion to attack Cuba, we would have been wasting our time and the strike could have taken place. But if we
 "We think that the presence of our strategic missiles in Cuba has polarized the attention of the imperialists," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: We think that our strategic missile presence has polarized our attention .
 "They were afraid that they would be used, which was why they risked wanting to eliminate them either by bombing them or by invading Cuba," says the Cuban leader .
 "We must recognize that they had the capability to put them out of action," says President Obama . "And we must recognize ... they had to be put in action," he says .
 In your cable of October 27, you proposed that we be the first to carry out a nuclear strike against the enemy’s territory . In the future, the U.S. would be first to strike against enemy's territory .
 It would not be a simple strike, but the start of a thermonuclear world war . It would be not a simple . strike, it would be the start . world war.
 I find your proposal to be wrong, even though I understand your reasons, I find it wrong . Fidel Castro's proposal is wrong, but I understand his reasons, he writes .
 We have lived through a very grave moment, a global thermonuclear war could have broken out, says David Cameron . The world has lived through the moment, he says . "We have lived in a grave moment," says Cameron .
 U.S. would have suffered enormous losses, but the Soviet Union and the whole socialist bloc would have also suffered greatly . The United States would have been devastated by the loss of Soviet Union .
 It is difficult to say how things would have ended for the Cuban people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It is impossible to say what would have happened if things were different .
 Without a doubt the Cuban people would have fought courageously but, also without a doubt, would have perished heroically . The Cuban people died heroically, says Cuban President Carlos V Lopez .
 We struggle against imperialism, not order to die, but to draw on all our potential, to lose as little as possible, and later to win more, so as to be a victor and make communism triumph . We struggle not to die. We struggle to draw up all of our
 The measures which we have adopted have allowed us to reach the goal which we had set when we decided to send the missiles to Cuba, says President Obama . The measures have been adopted, says Obama .
 We believe that we must take advantage of all the possibilities to defend Cuba, to strengthen its independence and sovereignty, to thwart military aggression, and to prevent a global thermonuclear war in the present stage .
 The United States has also made concessions, it has committed itself publicly, before the whole world, not to attack Cuba . The U.S. has also committed itself to not attack Cuba, the U.N. says .
 If we compare a U.S. attack and thermonuclear war on the one hand, the commitments made, the reciprocal concessions, the guarantee of the inviolability of the Republic of Cuba, and the prevention of a world war, then I think that the conclusion is clear,
 According to you, we were consulted before you took the decision to withdraw the strategic missiles. We were consulted by you, says Russian President Vladimir Putin. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case, says Putin .
 You justify this statement by referring to the alarming news coming out of Cuba and to my last cable of October 27. You justify that statement by . referring to . the alarming . news coming from Cuba . and to the . alarming news . of Cuba .
 I do not know what information you received; I am responding only to the message I sent on the night of the 26th, and which you received on the 27th . I am not sure what information I sent, but I am only responding to the messages I sent that night .
 "What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves and be ready to fight," she said . "We were prepared to fight. What we did was prepare ourselves," she added .
 The Cuban government said the imperialist attack was imminent, and that Soviet forces were determined to fight with us in defending the Republic of Cuba . Cuba could not have stopped but against which we could have resisted, the government said .
 I told you that the morale of our people was very high and that we would resist aggression heroically. I said that we were very high, and that . I told . that morale of the people is very high. I told them that .
 At the end of my message I told you that we would wait for the events calmly . At the beginning of this week, I said: 'We would wait calmly'
 "Danger could not impress us because we had seen it hover over our country for a long time, in a way, we were used to it," she said . "We were not impressed by the danger," she added .
 The Soviets who where with us know how admirable the stance of our people during the crisis has been, and of the great fraternity that has developed between men of our two peoples in these decisive hours .
 Many Cubans and Soviets, who were ready to die in maximum dignity, shed tears when they learned of the surprising decision to withdraw the weapons . The decision was unexpected and almost unconditional, almost unconditional .
 You perhaps do not know of the extent of which the Cuban people were ready to fulfill their duty towards their Motherland and toward humanity. You perhaps don't know of . the extent to which the . Cuban people are ready to . fulfill their . duty towards . their motherland and humanity
 Khrushchev: Rarely in history has any people run such a danger . Never has a people been so ready to fight and die with such a universal sense of duty, he says .
 We knew, don't think that we didn’t, that we would have been exterminated in thermonuclear war . We knew we would be exterminated, as you insinuate in your letter, in the case of thermonnuclear war .
 "That would, nevertheless, not have prompted us to ask you to withdraw the missiles," he said . That would have prompted the U.S. to withdraw missiles, he said. That would, nonetheless, not prompted us, to ask for you to concede, he added .
 "The imperialists were blocking every solution and their demands, in our opinion, were unacceptable to the USSR and to Cuba," says Vladimir Putin . "That, precisely, was a possibility," says Putin .
 Those means really had the purpose of defending the sovereignty of Cuba, Cuban president says . "After your assurance they lost their purpose," he says .
 We hope and we would like to believe that you will adhere to the commitments which you have taken, as strictly as we do with regard to our commitments. We hope you will, as well, as I spoke of that publicly too .
 President Obama: "We have already fulfilled our commitments concerning the removal of our missiles and IL-28 planes from Cuba and we did it even ahead of time"
 It is obvious that fulfillment by you of your commitments cannot be as clearly demonstrated as it was done by us . "Your commitments are of a longterm nature," says the letter . "We are disappointed that you have not been able to fulfill your commitments"
 It is important to fulfill them and to do everything so that no doubts are sown from the very start that they will not be fulfilled . But it is also important to do so so that it is not sown that they won't be fulfilled, he says .
 President Obama has promised non-invasion of Cuba to Cuba . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House this week .
 We believe that you will be able to receive a mandate at the next election too, that is that you . will be the United States President for six years, which would appeal to us . We believe you will receive a . mandate at this election too .
 At our times, six years in world politics is a long period of time and during that period we could create good conditions for peaceful coexistence on earth . This would be highly appreciated by the peoples of our countries as well as by all other peoples, he says .
 Mr President, I would like to express a wish that you follow the right way, as we do, in appraising the situation. Therefore, Mr President," I would say, "Mr President" Mr President .
 President Obama says he has set up confidential channels to exchange views with the world's most powerful politicians . He says it is important to provide for the possibility of an exchange of opinion through confidential channels .
 This is needed in order that all the peoples be sure that tension in the Caribbean is a matter of yesterday and that now normal conditions have been created in the world . This is in order to make sure that tensions in the Caribbean caribbean is just yesterday . This
 It is necessary to fix the assumed commitments in the documents of both sides and register them with the United Nations . And for this it's necessary to do this, both sides should register their commitments .
 You refer to the importance of my statements on an invasion of Cuba and of our intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts are sown from the start of the start, says President Obama .
 I have already stated my position publicly in my press conference on November 20th, and I am glad that this statement appears to have your understanding . "We have never wanted to be driven by the acts of others into war in Cuba," says President Obama .
 The other side of the coin, however, is that we do need to have adequate assurances that all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and are not reintroduced . Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere, the author says .
 President Obama says he's confident Cuba will not engage in such aggressive acts . Obama: "I already have your own assurance about the offensive weapons. As I understand you, you feel confident"
 This Choices curriculum unit makes the exciting results of Blight’s research accessible for high school students . The unit is a curriculum unit for students in high school classrooms .
 This answer suggested the third question to Blight and its answer as well . This answer was the answer to the question 'Blight' Blight .
 Blight’s attempt to answer his own question began his fifteen-year-long examination of the missile crisis . Blight: "I’m trying to answer my own question: 'What do you think?'
 The starting point for Blight was the behavior of President Kennedy during those tense days of October 1962 . Blight is based on President Kennedy's behavior during that tense days .
 The principle of the “rational actor” underlying nuclear deterrence theory suggested that President Kennedy should have acted to destroy the Soviet missiles . With the U.S. military edge he could have easily done just this, author says .
 Beginning in 1987, Blight and his colleagues held the first of five conferences on the Cuban missile crisis . Blight: "It's a good time for the world to learn about the missile crisis"
 Blight’s critical oral history method brings together three basic components . Blight's critical oral histories method uses an oral history tool to create a critical oral record .
 He added counterparts from the former Soviet Union and from Cuba to his list . Subsequently he added counterparts to the list of Soviet-era counterparts .
 Fidel Castro hosted and participated extensively in the final conference in Havana . Fidel Castro was a member of the Cuban revolutionary movement .
 These people were selected for their thorough knowledge of the missile crisis . They were selected to be chosen for their knowledge of missile crisis in the 1970s .
 Their primary role was to challenge the memory of the policymakers, applying a high level of academic rigor to the proceedings . Their primary task was to "challenge the memory"
 Scholars involved in the missile crisis conferences included Graham Allison, Thomas Biersteker, Alexander George, P Terrance Hopmann, Ernest May, Richard Neustadt, Thomas Schelling, and David Welch . The missile crisis crisis conferences were held in the 1960s .
 Documents on the American side of the conflict have been recently declassified . Many of the documents on the U.S. side have been released .
 The opening of Soviet archives after the fall of the Soviet Union has added another important perspective to the documentary records of the crisis . The opening has added an important perspective into the documentary record of the fall .
 Blight saw that while the scholars and documents helped to keep the former policymakers honest, the policymakers could explain the importance of documents to the scholars . Blight: "The scholars and the documents helped keep the . former policymakers . honest"
 Blight discovered that crossexamination by former adversaries became an important element of each conference . Blight also discovered that former adversaries become an important part of the conference .
 Out of these often heady discussions came important and provocative new information . Much of it can be found in this curriculum unit .
 Scholars realized the idea that everything useful about the Cuban missile crisis was already known was wrong . Scholars realized that the idea was that everything was known was absolutely wrong .
 Blight has also used critical oral history to cast new light on other important moments in U.S. history including the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the Vietnam War . Blight uses critical oral histories to shed light on important events in the United States .
 Classroom sets (15 or more student texts) may be ordered at $7 per copy . The book is available for $7 .
 Choices units develop critical thinking and civic judgment . The units use an innovative approach to student-centered instruction . Students will learn critical thinking, civic judgment and critical thinking .
 Each Choices unit provides students with a thorough introduction to the topic under consideration . Choices units provide students with an overview of the topics under consideration.
 Students gain an understanding of the historical background and the status of current issues . Students gain a sense of the history of the country .
 With this foundation, students are prepared to thoughtfully consider a variety of perspectives on public policy . Students will be prepared to thinkfully consider the issues of public policy in the classroom .
 Each Choices unit is built around a framework of alternative policy options that challenges students to consider multiple perspectives and to think critically about the issue at hand .
 Students are best able to understand and analyze the options through a cooperative learning/role-play activity . Students best to understand the options are best to analyze and analyze .
 In groups, students explore their assigned options and plan short presentations . In groups of students, students discuss their assigned topics .
 The setting of the role-play may be a congressional hearing, a meeting of the National Security Council, or an election campaign forum . The setting is set in the setting of a hearing, meeting, or a campaign meeting .
 Student groups defend their policy options and, in turn, are challenged with questions from their classmates . Students defend their policies and defend them from classmates .
 The ensuing debate demands analysis and evaluation of the many conflicting values, interests, and priorities reflected in the options . The debate must be analyzed and evaluated, including the conflicting values and interests reflected .
 Students are challenged to articulate original, coherent policy options that reflect their own values, priorities, and goals as individuals and citizens . Armed with fresh insights from the role-play and debate, students will be able to articulate their own original policy options .
 Students’ views can be expressed in letters to Congress or the White House, editorials for the school or community newspaper, persuasive speeches, or visual presentations . Students can also express their views in letters or editorials to Congress .
 Choices curricula are informed by current educational research about how students learn best . Curriculum curricula is based on current research into how best students learn .
 Studies have consistently demonstrated that students of all abilities learn best when they are actively engaged with the material rather than listening passively to a lecture .
 Studentcentered instructional activities motivate students and develop higher-order thinking skills . Activities motivate students to engage in activities that engage students and help them understand and understand ideas .
 Some high school educators find the transition from lecture format to student-centered instruction difficult . However, some educators find it difficult to teach students how to learn .
 Lecture is often viewed as the most efficient way to cover the required material . Lectures are often seen as an efficient way of covering the material in lectures .
 Choices curricula offer teachers a flexible resource for covering course material while engaging students and developing skills in critical thinking, persuasive writing, and informed citizenship .
 The instructional activities that are central to Choices units can be valuable components in any teacher’s repertoire of effective teaching strategies .
 Each Choices unit includes student readings, a framework of policy options, suggested lesson plans, and resources for structuring cooperative learning, role-plays, and simulations .
 Political cartoons, slogans, posters, or characterizations can be used in presentations . Students can contribute their individual talents to the group presentations .
 These cooperative learning lessons invite students to take pride in their own contributions and the group product . These lessons enhance students’ self-esteem and confidence as learners as learners .
 Choices units offer students with diverse abilities and learning styles the opportunity to contribute, collaborate, and achieve . Units offer students the chance to contribute and collaborate to achieve .
 This Choices curriculum unit makes the exciting results of Blight’s research accessible for high school John Forasté students . The unit is a curriculum unit for students in high school .
 Sergei Khrushchev, son of Nikita Khrushvich, participated in the conferences . Sergei and Nikita participated in conferences in Moscow, Russia .
 The Caribbean and Central America have felt the full weight of their colossal neighbor to the north . From the Monroe Doctrine to Cold War containment, Central America has felt the weight of its neighbor . The countries of the Caribbean and the Central American countries have felt their neighbor's weight .
 Cuba has been the scene of many of our nation’s most riveting foreign policy dramas . Of all the countries in the region, Cuba has played a key role in many of America's most dramatic foreign policy decisions .
 U.S. expansion overseas can trace its beginnings to the explosion of the Maine explosion and Teddy Roosevelt’s charge up San Juan Hill . Teddy Roosevelt led the charge up the hill .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History probes the complex relationship between the U.S. and Cuba . The film examines the crisis that brought the world to the brink of war .
 An optional lesson introduces students to important milestones in our country’s relationship with Cuba . It places it in the context of United States involvement in the Caribbean and Central America .
 Students assume the role of advocates of three options faced by the Kennedy administration . Students also simulate the 1962 missile crisis in a simulation set in October .
 The fourth day contains an exercise that explores the Cuban point of view about the crisis . The exercise is a four-day look at the crisis in Cuba .
 An optional lesson examines the role of the letters exchanged between Nikita Khrushchev and John F Kennedy during the crisis . The lessons focus on the letter exchange between the two men .
 An optional lesson provides insight into the U.S., Soviet, Cuban, and UN points of view through a simulated diplomatic exercise . An additional optional lesson is available online .
 Students examine U.S.-Cuban relations since the missile crisis . Finally, on the fifth day, students examine the relationship between the two countries .
 Each section of background reading is accompanied by two distinct study guides . Each section has a separate study guide for background reading .
 The standard study guide is designed to help students harvest the information provided in the background readings . Students will be able to tackle analysis and synthesis within classroom activities .
 Advanced study guide requires the student to tackle analysis and synthesis prior to class activities . The advanced study guide is available to students from around the world .
 This provides additional information on key concepts of particular importance . This provides information about key concepts that are important to understand .
 The class periods are designed for traditional class periods of approximately fifty minutes . They are designed to be about fifty minutes long .
 We hope that these suggestions help you in tailoring the unit to fit the needs of your classroom .
 Considering its Place in Cold War History might fit into your curriculum . Consider it in your curriculum. Consider it as an example of the Cold War era .
 The crisis affords a glimpse into the decisionmaking process at the highest levels of United frontation . The crisis offers a glimpse of the decision-making process .
 The stratemerged as an international flashpoint and an egies, goals, and fears driving the foreign policies of many of the superpowers clearly emerge from the United States policymakers . U.S. policymakers are often obsessed with foreign policy .
 Place in Cold War History offers students a broader study of the crisis for insight into how the international consequences of nuclear weapons have reshaped the nature of inof the Cold War .
 The United States victory in the America, especially the Caribbean and Central Spanish-American War at the turn of the century America, has been inextricably intertwined with transformed the United States into an imperial the U.S. history .
 The acquisition of Puerto Rico, control cal system initially served as a model, and later over Cuba, and the subsequent opening of the as a yardstick, for the republics .
 Panama Canal created a new set of interests for Panama Canal . Economically, the region has been bound to the U.S. foreign policy . Panama Canal has been a source of interest for the United States .
 Proponents of naval might United States in the twentieth century by trade pressed for an expansion of the U.S. fleet and investment ties . Proponents for naval might in the United States pressed for expansion .
 Latin American businesses have largely circumence in the Caribbean Basin . The foreign policies of Latin America businesses strengthened their pres. Latin American countries have been largely circumcluded in the region .
 Even in the cultural anti-imperialist forces warned that the United sphere, United States influence has trickled down into the States was destined to acquire the worst features daily lives of Latin Americans . The U.S. is destined to become a part of the worst feature of daily lives
 Considering its Place in Cold War History offers students an introduction to the complex complex . Students will learn how our country’s relationship with imperialism in the Caribbean Basin ing cultures of the Western Hemisphere shaped the United States role in the world .
 Forming Small Groups—Divide the class into groups of three to four students . Forming small groups is the best way to form a small group .
 Manifest Destiny: Panama Canal Panama Canal Spanish-American War Roosevelt Corollary . United Fruit Company Platt Amendment: Monroe Doctrine Good Neighbor Policy 2. 2.
 Groups must prepare two-to-three minute presentations on their topics . Use background reading, textbooks and other information sources to prepare presentations .
 Call on group spokespersons to make their presentations to the class . After students have completed their preparations, call on group leaders to present .
 Students should focus on drawing connections among eight topics under consideration . Students should also focus on making connections among the eight topics .
 Students to summarize main points from presentation of each group . Require students to summarize the main points of the presentation .
 List two reasons the United States took an interest in the Caribbean and Central America . List two of the reasons the U.S. took interest in Central America in the region .
 List of four territories acquired by the United States at the end of the Spanish-American War . List of territories acquired during the war . List includes four territories from the Spanish American War .
 United Fruit Company became known as “The Octopus’s” for its exploitation of much of the Caribbean . The company became known for its fruit production in the 1950s and 1960s .
 You should prepare a two-to-three minute presentation on your topic for the class .
 Your presentation should explain how your topic is connected to the overall role of the United States in the Caribbean and Central America . The presentation should also explain how the U.S. is in the region .
 Forming Small Groups—Divide the class into groups of four or five students . Forming small groups is the best way to form a small group .
 The United States, Cuba, and the Soviet Union have been involved in the Cold War . Assign to each group the role of the U.S., Cuba, or Soviet Union .
 Students should respond to the questions from the perspective of their assigned country in early October 1962 . Emphasize that students should respond from the perspectives of the country .
 After the groups have answered the discussion questions, ask them to share their responses with the entire class . Clarifying Positions will be required .
 Preparing for the Roleplay, form student groups before the start of Day Two .
 There should be a student group for each of the three options; another group should represent President Kennedy . There should also be a group of students representing President Kennedy.
 During the class period on Day Two, students will be preparing for the Day Three simulation . Students will have to prepare for the simulation .
 Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and “Options in Brief” in the student text as well as their assigned option . Students should also read ‘October 1962’ and ‘November 1962”
 The group representing President Kennedy should read all three options in full . President Kennedy's office should read the options in order to defend his legacy .
 You should complete this worksheet from the perspective of your assigned country . Use this workheet to test your knowledge of the countries you are in the United States .
 Cuba strengthened ties with the Soviet Union after the Bay of Pigs invasion . Explain why Cuba strengthened its ties with Russia in the wake of the invasion .
 The struggle with the _____________, known as the _______ War, caused the U.S. to be more concerned about _________________ in the Caribbean and Central America than about _______________ reform .
 List two reasons why the United Fruit Company was upset with Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz . List two of the reasons for the U. Fruit Company's anger with the Guatemalan president . List one of those reasons: "I'm going to sue the president"
 List two reasons why the U.S. government is concerned about Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz . List of reasons for concern: Guatemala's president and his wife .
 List five characteristics of life in Cuba during the government of Fulgencio Batista . List of Cuba's life during the Batista government .
 List two reasons that Fidel Castro had for believing the U.S. would invade Cuba . List two of the reasons he believed the United States would invade the country .
 Political pressure at home was mounting in _________ for Kennedy to __________ ________ against ___________ revolution and the threat of _______________ in Latin America . Kennedy was pressured to  ________ against _____________ revolution and ____________ revolution .
 Form student groups before beginning Day Two . Planning for Group Work can save time in the classroom .
 During the class period, students will be preparing for the Day Three simulation . Students will also prepare for the simulation .
 2a. Remind them to incorporate the background reading into their presentations and questions . 2b. 2b: Include background reading in your presentation and questions about the background .
 Each option group will be called upon in Day Three to present the case for its assigned option to the president . Inform students that each option group is called upon to present their case for their assigned option .
 Note that the option groups should begin by assigning each member a role . Note that each member of the group should be assigned a role to each other .
 2b. Ask the option groups to design a poster or a political cartoon illustrating the best case for their options . 2b . Ask them to design posters or political cartoons to illustrate their best case of their options.
 The remainder of the class will represent the role of President Kennedy . President Kennedy will be represented by the remainder .
 Students playing the role of the president should develop cross-examination questions for Day Three . Cross-examined questions should be developed for students playing the president .
 Remind students that they are expected to turn in their questions at the end of the simulation . Remind them that they should turn in questions at end of simulation .
 In smaller classes, other teachers or administrators may be invited to play the role of President Kennedy .
 Your assignment is to persuade President Kennedy and other ExComm members that your option should be the basis for the U.S. response to Cuba and the Soviet Union . Your task is to convince President Kennedy that your choice should be a basis for a response to Russia and Cuba .
 Each member of your group will take a specific role and participate in the presentation . The presentation will be divided into groups of people .
 Your job is to explain the option of your group to the president in a three-to-five minute presentation . Your job: Explain the options of your groups in a 3 to five-minute presentation .
 In making a presentation, you will receive help from other members of your group . In making your presentation, the presentation will be presented by others .
 Keep in mind, though, that you are expected to take the lead in organizing your group . Take the lead, but remember that it's important to be in the lead .
 Carefully read your option and review the background reading to build a strong case for your option . Carefully review your background reading and support your choice .
 Your job is to explain why your option best addresses the security challenges facing the U.S. in Cuba . Your job: Explain why your choice best addresses security challenges .
 Carefully read your option and then review the background reading and the option . Carefully review your options and read your background reading before taking action .
 Make sure that your area of expertise is reflected in the presentation of your group . The presentation should be based on your expertise .
 Your job is to explain why your option best serves the interests of the U.S. in its relationship with the Soviet Union . Your job: Explain why your choice best serves your interests in the United States .
 Your job is to explain how the lessons of history justify the position of your option . Your job: Explain how history justifies your choice .
 Your group will deliver a three-to-five minute presentation to the president and other members of ExComm .
 Notes may be used, but each group member should speak clearly and convincingly . Notes may not be used in this article . Use this article to help students understand each other's perspective .
 During the presentations, you should try to identify the weak points of the other options . You should also identify the weaknesses of each other .
 After all of the groups have presented their options, members of ExComm will ask you crossexamination questions . ExComm members will also ask you questions about crosseamination .
 Any member of your group may respond during the cross-examination period . The question is whether or not you will be able to answer .
 The deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba is the most serious crisis of the Cold War to date, says CNN's John Sutter . "As you know, the deployment of [Soviet] missiles in [Cuba's] Cuba is a serious crisis to date," he says .
 These presentations will introduce you to three distinct approaches to the U.S. response to these missiles . The presentations will be presented at 9 p.m. ET (GMT) on Monday .
 The decision faced by the president is a serious one and of vital importance to the safety of the nation . The decision was made by President Barack Obama, the president's spokesman said .
 Each of you should prepare two questions regarding each of the options . Your assignment is to prepare for the presentation of each option .
 Your teacher will call on you and your fellow committee members to ask questions . After their presentations, your teacher will ask them questions .
 The “Evaluation Form” you will receive is designed for you to record your impressions of the option . You will receive a “form” that includes an evaluation form . The form is designed to help you understand the value of an option .
 After this activity is concluded, you may be called upon to explain your evaluation of the option . Use this information to help students understand your options .
 Organize the room so that the three option groups face a row of desks reserved for the group representing President Kennedy . Set the stage for the Kennedy-Kennedy debate .
 Instruct members of that group to fill out the first part of their “Evaluation Form” during the course of the period . Instruct members to fill in the form during the time .
 The simulation will begin with threeto-five minute presentations by each option group . The simulation begins with a presentation by each of the options .
 Following the presentations, invite members of the group representing President Kennedy to ask cross-examination questions . Guiding Discussion: Invite members of Kennedy's group to ask questions .
 Make sure that each member of this group has an opportunity to ask at least one question . Ask your questions at the end of the interview .
 The questions should be evenly distributed among all three option groups . The question should be distributed among the three groups .
 If time permits, encourage members of the option groups to challenge the positions of the other groups, and invite comments from the regional representatives . The option groups are encouraged to challenge their positions .
 Ask students to compare the styles of the two Khrushchev letters . Reviewing the Letters .
 The first letter has a more personal, emotional tone, as well as a style that is often rambling and disjointed . Note that the first letter is more personal than the first .
 In contrast, Khrushchev states his case much more directly and succinctly in the second letter . In contrast to the letter he states his position in the first letter, the second in which he states it more directly .
 Call on students to identify the most meaningful paragraphs of the letters . Students should identify what they think is the most significant paragraph of letters .
 Most important are paragraphs 16, 22, and 25 in the October 26 letter, and paragraphs 6, 7, 10, 12, and 13 in the Oct. 27 letter .
 Students weigh the relative strengths and weaknesses of the United States and the Soviet Union at the time of the missile crisis . Student Responses: How do students weigh the U.S. and Soviet Union's relative strengths?
 Most ExComm members did not believe Khrushchev would accept Kennedy’s proposal . Remind students that most ExComm . members believed Kennedy would accept the proposal .
 Ask students to assume Khrushchev's perspective in considering Kennedy’s response . Ask students how they would react to the events of the day .
 Ask students to identify crucial junctures after the U.S. imposed a blockade . Identify the crucial moments after the blockade .
 Castro pushed for five-point agreement that he pushed for eventually came about . Castro had pushed for the agreement, but it was ultimately reached .
 Students complete exercise “Understanding/Exploring the Cuban Point of View . Ask some students to share their letter to President Kennedy to the class .
 Students to identify important discoveries made by historians since the end of the Cold War . Invite students to identify the important discoveries by historians . New Revelations: Discoveries made by Cold War historians .
 Ask each of the option groups how this new knowledge might have affected their presentation to the president . Ask each other how this information might have helped their presentation .
 The missile crisis and the fear of nuclear war had a profound effect on American popular culture . The fear of a nuclear war in the U.S. was a profound part of American culture .
 Bob Dylan’s song ”A Hard Rains A-Gonna Fall’ and others captured the mood in popular music . Bob Dylan's song ‘A Hard Rain’ was the subject of many popular songs .
 The first letter arrived in Washington the evening of October 26, 1962 . It was the first letter to the White House from President Richard Nixon .
 A second letter arrived the morning of October 27 . Kennedy and his advisers had time to respond to the first letter .
 Fidel Castro never wrote President Kennedy a letter during the missile crisis . President Kennedy never wrote a letter to Fidel Castro during the crisis . Fidel Castro was president of Cuba in 1961 .
 For this assignment, you are to imagine yourself in Castro’s shoes and write to President Kennedy .
 You will be evaluated on your ability to make a compelling case about the history of U.S.-Cuban relations .
 President Kennedy would like to explain to you the reasons, as I see them, for the current difficulties between the U.S. and Cuba .
 On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a _________________ —or _______________ — of Cuba by the United States Navy . The U.S. Navy wanted to prevent further shipments of ___________________ supplies to the island .
 What two organizations did the U.S. turn to in response to the missiles in Cuba? What did the United States turn to? The U.N. didn't want missiles from Cuba, it wanted them from Cuba .
 List two military steps the U.S. took in response to the missiles in Cuba . List of military steps taken by the United States. List of the steps taken in Cuba.
 In 1962, the U.S. knew that there were nuclear warheads in Cuba . The United States knew that Cuba had nuclear weapons in Cuba, but never knew more .
 The U.S. knew for sure that the Soviets exercised complete control over the missile sites in Cuba . The United States knew that the Soviet Union had control of the sites .
 Robert F Kennedy made two points to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . List two points that Robert F. Kennedy made to Anatoly Doyrynin. List two of those points .
 Students identify significant events in U.S.-Cuban relations since the end of the missile crisis . Ask students to identify the significant events that have occurred in the past .
 Following the defeat of Hitler in 1945, Soviet-U.S. relations began to deteriorate . After the defeat, relations between the two countries deteriorated .
 A form of socialism that for adopted a policy of containing the spread of much of the twentieth century was in Soviet communism around the world . The Soviet communism led competition with capitalism .
 Karl Marx and Friedrich Vietnam. In their 1848 book, to, among other things, U.S. involvement in the Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx . Karl Marx. Vietnam .
 Engels outlined a form of scientific socialism in the Soviet Union and the United States devoted resources to their military but never engaged in against capitalist exploitation . During this period, both the Soviet Engels and the U.S. devoted vast resources to the military but not to the fight against capitalism .
 Lenin adapted and added to Marx’s ideas in the Soviet Union and the United States . Lenin adapted to Marx's ideas in both Soviet and American versions .
 Nearly every foreign policy on Cuba was examined for its potential impact on U.S.-Soviet relations . Castro nuclear weapons and were in competition attempted to impose a Marxist-Leninist system around the world .
 A strong devotion and loyalty to Cold War in the early 1990s forced policymakers to act in the interest of one’s country and people . A strong loyalty to the Cold War forced policymakers the interests of one's country, people .
 Strong to struggle to define a new guiding purpose for nationalist feelings were behind the U.S. decision their foreign policy. to go to war with Spain and behind the revolution in Cuba. Strong .
 Socialism is the policy of extending the rule of a nation over foreign countries as well as Socialism . Socialism is a political and economic acquiring colonies and dependencies . The policy is to extend the rule over foreign nations .
 Supporters of U.S. are distributed subject to social control rather imperialism . Supporters used several different arguments to than individual or market forces to advocate their point of view .
 The freedom of a state to govern stressed the importance of naval power for the itself without outside interference, the author says .
 Castro U.S. objected to UN inspections of the missile sites on This meant that the United States would need to . acquire and maintain naval bases around the . sovereignty globe . Castro United States’ physical and . economic security .
 The institutions and organizations of nations and people in which only the fittest government is in power . The institutions, organizations and organizations, are only institutions and people that only need to have a government .
 Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and the Options in Brief in the background reading Day 2 . Assign each student one of the three options, and allow a few minutes for students to familiarize themselves with the mindsets of the options .
 Students should evaluate the benefits and trade-offs of assigned options . Call on students to evaluate their assigned options and evaluate their options .
 With careful preparation, guidance, and practice significant gains can be made quickly . But with careful preparation and guidance, it can't be achieved quickly .
 No single recipe guarantees success with cooperative learning or the Choices approach in every classroom . Choices is not a single recipe for success in cooperative learning, says the author .
 Each classroom differs in size and size, and its unique collection of personalities and needs . That would be impossible, since each classroom is different and unique .
 The suggested ingredients that follow have been drawn from educational research on student-centered instruction . Teachers who have used Choices curricula successfully in their classrooms .
 Educators who have questions about using Choices curricula in their classrooms are encouraged to contact the Choices Education Project in writing or calling 8633155 .
 Choices staff includes experienced classroom teachers who will be pleased to speak with you . The Choices team includes experienced teachers who are passionate about classroom teaching .
 The key to successful cooperative group work is having a group assignment that is complex enough to require the participation of all group members . The group assignment must be complex enough for all members to participate in .
 Planning the size and composition of working groups in advance is crucial to the successful use of Choices curricula curricula . Planning is key to the success of the Choices curriculum .
 Research indicates that the ideal size for a cooperative learning group is four or five students . The ideal size of a cooperative group is 4 or 5 students, research shows .
 This is certainly the ideal size for group assignments in Choices units . This is the perfect size for Choices groups .
 When using Choices units in larger classes, the size of the option groups may be expanded to six or seven students .
 It is important to keep in mind that whenever the number of students in a group is increased, the roles and expected outcomes must also be expanded . However, it is important .
 A strength of cooperative learning is that it creates opportunities for students to work together in new combinations on challenging tasks . Cooperative learning is a strength that creates opportunities to students to learn together, say experts .
 Cooperative learning not only requires the academic skills of reading, writing, and critical thinking . It also requires the interpersonal skills of communication, negotiation, and problem-solving . Cooperative learning requires the use of communication and negotiation skills to succeed .
 In most cases, this style of instruction and learning is most effective when students are assigned to groups by the teacher rather than being allowed to work with friends .
 While random group selection can be effective, in most classes successful group composition requires that the teacher consider the personalities, strengths, and needs of the students .
 Groups comprised of students with diverse strengths, talents, and needs are ideal . Groups of students are ideal groups of students who come from diverse backgrounds .
 Students might be assigned to different groups to share their talents and perspectives . Less verbal students could be placed in groups with more outgoing students to help draw them into the lesson .
 Whenever possible, teachers should try to prevent one student from dominating a group, they say . Teachers should also try to stop students from dominating groups .
 Explaining instructions, roles, and ground rules for cooperative learning helps prevent this . Explaining the instructions and roles of a child is essential to learning .
 Teachers may choose to group aggressive students with each other, leaving room in other groups for less assertive students to emerge .
 The negotiation of roles among students in a group can be a valuable part of the cooperative learning experience . Teachers might choose to assign certain roles in order to encourage leadership from more reticent students .
 Students may initially complain about being assigned to groups that do not include their closest friends . Students may also complain about having a group that doesn't include them .
 At the end of the assignment, people will usually express satisfaction with their assigned partners, recognize that they got more accomplished, and sometimes even acknowledge the start of new friendships .
 The additional time involved in planning group size and composition will pay off when students are actively engaged in debating, debating, and thinking critically .
 These should be given to students in writing and reviewed with the class . These should also be reviewed with class .
 Students should refer to the written instructions and attempt to answer each other’s questions before asking for help . Afterwards, as questions arise within groups, students should try to answer them with the help of the teacher .
 Students benefit from the establishment of ground rules that are explained before groups are formed . Ground rules should be established before groups form, especially in cooperative learning .
 Ground rules must be kept simple, and should be designed to keep students involved and on task . Ground rules need to be made simple and keep students on task. Ground rules should be simple and easy for students to understand .
 Posting these rules in a prominent place in the classroom can be very effective . Posting them in prominent places in classrooms can be a big success .
 Everybody has a role Nobody dominates Everybody participates Everybody participates Nobody interrupts Nobody interrupts These rules can be enforced by appointing one student to serve as the group manager .
 The teacher can make it clear that one of the group manager’s responsibilities is to enforce the ground rules as the group explores its assigned option .
 The group manager might also be required to make sure that members of the group stay on task and attempt to solve problems before asking for the teacher's assistance .
 Ground rules that are clear and used consistently can, over time, become an integral component of the classroom, facilitating learning and keeping students on task . Ground rules can be used consistently to keep students on track .
 At the heart of the Choices approach is the role-play simulation in which students advocate different options, question each other, and debate each other . Students are encouraged to take part in the simulation .
 Planning for the presentations and debate can increase the effectiveness of the simulation . Just as thoughtful preparation is necessary to set the stage for cooperative group learning .
 A minimum of 45 to 50 minutes is necessary for the presentations and debate . The debates will take between 45 and 50 minutes to complete .
 If only one class period is available, student groups must be ready as soon as class begins . Students must also be ready to be ready for the next period of class .
 Teachers who have been able to schedule a double period or extend the length of class to one hour report that the extra time is beneficial to students .
 When necessary, the role-play simulation can be run over two days, but this disrupts the momentum of the debate . The simulation is run over the course of two days in a row .
 The best strategy for managing the role-play is to establish and enforce strict time limits, such as five minutes for each option presentation, ten minutes for questions and challenges .
 It is crucial to make students aware of strict time limits as they prepare their presentations . Students should be aware of the time limits when preparing presentations .
 During the debate and debriefing, it is important to highlight the role of values in the options . The debate is important for the debate to be focused on values .
 Students should be instructed to identify the core values and priorities underlying the different options . Students should also identify the values of each option .
 The “Expressing Key Values” worksheet is designed to help students incorporate the values into their group presentations . The worksheet includes a worksheet that helps students incorporate their values into presentations .
 Students are expected to articulate their own views of the issue under consideration . This is a culminating activity of a Choices unit .
 An effective way to move beyond the options debate to create individual options is to have students consider which values in the options framework they hold most dear . Students should also consider what values they hold more dear .
 Students will hold several of these values simultaneously . Students will need to prioritize them to reach a considered judgment about the issue .
 These values should be reflected in their own options and should shape the goals and policies they advocate . These values are reflected in the policies and goals of the candidates for Congress .
 In larger classes, additional roles can be assigned to increase student participation . Additional roles, such as a reporter or member of a special interest group, can also be assigned .
 With larger option groups, additional tasks might be to create a poster, political cartoon, or public service announcement that represents the viewpoint of an option .
 In smaller classes, the teacher can serve as the moderator of the debate . Administrators, parents, or faculty can be invited to play the roles of congressional leaders .
 Research suggests that it is counterproductive to give students individual grades on cooperative group assignments . Students should not be given individual grades, research suggests .
 A significant part of the assignment given to the group is to cooperate in achieving a common goal, as opposed to looking out for individual interests . The assignment is to help the group achieve their goals and achieve a common objective .
 Telling students in advance that the group will receive one grade often motivates group members to hold each other accountable . Telling a group member that they will receive a grade motivates them to hold them accountable .
 Students complete individual assignments as well in every Choices unit . It may be useful to note that in addition to the cooperative group assignments, students complete individual assignment .
 The “Assessment Guide for Oral Presentations” is designed to help teachers evaluate group presentations . This page includes an assessment guide for oral presentations .
 Having students complete self-evaluations is an effective way to make them think about their own learning . Self-evaluation is an extremely effective way of teaching students to think about learning .
 Self-evaluations can take many forms and are useful in a variety of circumstances . Self-evaluateing is a form of self-evaluation that can be useful in many ways .
 They are particularly helpful in getting students to think constructively about group collaboration . They are especially helpful in teaching students how to work constructively .
 In developing a self-evaluation tool for students, teachers need to pose clear and direct questions to students . Teachers need to ask students what they think they need to do to develop a self evaluation tool .
 Two key benefits of student self-evaluation are that it involves students in the assessment process, and that it provides teachers with valuable insights into the contributions of individual students .
 These insights can help teachers organize groups for future cooperative assignments . These insights will help teachers to organize groups of students .
 The most important outcomes of a Choices unit are the original options developed and articulated by each student . The Choices Unit is based on original options from each student's original options .
 Students will identify different values and priorities that shape their viewpoints . These will differ significantly from one another, as students identify different priorities .
 These options cannot be graded as right or wrong, but should be evaluated on clarity of expression, logic, and thoroughness . These options can be graded on clarity, logic and logic, according to experts .
 Students using Choices learned the factual information presented as well as or better than students who were taught in a more traditional lecture-discussion format .
 Students using Choices demonstrated significantly higher ability to think critically, analyze multiple perspectives, compared to students who did not use this approach . However, the larger benefits of the Choices approach were evident when students using it were using it more effectively .
 Teachers should hold students accountable for learning historical information, concepts, and current events presented in Choices units . Teachers should also hold students responsible for learning history and concepts .
 A simple multiple-choice examination will not allow students to demonstrate critical thinking and communication skills developed through the Choices unit . However, a simple multiple choice exam will not let students demonstrate the critical thinking .
 Teachers may wish to explore new models of test design that require students to do more than recognize correct answers . If teachers choose to test students, they may .
 The presentation reflected 5 4 3 2 1 analysis of the issues under consideration 3. 3. 2. 2 . 3. 4. 4 . 4. 5. 5 . 4 . 5 . 3 . 5. 3 .
 The group incorporated 5 4 3 2 1 relevant sections of the background reading into its presentation 5. 5. 4. 4 . 4 . 5. 3 . 4. 5 . 4 4 .
 The group’s presenters spoke 5 4 3 2 1 clearly, maintained eye contact, and made an effort to hold the attention of their audience 6.5 . The group's presenters also made an attempt to hold their audience's attention 6 .
 The presentation incorporated 5 4 3 2 1 contributions from all the members of the group . Individual Assessment 1.
 The student was well-prepared 5 4 3 2 1 to meet his or her responsibilities 3. 4. 3. 3 . 3. 5. 5 4 . 3 . 5 . 4 . 4. 5 .
 For $15, you add 7% for shipping and handling . You also receive a reproducible student text and a teacher’s resource book .