 Thomas O'Neill, Jr. was a member of Massachusetts's 11th district from 1947 to 1953 . He served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 - 1953 .
 Kennedy represented Massachusetts's 11th congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 as a Democrat . Kennedy was commander of the Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 during World War II in the South Pacific .
 He served in the United States Senate from 1953 until 1960 . Thereafter, he was elected to the Senate in 1953 .
 President Kennedy defeated then Vice President and Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the 1960 U.S. presidential election . Kennedy defeated Vice President Richard Nixon .
 He was the youngest elected to the office, at the age of 43, the second-youngest President and the first president to have been born in the 20th Century . He was also the first President to be born in 20th century .
 Kennedy is the only Catholic and the first Irish American president . Kennedy is also the only president to have won a Pulitzer Prize and won a Catholic Pulitzer Prize .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was charged with the crime but was shot and killed two days later by Jack Ruby before any trial . Jack Ruby shot Oswald in the head after he was accused of the crime . Oswald was shot dead by Ruby before a trial before he could stand trial .
 The FBI, the Warren Commission, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Oswald was the assassin . The HSCA allowed for the probability of conspiracy based on disputed acoustic evidence .
 Kennedy continues to rank highly in public opinion ratings of former U.S. presidents . Today, Kennedy remains a highly popular figure .
 Early life, education, military career and Congressional career . Military service, Congressional service, congressional career . Congressional career, legislative career, and more .
 Administration, Cabinet and judicial appointments 1961–1963 7. Funeral 7 . Administration . Cabinet . appointments . 1961-1963 .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born at 83 Beals Street in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, 1917 . He was the second son of Joseph P Kennedy, Sr., and Rose Fitzgerald . Rose, in turn, was the eldest child of John ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, a prominent
 Kennedy lived in Brookline for ten years and attended Edward Devotion School, Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School, through 4th grade . Kennedy lived there for 10 years and went to Noble, Greenough and Dexter School .
 Kennedy spent summers with his family at their home in Hyannisport, Massachusetts, and Christmas and Easter holidays at their winter home in Palm Beach, Florida, Florida .
 For the 5th through 7th grade, Kennedy attended Riverdale Country School, a private school for boys . Kennedy attended the school for five to seven years .
 For 8th grade in 1930, Kennedy attended Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut . Kennedy was the 13-year-old in September 1930 .
 In late April 1931, he had appendicitis requiring an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home .
 In September 1931, Kennedy was sent to The Choate School in Wallingford, Connecticut, for his 9th through 12th grade years . Kennedy attended the school for nine to 12 years .
 His older brother Joe Jr., was already at Choate, two years ahead of him, a football star and leading student in the school . Joe Jr. was already a football player and a leading student at the school.
 Jack spent his first years at Choate in his brother's shadow, and compensated for this with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie . Jack's rebellious behavior attracted a group of friends .
 Their most notorious stunt was to explode a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker .
 The defiant Jack Kennedy took the cue and named his group ""The Muckers Club" The group included roommate and friend Kirk LeMoyne ""Lem"" Billings .
 While at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems, culminating in 1934 with an emergency hospitalization at Yale New Haven Hospital . Kennedy was hospitalized at the end of his career .
 In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota and diagnosed with colitis . He was admitted in June 1934 .
 In September 1935, he made his first trip abroad, with his parents and sister Kathleen, to London, with the intent of studying at the London School of Economics as his older brother Joe had done .
 He was hospitalized for two months of observation for possible leukemia at a Boston hospital . He was then hospitalized for possible cancer treatment .
 He convalesced further at the Kennedy winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on a 40,000-acre cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona .
 He tried out for the football, golf, and swim teams and earned a spot on the varsity swim team . He also earned a place on the football and golf teams .
 In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France, with his convertible on board, and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings . Kennedy's convertible was driven by Billings for ten weeks in Europe .
 In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas to work with his father, Roosevelt's U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. Louis . Kennedy's father was Roosevelt's United States Ambassador .
 In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis . Kennedy toured the Balkans and the Balkans as part of his thesis .
 He returned to London on September 1, 1939, the day Germany invaded Poland . He then went to Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London .
 On September 3, 1939, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany . The family was also in London for speeches supporting the declaration of the war on the Germans .
 In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, ""Appeasement in Munich,"" about British participation in the Munich Agreement . Kennedy was a member of the British government in Munich .
 He initially intended his thesis to be private, but his father encouraged him to publish it . He said he initially intended to keep it private .
 He graduated cum laude from Harvard with a degree in international affairs . His thesis was published that year as a book entitled Why England Slept, and became a bestseller .
 Kennedy enrolled and audited classes at the Stanford Graduate School of Business . Kennedy is a graduate of the Graduate Business Administration at Stanford .
 In early 1941, he helped his father complete the writing of a memoir of his three years as an American ambassador . He then traveled throughout South America, traveling with him .
 An ensign was an ensign serving in the office of the Secretary of the Navy when the attack on Pearl Harbor occurred . Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 Kennedy was an officer in the Navy .
 He then attended the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps and Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Training Center . He earned the rank of lieutenant, commanding a patrol torpedo boat .
 PT-109, along with PT-162 and PT-169, were ordered to continue nighttime patrol near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands . It was rammed by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri in August 1943 .
 Kennedy stated, "There's nothing in the book about a situation like this" Kennedy stated that there was nothing in his book about the situation .
 Kennedy, despite re-injury to his back in the collision, towed a badly burned crewman through the water with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth . Kennedy, who was injured in the crash, was able to pull the badly burned man through the waters .
 He towed the wounded man to the island and later to a second island from where his crew was rescued . The wounded man was later towed to another island where he was rescued by his crew .
 Lieutenant Kennedy swam many hours to secure aid and food after he had succeeded in getting his crew ashore . Unmindful of personal danger, Lieutenant Kennedy bravely braved the difficulties and hazards of darkness to direct rescue operations .
 His "outstanding courage, endurance and leadership contributed to the saving of several lives," he said . "His outstanding courage" was in keeping with the highest traditions of the U.S. Naval Service, he added .
 In October 1943, Kennedy took command of a PT boat converted into a gun boat, PT-59 . In November, he took part in a Marine rescue on Choiseul Island .
 Kennedy was honorably discharged in early 1945, just prior to Japan's surrender . Kennedy was honored for his service in the war .
 Kennedy's other decorations in World War II included the Purple Heart, American Defense Service Medal, American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with three bronze service stars . Kennedy also received the World War War II Victory Medal .
 In 1946, James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strong Democratic 10th Congressional district in Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston . Curley was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1946 .
 Kennedy ran for the seat, beating his Republican opponent by a large margin . This, despite not having previously included politics in his career planning . Kennedy won the seat despite not previously having previously considered politics .
 In 1952, he defeated incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. for the United States Senate . He was elected to the U.S. Senate .
 Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the following two years . The following year he was married to wife Jacqueline . He was often absent from the Senate .
 During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about U.S. Senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, which received the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957 . He died at the age of 92 .
 At the 1956 Democratic National Convention, Kennedy was nominated for Vice President, for the presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson, but finished second in that balloting to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee . Rumors that this work was co-authored by his close adviser and speechwriter
 Kennedy received national exposure from that episode . His father thought it just as well that his son lost, due to the political debility of his Catholicism and the strength of the Eisenhower ticket .
 Kennedy cast a procedural vote on a bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957 . The vote was considered by some as an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill . Kennedy also cast a vote on Eisenhower's bill for civil rights .
 Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin . Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure .
 Many civil rights advocates at the time criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act . Civil rights advocates say that vote would have weakened the law .
 A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957 . Kennedy supported the bill, and it was passed by September 1957.
 In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate . He defeated his Republican opponent, Vincent J Celeste, by a wide margin .
 Joseph McCarthy was a friend of the Kennedy family . Joseph Kennedy, Sr. was a leading McCarthy supporter . Robert F Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee .
 In 1954, when the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, Kennedy had drafted, but not delivered, a speech supporting the censure, but was in the hospital . Kennedy was in a hospital when McCarthy was censured in 1954 .
 Though absent, he could have participated procedurally by ""pairing"" his vote against that of another senator, but did not do so . He could have done so by voting against another senator .
 On January 2, 1960, Kennedy initiated his campaign for President in the Democratic primary election . He faced challenges from Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota and Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon .
 Kennedy defeated Humphrey in Wisconsin and West Virginia, Morse in Maryland and Oregon . Kennedy defeated Morse in New Hampshire, Indiana, and Nebraska, as well as token opposition .
 Kennedy made a point of visiting a coal mine in West Virginia . Most miners and others in that predominantly conservative state were quite wary of Kennedy's Roman Catholicism .
 "The New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises," says President Obama . But the New Frontier is not just promises, but challenges, he says . "It is a new frontier of challenges," says Obama .
 With Humphrey and Morse eliminated, Kennedy's main opponent at the Los Angeles convention was Senator Lyndon B Johnson of Texas . Kennedy was defeated in 1960 .
 Kennedy overcame this formal challenge as well as informal ones from Adlai Stevenson and Stuart Symington . Kennedy was nominated at the Democratic convention on July 13, 1956 .
 Kennedy asked Johnson to be his Vice Presidential candidate, despite opposition from many liberal delegates and Kennedy's own staff . Kennedy's staff, including brother Robert. Robert. Kennedy, said Johnson would be his VP candidate .
 Johnson needed Johnson's strength in the South to win the election . It was considered likely to be the closest election since 1916 . Johnson won the South in a landslide .
 Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Cuba, and whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the United States . Kennedy famously told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association that he was not Catholic .
 In September and October, Kennedy appeared with Republican candidate Richard Nixon, then Vice President, in the first televised United States presidential debates in U.S. history . Kennedy appeared in the debates with Nixon, who was the Vice President .
 During these programs, Nixon, with a sore injured leg and his ""five o'clock shadow"", looked tense, uncomfortable, and perspiring . Kennedy, choosing to avail himself of makeup services, appeared relaxed, leading the huge television audience to favor Kennedy as the winner .
 Radio listeners either thought Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw . Radio listeners thought Nixon's victory was a draw or a victory .
 The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history . They are considered a point at the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics .
 After the first debate Kennedy's campaign gained momentum and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls . Kennedy's presidential campaign took off momentum after the debate .
 On Tuesday, November 8, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century .
 14 electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement . They voted for Senator Harry F Byrd of Virginia . Another 14 electors voted for Byrd, who was a Democrat .
 John F Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th President at noon on January 20, 1961 . He was sworn into office on that date .
 Kennedy brought to the White House a stark contrast in organization compared to the decision making structure of the former general, Eisenhower . Kennedy wasted no time in dismantling the decision-making structure of Eisenhower; .
 Kennedy preferred the organizational structure of a wheel, with all the spokes leading to the president . Kennedy preferred to the organization structure of an organization wheel . Kennedy prefers the organization to a wheel .
 He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment . He did a monumental job of selecting his cabinet and other appointments, some experienced and some not .
 President Kennedy announced in cabinet meeting, without prior notice, that Edward Lansdale would be Ambassador to South Vietnam, a decision which Secretary of State Rusk later had Kennedy alter .
 There was also the appointment of Harris Wofford who was summoned and arrived at the White House for swearing in without knowing his new role .
 He quickly agreed to a balanced budget pledge when this was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda . Much to the chagrin of his economic advisors who wanted him to reduce taxes, he
 The president insisted on a focus upon immediate and specific issues facing the administration . He quickly voiced his impatience with ponderings of deeper meanings .
 President Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American-Soviet confrontations in the early stage of the Cold War .
 Charles de Gaulle advised Kennedy to ignore the abrasive style of Khrushchev . On the way to the summit in Paris in June, Kennedy met de Gaulles in June .
 The French Prime Minister was nationalistic, and disdainful of the United States' presumed influence in Europe, in his talks with Kennedy . In his talks, he was dismissive of the U.S. in Europe .
 de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and family . De Gaulle's family was impressed by the president's family .
 On June 4, 1961 the president met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the Premier to bully him, despite warnings received .
 Khrushchev for his part was impressed with the president's intelligence but thought him weak . He was impressed by the intelligence of the Soviet Union leader .
 Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them . A proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin was proposed . The treaty was a proposed treaty .
 He made it clear that any such treaty which interfered with U.S. access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war .
 Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup with NATO allies as the appropriate response .
 The following month, the U.S. and East Berlin officials began blocking any further passage of East Berliners into West Berlin . Barbed wire fences across the city were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was erected in the following month .
 Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from West to East Berlin continued . Kennedy's first reaction to the situation was that it would not matter if it continued .
 This course was altered when it was learned that the West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the U.S. The course was changed when it became clear that the United States was not willing to defend their position .
 Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding America's conduct in the emerging Cold War . Johnson, along with a host of other military personnel, traveled in convoy through West Germany, including Soviet armed checkpoints .
 Eisenhower Administration created a plan to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba . Bay of Pigs Invasion was the first attempt to overthrow Castro's regime .
 Central to the plan was the arming of a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of anti-Castro Cuban exiles . U.S.-trained Cuban insurgents, led by CIA paramilitary officers were to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people .
 On April 17, 1961, Kennedy ordered the previously planned invasion of Cuba to proceed . The invasion was ordered by the President of the United States .
 1,500 U.S.-trained Cubans called ""Brigade 2506,"" returned to the island in the hope of deposing Castro . In what is known as the ""Bay of Pigs Invasion" 1,000 Cubans returned to Cuba in what is now known as
 In keeping with prior plans, no United States air support was provided . No U.S. air support is provided .
 As CIA director Allen Dulles said, they thought that once troops were on the ground any action required for success would be authorized by the president to prevent failure .
 By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles . Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors . The Cuban government eventually killed or captured 1, 189 survivors .
 Cuba released captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine . After twenty months, Cuba released exiles after twenty months . Cuba released the captured ex-cameras in exchange of food, medicine .
 The incident made Castro wary of the United States and led him to believe that another invasion would occur . The incident led Castro to believe another invasion of the U.S. would happen .
 Kennedy was convinced the plan was a set up to make him look bad when it failed . According to biographer Richard Reeves, Kennedy focused on the political repercussions of the plan rather than the military .
 Late in 1961 the White House formed the ""Special Group "", headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Sec. of the Department of Justice . The group was formed by the President of the United States .
 The group's objective was to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage and other covert tactics, never pursued . The group never pursued its objective .
 The deployment of these missiles had come to the attention of the intelligence community when Soviet shipments to Cuba began . The debate had ensued in the National Security Council as to whether the intended use of the weapons was offensive or defensive .
 The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16, 1962, and a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat . The missiles were seen to Kennedy in October 1962 .
 The U.S. would as well appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere . The United States. would . appear to be less committed . to the United States .
 There was some reaction from the international community that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of U.S. missiles placed in Turkey by Eisenhower .
 There also could be no assurance from the Council that the assault would be 100% effective . The Council could not guarantee that it would be fully effective .
 The United States Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24 . The U.S. Navy would inspect ships arriving in Cuba .
 Organization of American States gave unanimous support to remove missiles . Organization of America gave unanimous backing to removal of missiles . OAS gave unanimous approval .
 The president exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev to no avail . The letters were exchanged between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 UN Secretary General U Thant has requested both parties reverse their decisions and allow a cooling off period . UN secretary general U. Thant asked both parties to reverse their decision and allow the cooling period .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle missile sites subject to UN inspections . After one Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded, one of the missile sites was dismantled . The sites were subject to inspections by the UN .
 The United States publicly promised never to invade Cuba and agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The Jupiter missiles were at that time obsolete and had been supplanted by missile-equipped United States Navy Polaris subs .
 This crisis had brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point known before or since . This crisis was brought to an end with a nuclear war .
 The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the president's credibility, President Obama says . The crisis also improved the nation's image of willpower and credibility .
 Kennedy sought to contain communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress . Kennedy sought greater human rights standards in the region . He sent aid to troubled countries .
 He worked closely with Governor of Puerto Rico Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress, as well as developments in Puerto Rico autonomy .
 Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, has begun putting into place assassination plots in Cuba against Castro and in the Dominican Republic against Rafael Trujillo .
 Kennedy instructed the CIA privately that any such planning must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition . Kennedy told the CIA that any . such . planning must have plausible deniable .
 In June 1961 the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated . Robert Kennedy, substituting for his brother who was in France, called him a "gutless bastard" to his face .
 Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps as one of his first presidential acts . The Peace Corps was one of the first to be created by Kennedy .
 Through this program, Americans volunteer to help underdeveloped nations in areas such as education, farming, health care, and construction . Americans volunteer in the U.S. to help developing nations .
 The authorization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the following year . The authorization was authorized by the government in March 1963 .
 In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a ""free"" Laos to a ""neutral"" Laos . Kennedy voiced privately that Vietnam, not Laos, should be deemed America's tripwire for communism's spread in the area .
 Johnson assured Diem of more aid in molding a fighting force that could resist the Communists . Johnson promised Diem that more aid would be needed to defeat the Communist Party . Diem was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem in defeat of communism in South Vietnam . Kennedy initially followed Eisenhower's lead, by using limited military action to fight the Communist forces .
 Kennedy continued policies providing political, economic, and military support for the South Vietnamese government . Kennedy continued to provide support for Vietnam's government .
 Kennedy increased the number of helicopters, military advisors and undeclared United States Special Forces in the area . He was still reluctant to order a full scale deployment of troops .
 By July 1963, Kennedy faced a crisis in Vietnam . Despite increased U.S. support, the South Vietnamese military was only marginally effective against pro-Communist forces .
 Ngo Dinh Diem ordered South Vietnam forces, funded and trained by the CIA, into the temples to quell buddhist demonstrations . On August 21, just as the new U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge arrived, the new ambassador arrived in Vietnam .
 Lodge was instructed to try to get Diem and Nhu to step-down and out of the country . Lodge was told to get them to step down and get them out of country .
 Lodge was ordered to pressure Diem to remove his brother from Vietnam . Washington would no longer tolerate Nhu's actions . Nhu was removed from Vietnam in 1968 .
 Lodge replied that the only workable option was to get the South Vietnam generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu, as originally planned . Lodge replied to this contradictory cable, saying that the overthrow was necessary .
 Krulak said the military fight against the communists was progressing and being won . Mendenhall related that the country was civilly being lost to any U.S. influence . The United States is losing the country civilly to any United States influence .
 The president was unaware the two men were at such odds they did not speak on the return flight . McNamara and Gen. Gen. McNamara were appointed by the president in October 1963 .
 Maxwell D Taylor was sent to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy . The mission was part of an effort to coordinate information and policy .
 In meetings with McNamara, Taylor and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures insisted upon by the U.S., helping to dispel McNamara's optimism as to Diem .
 Nguyen Ngoc Tho in detailed terms obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside . The Vietnamese are now in control of the Vietnam War .
 In late October, intelligence wires again reported a coup of the Diem government was afoot . The final report also portrayed military progress, an increasingly unpopular Diem-led government .
 Kennedy's instructions to Lodge were to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination, but to ensure deniability by the United States . Later that month as the coup became imminent, Kennedy ordered all cables routed through him . Policy of ""control and cut out"" was initiated to insure presidential
 On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals led by ""Big Minh" overthrew the Diem government . They arrested and then killed Diem and his brother Nhu .
 Kennedy was shocked by the deaths and to find out afterwards that Minh had asked the CIA field office to secure safe passage out of the country for Diem and Nhu, but was told 24 hours was needed .
 Minh responded that he could not hold them that long and thus handed them a death sentence . Minh: "I'm not going to hold them for too long. I'm not sure what I'm going to do"
 McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas . Initially after news of the coup, there was renewed confidence in America and in Vietnam, that now the war might truly be won .
 It reiterated U.S. resolve to fight communism in Vietnam, with both military and economic aid at a higher level . The United States will continue to aid Vietnam, including operations in Laos and Cambodia .
 Historians disagree on whether Vietnam would have escalated to the point it did, had Kennedy survived . Kennedy survived and was re-elected in 1964 . Kennedy died in 1968 .
 Kennedy was strongly considering pulling out of Vietnam after the 1964 election . Kennedy and Johnson's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara made statements in the film, "The Fog of War", that Kennedy was considering withdrawing .
 The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position Johnson states he strongly disapproved .
 United States involvement in the region escalated until Lyndon Johnson, his successor, directly deployed regular U.S. military forces for fighting the Vietnam War .
 World peace, like community peace, does not require that each man love his neighbor it requires only that they live together in mutual tolerance . "Our problems are man-made therefore they can be solved by man," he said . "Peace is the necessary rational end of rational men," he
 The president also made two announcements that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty . The U.S. had postponed planned atmospheric tests, the president said .
 JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech was JFK's speech in 1963 . In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability, due to Soviet aggression to the east, and de Gaulle's French nationalism .
 On June 26, 1963, Kennedy visited West Berlin and gave a public speech reiterating American commitment to Germany and criticizing communism . He was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience .
 Israel Kennedy encountered problems with the Israeli government regarding the production of nuclear weapons in Dimona . Kennedy faced problems with Israel over production of the nuclear weapons at Dimona, Israel .
 Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes . Israel firmly resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to inspections .
 Seymour Hersh: Israelis set up false control rooms to show American inspectors . Hersh says Israel set up fake control rooms in order to show inspectors . The Israeli government is accused of trying to cover up what happened .
 The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should accept international supervision of its nuclear program . Israel's nuclear program is overseen by the U.N. State Department .
 Kennedy had tried to control the arms being sold and given to Israel because the Israelis would not sign the IAEA compacts for the Dimona nuclear site . Israel would not fully admit its purpose and continued to insist it was for peaceful energy purposes . Kennedy said the arms were being sold
 Director of State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Rodger P Davies, had concluded that Israel was developing nuclear weapons . Davies had concluded in March 1965 that Israel had developed nuclear weapons in Israel .
 He reported that the target date for acquisition of a nuclear capability by Israel was 1968-69 . The target date was Israel's acquisition of nuclear capability, he said .
 A science attache at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been 'purposely mothballed' to mislead American scientists during their visit .
 On May 1, 1968, President Johnson told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year . President Johnson said Dimona produced enough plutonium for two bombs per year .
 Attempts to write Israeli adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty into contracts for the supply of U.S. weapons continued throughout 1968 .
 In 1963, the Kennedy administration backed a coup against the government of Iraq headed by General Abdel Karim Kassem . Kassem had deposed the Western-allied Iraqi monarchy five years earlier .
 In a Ba'athist coup, the government used lists of suspected Communists and other leftists provided by the CIA, to systematically murder untold numbers of Iraq's educated elite . Saddam Hussein is said to have participated in the killings .
 Victims included doctors, teachers, technicians, lawyers, other professionals, military and political figures . The victims included hundreds of doctors and teachers, teachers .
 American and UK oil and other interests, including Mobil, Bechtel, and British Petroleum, were conducting business in Iraq . U.S. oil and British interests, such as Mobil, bechtel and British .
 President Kennedy joined with Irish President Éamon de Valera to form The American Irish Foundation . The Ireland Funds President Kennedy in motorcade in Republic of Ireland on June 27, 1963 .
 The mission of this organization was to foster connections between Americans of Irish descent and the country of their ancestry . This organization was formed by a group of Irish Americans .
 Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland . Kennedy furthered these connections of cultural solidarity by accepting a grant from Chief Herald .
 Kennedy had near-legendary status in Ireland, due to his ancestral ties to the country . Kennedy's ancestral ties with Ireland made him a national hero in Ireland .
 Irish citizens who were alive in 1963 often have very strong memories of Kennedy's visit . The president's visit to Ireland was one of the most memorable moments of his life .
 On December 22, 2006, the Irish Department of Justice released declassified police documents that indicated that Kennedy was the subject of three death threats during this visit to Ireland .
 The threats were determined to be hoaxes . Security was heightened after the threats were found to be a hoax .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed on the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation . The treaty was originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign . Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was originally agreed in 1956 .
 In 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the two tested nuclear weapons that September . Kennedy responded by conducting tests 5 days later . In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, the two leaders agreed to test nuclear weapons .
 In July 1963, Kennedy sent Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets . The greater nuclear strength of the United States was of little value as long as the U.S. viewed themselves at parity .
 Khrushchev then delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko . Gromko was the Soviet representative in charge of the Soviet Union .
 It quickly became clear that the stated objective of a comprehensive test ban would not reach fruition, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets for inspections to verify compliance . The Soviet Union was reluctant to inspect compliance with the ban .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty . The treaty prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground . The U.S. Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in
 France was quick to declare that it was free to further develop and test its nuclear defenses . France is free to continue developing and test nuclear defenses, officials say .
 It promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions, and government intervention to halt the recession . It ambitiously promised federal funds for education and medical care .
 Few of Kennedy's major programs passed Congress during his lifetime, although, under his successor Johnson, Congress did vote them through in 1964–65 .
 Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and encourage growth of the economy . Kennedy's policies have been criticized for being too tight .
 Kennedy presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962 . His first budget in 1961 led to the country's first non-war, non-recession deficit, in 1961 .
 The economy had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office . Kennedy's brief presidency accelerated notably during his brief presidency . The economy, which had been in recession for three years, accelerated during his presidency .
 Despite low inflation and interest rates, GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% during the Eisenhower presidency . GDP had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office .
 The economy turned around and prospered during the Kennedy administration . The economy prospeered during that period .
 This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1966, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time . The rate of economic growth in the UK has never been repeated .
 The stock market dropped a full 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry in 1962 . Kennedy's administration had steadily declined since Kennedy's election .
 The major steel companies announced in April 1962 a 3.5% price increase within a day of each other . The price increases were announced in the days leading up to 1962 .
 The president took personal charge of a campaign against the industry . He assigned to each cabinet member a statement regarding the effects of the price increase on their area .
 Robert took the position that steel executives had illegally colluded in doing this . Robert took a position that the steel executives were illegally colluding with the government . Robert said that Robert's position was that they were colluding to collude .
 There was genuine concern about the inflationary effects of the price increase . There were genuine concerns about the impact of the increase on petrol prices .
 Yale law professor Charles Reich wrote in The New Republic his opinion that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict United States Steel for collusion so quickly . Reich said the grand jury was a violation of civil liberties .
 The price increase would have resulted in a net gain for GDP as well as a net budget surplus . Kennedy had little knowledge of the agricultural sector of the economy . Farmers were definitely not on his list of priorities, at least in 1960 campaign .
 As President, Kennedy oversaw the last pre-Furman federal execution, and, as of 2008, the last military execution . Kennedy oversaw a federal and military death penalty as President . Kennedy also oversaw a military execution in 2008 .
 Governor of Iowa Harold Hughes, a death penalty opponent, personally contacted Kennedy to request clemency for Victor Feguer, who was sentenced to death by a federal court in Iowa, but Kennedy turned down the request . Governor Hughes called Kennedy personally to ask him to give him clem
 Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison . Kennedy signed into law HR5143 , abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia .
 The death penalty in the District of Columbia has not been applied since 1957 . It has now been abolished in the city's capital .
 The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s . Civil rights was a major issue of the same time as racial segregation .
 The United States Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 in Brown Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional . The U.S. Supreme Court in 1954 ruled in that case that segregation was unconstitutional.
 Many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision . Many schools did not comply .
 Segregation had also been prohibited by the Court at other public facilities but continued nonetheless . Segregation was also prohibited by other public institutions but continued .
 He also was more concerned with other issues early in his presidency,g.e.g. the ""Bay of Pigs"" fiasco and Southeast Asia .
 As a result, many civil rights leaders viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, especially concerning the Freedom Riders who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south .
 Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders as an alternative to using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents . Kennedy assigned marshals as a way to protect Freedom Riders .
 Campus Riots left two dead and dozens injured, but Meredith did finally enroll in his first class . Meredith did not enroll in the first class at the University of Alabama .
 Brother Robert and Ted Sorenson pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front . Kennedy was the president of the Senate in 1968 .
 Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard . The National Guard had just been federalized by order of the President, and had hours earlier been under Wallace's command .
 That evening Kennedy gave his famous civil rights address on national television and radio . He launched his initiative for civil rights legislation to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities .
 Medgar Evers was murdered at his home in Mississippi . Medgar was a leader of the N.A.C.P. and African-American civil rights movement .
 President Kennedy signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961 . House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two year signature effort in Congress had been defeated .
 The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination . The final report documenting legal and cultural barriers was issued in October 1963 .
 Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, a federal law amending the Fair Labor Standards Act, aimed at abolishing wage disparity based on sex . Over a hundred thousand gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963 .
 Kennedy feared the March would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills in Congress . Kennedy declined an invitation to speak, and declined to speak at the March .
 Organizers and the president personally edited speeches which were inflammatory . Thousands of troops were placed on standby .
 The March was considered a ""triumph of managed protest" and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred . Not one arrest was made during the demonstration .
 The March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken . Afterwards, they accepted a photo invitation to meet Kennedy and meet him .
 Kennedy felt the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill . Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over .
 A bomb exploded on a Sunday at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham . Six children died in the explosion and aftermath . Three weeks later, a bomb exploded .
 As a result of this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments . The amendments endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president . The president.
 Kennedy called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee . The following day, the bill was passed without the changes .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists . Hoover, who hated civil-rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker .
 Robert Kennedy and the president both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations . Concerned that the allegations, if made public, would derail the Administration's civil rights initiatives, would .
 Robert Kennedy authorized the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization . King's associations continued, prompting Kennedy to issue a written directive authorizing the wiretap .
 Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones on a trial basis, for a month or so . Hoover extended the clearance so his men were able to look for evidence in any areas they deemed worthy .
 John F Kennedy initially proposed an overhaul of American immigration policy that later was to become the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 . Kennedy's brother Senator Edward Kennedy later sponsored the bill .
 It dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia . It shifted the emphasis of selection of immigrants towards facilitating family reunification .
 Kennedy wanted to dismantle the selection of immigrants based on country of origin . He saw this as an extension of his civil rights policies . Kennedy wanted this as a way of dealing with immigration issues .
 The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration . It was a follow-up to America's Mercury program . The program is now being used to send astronauts to space .
 Funding for the program was far from certain given Eisenhower's ambivalent attitude to manned spaceflight . NASA went ahead with planning for Apollo, but funding was uncertain .
 Early in his presidency, Kennedy was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost . He postponed any decision out of deference to his vice president whom he had appointed chairman of the U.S. Space Council .
 In his January 1961 State of the Union address, Kennedy had suggested international cooperation in space . Kennedy had proposed international cooperation .
 Sergei Khrushchev said Kennedy approached his father, Nikita, twice about a ""joint venture"" in space exploration . Kennedy approached Nikita twice in the 1960s and '61s about a joint venture'
 On the first occasion, the Soviet Union was ahead of America in many aspects of space technology . The Soviet Union is ahead of the U.S. on the first time in space .
 On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space . American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was eager for the U.S. to take the lead in the Space Race for strategic reasons . Kennedy was also eager to lead the race in space race .
 "I'm not that interested in space. Because otherwise we shouldn't be spending this kind of money," he says . "I don't want to go to space."
 The only justification for it, in my opinion, to do it in the pell-mell fashion is because we hope to beat them and demonstrate that starting behind, as we did by a couple of years, by God, we passed them . But...we’ve spent
 Khrushchev persuaded that cost-sharing was beneficial and that American space technology was forging ahead . On the second approach, the Ukrainian was persuaded that U.S. space technology would forge ahead .
 Kennedy had asked Congress to approve more than $25 billion for the Apollo program in 1962 . The United States had launched a geosynchronous satellite in July 1962 .
 In September 1963, Kennedy again proposed a joint lunar program to the Soviet Union . Kennedy proposed the program in a speech before the United Nations in September 1963 .
 Kennedy's death only a little more than a month later essentially made the proposal irrelevant . Kennedy died only a month after the proposal was mooted .
 On July 20, 1969, almost six years after his death, Apollo's goal was realized when Americans landed on the Moon . The Apollo mission was the first to land on the moon .
 Kennedy declined to halt the project citing a critical need for flood control . Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene . Kennedy declined citing the need to protect flood waters .
 He did express concern for the plight of the Seneca, and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement .
 He was shot once in the upper back and was killed with a final shot to the head . He was killed by a single shot to his head .
 Only 46, President Kennedy died younger than any U.S. president to date . Kennedy died at 46, the youngest president to have been president .
 He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, but was killed by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be indicted or tried . Jack Ruby killed him before he was indicted .
 President Johnson created the Warren Commission, which concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin . Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer in 1967 .
 The assassination proved to be an important moment in U.S. history because of its impact on the nation and the ensuing political repercussions . The assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln was a major event in American history .
 State funeral of John F Kennedy was held for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St. Louis Cathedral . A Requiem Mass was held at Kennedy's funeral . State funeral was held in New York .
 John F Kennedy's body was buried in a small plot, , in Arlington National Cemetery . Afterwards, John F. Kennedy's remains were buried in small plot .
 Over a period of 3 years, an estimated 16 million people had visited his grave . Over a . period of three years, , an estimated . 16 million visitors to his grave visited him .
 On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's body was moved to a permanent burial plot and memorial at the Cemetery . Kennedy's funeral was held in New York City on March 13, 1967 .
 The funeral was officiated by Father John J Cavanaugh . The honor guard at JFK`s graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army .
 Jackie Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at the funeral of her husband . JFK was greatly impressed by the Irish Cadets on his last official visit to the Republic of Ireland .
 In August 2009, his brother, Senator Edward M Kennedy, was also buried near his two brothers . Senator Kennedy was buried in 2009 .
 President Kennedy and William Howard Taft are the only two U.S. Presidents buried at Arlington . Taft and Kennedy are only two United States Presidents buried in Arlington, Texas .
 John Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Bouvier, when he was a congressman . The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port in 1963 . John Kennedy was a member of Congress .
 Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies that preceded them . Both were popular in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians . They influenced fashion trends and became the subjects of numerous photo spreads in magazines .
 Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television . Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of medium .
 Jacqueline brought new art and furniture to the White House, and directed its restoration . Jacqueline also directed the restoration .
 The White House invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners . They raised the profile of the arts in America . They invited artists and writers to the rounds of dinners .
 The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States . The family has produced a President, three senators, and multiple other Representatives .
 John Kennedy's father, Joseph P Kennedy, was a prominent American businessman and political figure . He served as Ambassador to the United Kingdom, from 1938 to 1940 .
 The Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house on the White House lawn . Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home .
 Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album sold about four million copies . The album parodying the President, First Lady, their family and administration . Meader: "The First Family" sold about 4 million copies.
 Marilyn Monroe sang ""Happy Birthday, Mr President"" at a large party in Madison Square Garden, celebrating Kennedy's upcoming forty-fifth birthday . On May 19, 1962, Marilyn Monroe performed the song .
 The charisma of Kennedy and his family led to the figurative designation of ""Camelot"" for his administration, credited by his wife to his affection for the contemporary Broadway musical of the same name .
 One of the fundamental aspects of the Kennedy family is a tragic strain which has run through the family, as a result of the violent and untimely deaths of many members .
 John Kennedy's eldest brother, Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., died in World War II, at the age of 29 . John's brother died in the war, aged 29 .
 It was Joe Jr. who was originally to carry the family's hopes for the Presidency . Joe Jr.'s family was originally set to carry out the presidency in the 1980s . Joe Sr. Joe Sr.'s son Joe is the son of the late President George W. Bush .
 John himself, and his brother Robert died as a result of assassinations . Then both John and Robert died in the same way .
 Edward had brushes with death, the first in a plane crash and the second as a result of a car accident, known as the Chappaquiddick incident . Edward's father died in a car crash and plane crash .
 Edward died at age 77, on August 25, 2009, from the effects of a malignant brain tumor . Edward died aged 77, aged 77 .
 At age 30, Kennedy was diagnosed with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder . In 1947, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with the rare disorder .
 In 1966, his White House doctor, Janet Travell, revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism . The White House also revealed that the president also suffered from hypothyroism .
 He also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery . He also had surgery and was written up in the AMA's Archives of Surgery .
 Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no less than three doctors, one of whom was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was for the most severe bouts of pain . Kennedy was often seen by three doctors at the time .
 There was often disagreement among his doctors over the proper balance of medication and exercise . The president preferred the former as he was short on time and desired immediate relief .
 Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family . Details of Kennedy's medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime .
 John F Kennedy, Jr. was born in 1960, just a few weeks after his father was elected . He is the son of former President Kennedy .
 John Kennedy died in 1999, when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Martha's Vineyard, killing him, his wife, Carolyn Bessette, and his sister-in-law .
 Because of their eight-year separation in age, the two brothers had previously seen little of each other . The two brothers were separated by eight years .
 This 25,000-mile trip was the first extended time they had spent together . The trip resulted in them becoming best friends, and also being best friends .
 Robert Kennedy was campaign manager for Kennedy's successful 1952 Senate campaign and later, his successful 1960 presidential campaign . Robert was also the campaign manager of Kennedy's 1952 Senate Senate campaign .
 The two brothers worked closely together from 1957 to 1959 on the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor and Management Field . Robert was Robert's chief counsel for the committee .
 Marilyn Monroe, Gunilla von Post,Judith Campbell,Mary Pinchot Meyer and Mimi Beardsley Alford were among the stars . Marilyn Monroe was Marilyn Monroe's first Lady of the World .
 There was some medical opinion that the drugs the president required for Addison's had the side effect of increasing virility .
 Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters . Kennedy's team and supporters are proud of his legacy . Kennedy was one of the world's most famous men .
 Kennedy came in third in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century . Kennedy was the third most popular person in the world of the century .
 Kennedy family originally came from Dunganstown, County Wexford . Ancestors The Kennedy family was originally from Dunghstown, Co. Weexford .
 Patrick Kennedy left his farm and boarded a ship in New Ross bound for Liverpool on his way to Boston . In 1848, Patrick Kennedy traveled to Liverpool on a ship bound for Boston . Patrick Kennedy died in 1848 .
 Patrick Kennedy came to Boston, took a job as a migrant worker, and died within eight or nine years, of cholera . Kennedy was a migrant who died in the city of Boston, Massachusetts . Kennedy died in 18th century of chororrhine disease .
 Television became the primary source by which people were kept informed of events surrounding John F Kennedy's assassination . Mary Ann Fitzgerald .
 Newspapers are kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information . Newspapers were kept in the collection of newspapers rather than souvenirs .
 In this sense it was the first major ""TV news event"" of its kind, the TV coverage uniting the nation, interpreting what went on and creating memories of this space in time . The first major TV news event of its sort, the coverage unites the nation .
 All three major U.S. television networks suspended their regular schedules and switched to all-news coverage from November 22 through November 25, 1963 . It was the longest uninterrupted news event on American TV until 9/11 .
 Kennedy's state funeral procession and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald were all broadcast live in America and other places around the world . Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 The assassination had an effect on many people, not only in the U.S. but around the world . The assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy had a profound effect on the United States .
 Many vividly remember where they were when first learning of the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 before it and September 11 attacks after it .
 Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin, the possible instigators and the causes of the killing as an end to innocence . In retrospect it has been coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the 1960s
 Michael D Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington Cemetery . Healy was commander of the Special Forces during the Vietnam War .
 A wreath in the form of a Green Beret would be placed on the grave, continuing a tradition that began the day of his funeral . A sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces men guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin .
 Harry S Truman and Dwight D Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to the Vietnam War preceded President Johnson's escalation of the conflict .
 This contributed to a decade of national difficulties and disappointment on the political landscape, says President Obama . "This contributed to the country's difficulties," he says .
 Americans regularly vote him as one of the best presidents, in the same league as Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, and Franklin D Roosevelt . Many of Kennedy's speeches are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office and lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term,
 Some excerpts of Kennedy's inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington . Some excerpts are engraved at Arlington's Arlington Cemetery .
 It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations .
 President Kennedy is the only president to have predeceased both his mother and father . President Kennedy prededed both his parents and his mother . Kennedy died in 1963 .
 His grandmother, Mary Josephine Hannon Fitzgerald, died in 1964, just over eight months after his assassination . Fitzgerald's grandmother died eight months before his assassination in 1964 .
 Given name Kennedy has sometimes been used in honour of President Kennedy, as well his brother Robert . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, along with his brother .
 In 1961, Kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of Patrick Kennedy from the Chief Herald of Ireland .
 The design of the arms strongly alludes to symbols in the coats of arms of the O'Kennedys of Ormonde and Fitzgeralds of Desmond . The family is believed to be descended from the Fitzgeralds .
 The crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches, elements taken from the coat of arms of the United States of America . It is also symbolic of Kennedy and his brothers .
 Kennedy received a signet ring engraved with his arms for his 44th birthday as a gift from his wife . The arms were incorporated into the seal of the USS John F Kennedy .
 Following his assassination, Kennedy was honored by the Canadian government by having a mountain named for him . His brother, Robert Kennedy, climbed Mount Kennedy in 1965 to plant a banner of the arms at the summit of Mount Kennedy .
 Kennedy features prominently in popular culture . Play media Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches . In other media/popular culture Kennedy has appeared in films and television .
 JFK's assassination was the subject of the Oliver Stone film JFK . Footage of him appears in the Robert Zemeckis film Forrest Gump .
 During his lifetime Kennedy was the focal point of a Superman comicbook, Superman's Mission for President Kennedy . Kennedy was a focal point in the Superman comic book Superman's mission for him .
 Abraham Zapruder was the photographer of the primary film of assassination, the Zapruders film . He was the only person to capture the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln .
 Kennedy accepted there had been zero or modest progress in countering the increase in communist aggression in return for an expanded U.S. involvement .
 Planes and the Presidents: Flight II, hosted and narrated by Charlton Heston, will be released on December 25 .
 AP White House Correspondent Frank Cormier says 5/6 of the population was on the street when Kennedy gave that famous phrase . Cormier said that 5-6 of those who heard Kennedy's famous phrase were on the streets that day .
 Senator John F Kennedy, Immigration and Naturalization Laws, Hyannis Inn Motel . Kennedy, immigration and naturalization laws were passed by Kennedy in 1963 . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 That Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. that Kennedy had . married previously .
 Reeves states that Ben Bradlee, then at Newsweek, inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood . Reeves says that Bradlee was at Newsweek at the time .
 JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why it Matters is positive assessment . John F Kennedy in WW II was 40th anniversary edition of JFK's death .
 Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 . Garrow, David J The FBI and Martin Luther King . Giglio, James. Giglio. The FBI . The FBI.
 The Presidency of John F Kennedy is standard scholarly overview of policies . Goldzwig, Steven R and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds. John F. Kennedy's policies .
 The Public Address of John F Kennedy, text and analysis of key speeches, is published by Nigel Hamilton, Nigel Hamilton and Nigel Boulden, Nigel .
 Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II . Karnow, Stanley. Karnow . Stanley. Stanley. Five Presidents .
 The Presidential Portfolio Kunz, Diane B The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade: American Foreign Relations during the 1960s . Lynch, Grayston L Decision for Disaster Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs Maier, Thomas Thomas .
 McNamara, Robert S. "Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy" Manchester, William. Manchester . McNamara "Arguments Without End" is published by William Manchester .
 Newman, John M., JFK and Vietnam: Deception, Intrigue, and the Struggle for Power . O'Brien, Michael. O'Neill, Michael .
 A Life of John F Kennedy hostile assessment of his character Sabato, Larry J. The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John. F Kennedy . Salt, Jermey. Salt, . The Kennedy half-century: The . Lasting . legacy of John
 John F Kennedy was President of the United States January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963 Succeeded byLyndon B Johnson .
 Thomas O'Neill, Jr. was a member of Massachusetts's 11th congressional district . He served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 . He died January 3, 1953, in office in Massachusetts .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. Caroline Kennedy, Caroline Kennedy and Edwin Schlossberg were JFK's first wives . John F Kennedy Jr., Jr. was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy died at age 18 .
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, Bobby Shriver and Maria Shriver all died at the age of 65 .
 David A Kennedy, Jr. Cheryl Hines and Michael LeMoyne Kennedy have been married for more than 50 years . Kennedy's daughter, Susan, was the first woman to marry the late Senator Kennedy .
 This page uses content from the English language Wikipedia . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .