 U.S., UK, Canada, Canada and France collaborated during World War II to build a fission weapon, also known as an atomic bomb . The Manhattan Project was based on scientific breakthroughs made during the 1930s .
 In August 1945, the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were conducted by the United States against Japan at the close of that war . The atomic bombings are still standing to date as the only use of nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union started development shortly after with their own atomic bomb project . Not long after, both countries were developing more powerful fusion weapons known as hydrogen bombs .
 Britain and France built their own nuclear weapons in the 1950s . The list of states with nuclear weapons has gradually grown larger in the decades since .
 Physics and politics in the 1930s and 1940s . From Los Alamos to Hiroshima, the story of the atomic bomb is told here .
 In nuclear fission, the nucleus of a fissile atom absorbs a thermal neutron, becomes unstable and splits into two new atoms, releasing some energy and releasing between one and three new neutrons, which can perpetuate the process . In the 20th century: birth of modern physics .
 In the first decades of the 20th century, physics was revolutionized with developments in the understanding of the nature of atoms . The discovery of atoms was a key part of the revolution in physics .
 In 1898, Pierre and Marie Curie discovered that pitchblende, an ore of uranium, contained a substance, which they named radium, that emitted large amounts of radioactivity . The discovery of radium in 1898 was the work of the French scientists who discovered radium .
 Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy identified atoms were breaking down and turning into different elements . Ernest Rutherford identified atoms breaking down as atoms were turning into new elements .
 Hopes raised among scientists and laymen that the elements around us could contain tremendous amounts of unseen energy, waiting to be harnessed .
 Wells was inspired to write about atomic weapons in a 1914 novel, The World Set Free, which appeared shortly before the First World War . Wells wrote about the issue in his novel, which was published shortly before World War One .
 In January 1933, the Nazis came to power in Germany and suppressed Jewish scientists . In 1933, Jewish scientists were suppressed by the Nazis .
 Leó Szilárd invented the idea of a nuclear chain reaction via neutrons in 1934 . In 1934 he patented the idea using neutrons to create a chain reaction in a nuclear reactor . Szilacrd fled to London where he patented his idea of the reaction .
 The patent was not about an atomic bomb per se, as the possibility of chain reaction was still very speculative . The patent did not mention an atomic weapon per se .
 Szilard assigned the patent to the British Admiralty so that it could be covered by the Official Secrets Act . Szileard subsequently assigned it to the Admiralty to cover the act under the Official Secret Act .
 In a very real sense, Szilárd was the father of the atomic bomb academically . In Hungary, he was Hungary's "father" of the bomb . Szlárd died in 1945 at the hands of Hungarian dictator Fárzizi Szilbár
 The 1934 military secret patent of Szilard was clearly ahead of the time . The 1934 secret patent was published in the book "Szilard"
 The neutron inducted nuclear chain reactions and power from that reactions, and the possibility of the nuclear explosion from these reactions, was five years before the public discovery of nuclear fission . Szilard and Enrico Fermi demonstrated a working reactor with uranium at the university of Chicago
 In 1934, Szilard joined with Enrico Fermi in patenting the world's first working nuclear reactor . In Paris in 1934, Irèdéric Joliot-Curie discovered artificial radioactivity could be induced in stable elements by bombarding them with alpha particles
 In December 1938, Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann reported that they had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons . The discovery of barium was made in December 1938 .
 Lise Meitner and Otto Robert Frisch correctly interpreted these results as being due to the splitting of the uranium atom . The uranium atom was split by a uranium atom in the process of uranium splitting .
 Scientists gave the process the name ""fission"" because of its similarity to the splitting of a cell into two new cells . The process was given the name 'fission' because of the similarity to splitting a cell .
 The active component of uranium is the rare isotope uranium-235 . The following year, they identified the active component as being the rare radioactive isotope .
 Joliot-Curie's team applied for a patent family covering different use cases of atomic energy . One was the first official document mentioning a nuclear explosion as a purpose, including for war .
 This patent was applied for on May 4, 1939, but only granted in 1950, being withheld by French authorities . Patent was granted only in 1950 after being withheld from French authorities for years .
 When the nucleus of uranium-235 absorbs a neutron, it undergoes nuclear fission, releasing energy and, on average, 2.2 neutrons . When a neutron absorbs a nuclear nucleus, the nucleus undergoes fission to release energy and 2 neutrons.
 Uranium-235 releases more neutrons than it absorbs, so is described as fissile . It can support a chain reaction and so is called a fissionile .
 Uranium-238, on the other hand, is not fissile as it does not normally undergo fission when it absorbs a neutron . Uranium does not usually undergo nuclear fission as it absorbs neutron .
 Many scientists likely to be persecuted by the Nazis had already escaped . By the start of the war in September 1939, many scientists had escaped .
 Physicists on both sides were well aware of the possibility of utilizing nuclear fission as a weapon, but no one was quite sure how it could be engineered .
 Albert Einstein signed a letter to U.S. President Franklin D Roosevelt warning him of the threat posed by Germany . Roosevelt responded by setting up the Uranium Committee under Lyman James Briggs .
 The Maud Committee was set up following the work of Frisch and Peierls who calculated uranium-235's critical mass and found it to be much smaller than previously thought which meant that a deliverable atomic bomb should be possible .
 Edgar Sengier became aware of uranium's possible use in a bomb . Shinkolobwe Mine in the Congo produced by far the highest quality uranium ore in world .
 Two of his first acts were to obtain authorization to assign the highest priority AAA rating on necessary procurements, and to order the purchase of all 1,250 tons of the Shinkolobwe ore .
 The Tube Alloys project was quickly overtaken by the United States effort . After Roosevelt and Churchill signed the Quebec Agreement in 1943, it was relocated and amalgamated .
 Leo Szilard invented the electron microscope, linear accelerator, cyclotron, nuclear chain reaction and patented the nuclear reactor in London in 1934 . He invented the atomic reactor in 1934 in London and patented it in 1936 .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . From Los Alamos to Hiroshima, the history of the atomic bomb goes back to Japan .
 Manhattan Project UC Berkeley physicist J Robert Oppenheimer led the Allied scientific effort at Los Alamos . Manhattan Project was the Allied effort to build the atomic bomb in New Mexico .
 Proportions of uranium-238 and uranium-235 found naturally versus grades that are enriched by separating the two isotopes atom-by-atom using various methods that all require a massive investment in time and money .
 The beginning of the American research about nuclear weapons started with the Einstein–Szilárd letter . Einstein's letter was sent to Hungary from Hungary in 1953 .
 Manhattan project brought together top scientific minds of the day, including many exiles from Europe, with the production power of American industry for the goal of producing fission-based explosive devices .
 Britain and the U.S. agreed to pool their resources and information for the project . The Soviet Union was not informed of the plan .
 The United States made a tremendous investment in the project which at the time was the second largest industrial enterprise ever seen . At the time, the project was spread across more than 30 sites in the United States and Canada .
 Scientific development was centralized in a secret laboratory at Los Alamos . Scientists developed the atomic bomb in secret lab in secret laboratory .
 For a fission weapon to operate, there must be sufficient fissile material to support a chain reaction, a critical mass . A critical mass must be reached in order to make a nuclear bomb capable of producing enough material .
 Another secret site was erected at rural Oak Ridge, Tennessee, for the large-scale production and purification of the rare isotope . It required considerable investment .
 At the time, K-25 was the world's largest factory under one roof . At the same time, it was the largest factory in the world . The Oak Ridge facility was one of the largest in existence in existence .
 The Oak Ridge site employed tens of thousands of people at its peak, most of whom had no idea what they were working on . Most of the site's workers were not even aware of their work .
 Massive new physics machines assembled at secret installations around the U.S. for the production of enriched uranium and plutonium . The machines were assembled in secret installations .
 uranium-238 cannot be used for the initial stage of an atomic bomb . When it absorbs a neutron, it becomes uranium-239 which decays into neptunium-239 and plutonium-239, which is fissile .
 Fermi achieved the world's first sustained and controlled nuclear chain reaction . Massive reactors were secretly constructed at what is now known as the Hanford Site to transform uranium-238 into plutonium for a bomb .
 The simplest form of nuclear weapon is a gun-type fission weapon, where a sub-critical mass would be shot at another . This type of weapon would be a weapon that could be used to create a nuclear bomb .
 The result would be a super-critical mass and an uncontrolled chain reaction that would create the desired explosion . The explosion would be the result of a supercritical mass .
 The weapons envisaged in 1942 were the two gun-type weapons, Little Boy and Thin Man, and the Fat Man plutonium implosion bomb . The Fat Man bomb was the first to be built in the US .
 The plutonium gun was to receive the bulk of the research effort, as it was the project with the most uncertainty involved . The plutonium weapon was to be the most uncertain project of research .
 It was assumed that the uranium gun-type bomb could then be adapted from it . The uranium gun type bomb was assumed to be adapted into a nuclear bomb .
 In December 1943 the British mission of 19 scientists arrived in Los Alamos, New Mexico . The mission was led by British scientists .
 In April 1944 it was found by Emilio Segrè that the plutonium-239 produced by the Hanford reactors had too high a level of background neutron radiation, and underwent spontaneous fission to a small extent .
 If such plutonium were used in a gun-type design, the chain reaction would start in the split second before the critical mass was fully assembled, blowing the weapon apart with a much lower yield than expected, in what is known as a fizzle .
 Chemical explosives were used to implode a sub-critical sphere of plutonium, thus increasing its density and making it into a critical mass . The implosion was used to increase the density of a sphere of nuclear material .
 The difficulties with implosion centered on the problem of making the chemical explosives deliver a perfectly uniform shock wave upon the plutonium sphere . If it were even slightly asymmetric, the weapon would fizzle .
 While Germany had an atomic bomb program headed by Werner Heisenberg, the government had not made a significant investment in the project, and it had been nowhere near success . They concluded that, while Germany had a . government had . not made significant investment, and the project had not been
 Japan's efforts at developing a nuclear weapon were starved of resources . Similarly, Japan's attempts at developing nuclear weapons were starved resources .
 Historians claim to have found a rough schematic showing a Nazi nuclear bomb . Historians say they found a sketch of a Nazi bomb .
 In March 1945, a German scientific team was directed by the physicist Kurt Diebner to develop a primitive nuclear device in Ohrdruf, Thuringia . The device was developed by a team of scientists and engineers in the region .
 Last ditch research was conducted in an experimental nuclear reactor at Haigerloch . It was used to create an experimental reactor at the site .
 On April 12, after Roosevelt's death, Vice President Harry S Truman assumed the presidency . Truman assumed his post on April 12 .
 The Manhattan Project was still months away from producing a working weapon . At the time of the unconditional surrender of Germany on May 8, 1945, the Manhattan Project still had months to complete .
 Because of the difficulties in making a working plutonium bomb, it was decided that there should be a test of the weapon .
 The test, a plutonium implosion-type device, released energy equivalent to 22 kilotons of TNT . The test is far more powerful than any weapon ever used before .
 The news of the test's success was rushed to Truman at the Potsdam Conference . Churchill was briefed and Joseph Stalin was informed of the new weapon .
 The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki killed tens of thousands of Japanese combatants and non-combatants . The bombings also destroyed dozens of military bases and supply depots as well as hundreds of factories .
 Truman ordered the use of the weapons on Japanese cities, hoping it would send a strong message . Truman hoped it would end in the capitulation of the Japanese leadership, and avoid a lengthy invasion .
 Truman and his Secretary of State James F Byrnes were also intent on ending the Pacific war before the Soviets could enter it, given that Roosevelt had promised Stalin control of Manchuria if he joined the invasion .
 Concerns about Kyoto's cultural heritage led it to be replaced by Nagasaki . Nagasaki replaced Kyoto as Kyoto's main city . Kyoto was replaced with Nagasaki instead .
 Evidence suggests that these leaflets were never dropped over Hiroshima or Nagasaki . Evidence suggests they were dropped too late or not dropped over Nagasaki or dropped too early .
 On August 6, 1945, a uranium-based weapon, Little Boy, was detonated above the Japanese city of Hiroshima . Three days later, Fat Man, a plutonium-based bomb, was also detonated above Nagasaki .
 Hiroshima and Nagasaki remain the only two instances of nuclear weapons being used in combat . To date, they are the only instances of using nuclear weapons in combat in Japan . Hiroshima and Hiroshima remain two examples of nuclear warfare .
 The atomic raids killed at least one hundred thousand Japanese civilians and military personnel outright, with the heat, radiation, and blast effects . At least 100,000 people were killed in the raids .
 Many tens of thousands would later die of radiation sickness and related cancers . Radiation sickness was a major factor in radiation sickness .
 Truman promised a ""rain of ruin"" if Japan did not surrender immediately, threatening to systematically eliminate their ability to wage war . Truman also threatened to eliminate the ability of the Japanese government .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . The Soviet atomic bomb project was the focus of the project .
 The Soviet Union was not invited to share in the new weapons developed by the U.S. and the other Allies . Soviet Union did not want to share its atomic bomb project .
 During the war, information had been pouring in from a number of volunteer spies involved with the Manhattan Project . The Soviet nuclear physicist Igor Kurchatov was carefully watching the Allied weapons development .
 Stalin was outraged more by the Americans' guarded monopoly of the bomb than the weapon itself . Stalin was nonetheless outraged by the situation, more .
 Truman authorized nuclear weapons as a ""negotiating tool"" in the early Cold War . Some historians share the assessment that Truman immediately authorized the use of nuclear weapons in the 1950s . Truman authorized the weapons in order to negotiate with the Soviets .
 The Soviet spies in the United States project were all volunteers and none were Soviet citizens . In alarm at this monopoly, the Soviets urgently undertook their own atomic program . None of the spies were Russian citizens .
 Klaus Fuchs was a German émigré theoretical physicist who had been part of the early British nuclear efforts and the UK mission to Los Alamos . He was one of the most valuable theoretical physicist in the world .
 Fuchs passed on detailed cross-sections of the Trinity device to Soviet contacts . Fuchs had been intimately involved in the development of the implosion weapon .
 Other Los Alamos spies, none of whom knew each other, included Theodore Hall and David Greenglass .
 The information was kept but not acted upon, as the Soviet Union was still too busy fighting the war in Europe to devote resources to this new project .
 In the years immediately after World War II, the issue of who should control atomic weapons became a major point of contention .
 Many of the Los Alamos scientists who had built the bomb began to call for ""international control of atomic energy,"" Many scientists called for either control by transnational organizations or distribution of weapons information to all superpowers . The policy-makers of the United States worked to maintain the American
 A half-hearted plan for international control was proposed at the newly formed United Nations by Bernard Baruch . It was clear that it was an attempt primarily to stymie Soviet nuclear efforts .
 The Soviets vetoed the plan, effectively ending any immediate postwar negotiations on atomic energy . The Soviets also made overtures towards banning the use of atomic weapons in general .
 The Soviets had put their full industrial might and manpower into the development of their own atomic weapons . The Soviets were developing their own nuclear weapons at the time of the war .
 The Soviets had not scouted out uranium resources in the Soviet Union . The United States had made deals to monopolise the largest known uranium reserves in the Belgian Congo . The U.S. had also made deals with the Belgian .
 Two days after the bombing of Nagasaki, the U.S. government released an official technical history of the Manhattan Project . The Smyth Report, authored by Princeton physicist Henry DeWolf Smyth, is colloquially known as "Smyth Report"
 The sanitized summary of the wartime effort focused primarily on the production facilities and scale of investment . The report was written in part to justify the wartime expenditure to the American public .
 The Soviet program, under the suspicious watch of former NKVD chief Lavrenty Beria , would use the Report as a blueprint, seeking to duplicate as much of possible the American effort .
 The ""secret cities"" used for the Soviet equivalent of Hanford and Oak Ridge literally vanished from the maps for decades to come . The 'secret cities' disappeared from the map in the Soviet Union .
 At the Soviet equivalent of Los Alamos, Arzamas-16, Yuli Khariton led the scientific effort to develop the weapon . The weapon was developed in the Soviet version of the atomic bomb .
 Beria distrusted his scientists, however, and he trusted the carefully collected espionage information . Beria was a member of the Soviet Union, but he did not trust scientists .
 Beria assigned multiple teams of scientists to the same task without informing each other of the other's existence . As such, Beria did not inform each other that they were working on the project .
 Beria would bring them together for the first time and have them debate with their newfound counterparts . Beria: If they arrived at different conclusions, they would debate with them .
 With the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, the U.S. Congress established the civilian Atomic Energy Commission to take over the development of nuclear weapons from the military, and to develop nuclear power .
 The AEC made use of many private companies in processing uranium and thorium and other urgent tasks related to the development of bombs . Private companies were used in uranium processing, thorium processing and other tasks .
 Atomic Energy Act established the United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . The committee had broad legislative and executive oversight jurisdiction over nuclear matters . It became one of the powerful congressional committees in United States history .
 Two early chairmen pushed for increased production of nuclear materials and a resultant increase in the U.S. stockpile .
 The size of that stockpile, which had been low in the immediate postwar years, was a closely guarded secret . It had been a low-ranking stockpile .
 There was considerable confusion over who actually knew the size of the stockpile, including the Departments of State and Defense . Some people chose not to know for fear they might disclose number accidentally .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . The first thermonuclear weapons were built in the 1950s .
 Hungarian physicist Edward Teller toiled for years trying to discover a way to make a fusion bomb . Teller's design of the Teller-Ulam design was designed by Hungarian physicist Ulam .
 It was thought at the time that a fission weapon would be quite simple to develop . Work on a hydrogen bomb would be possible to complete before the end of the Second World War .
 The problem of a regular atomic bomb was large enough to preoccupy the scientists for the next few years . However, in reality the problem of the 'Super' bomb was not as large as a regular bomb .
 Only Teller continued working on the project, against the will of project leaders Oppenheimer and Bethe . Teller was the only person involved in the project to continue working on it .
 Many scientists at Los Alamos rebelled against the idea of creating a weapon thousands of times more powerful than the first atomic bomb . The Joe-1 atomic bomb test by the Soviet Union in August 1949 came earlier than expected .
 Many scientists, such as Bethe, urged that the U.S. should not develop such weapons and set an example towards the Soviet Union . Bethe: "The United States should not have such weapons"
 Promoters of the weapon, including Teller, Ernest Lawrence, and Luis Alvarez, argued that such a development was inevitable . To deny such protection to the people of the U.S. was itself an immoral and unwise act .
 Oppenheimer was now head of the General Advisory Committee of the successor to the Manhattan Project, the Atomic Energy Commission . He presided over a recommendation against the development of the weapon . The atomic weapon would have been a weapon of mass destruction .
 Oppenheimer believed that the atomic forces of the United States would be more effective if they consisted of many large fission weapons rather than large and unwieldy super bombs . The reasons were in part because the success of the technology seemed limited .
 If such weapons were developed by both superpowers, they would be more effective against the United States than against the USSR . The United States had far more regions of dense industrial and civilian activity as targets for large weapons than the Soviet Union .
 President Truman made the final decision to test the first Soviet atomic bomb test in 1949 . Truman was looking for a proper response to the first nuclear bomb test . The decision was made in the wake of the first atomic test by the Soviet Union .
 On January 31, 1950, Truman announced a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb . Truman announced the crash program on January 30, 1950 .
 An insight by Los Alamos mathematician Stanislaw Ulam showed that the fission bomb and the fusion fuel could be in separate parts of the bomb . The radiation of the nuclear bomb could first work in a way to compress the fusion material before igniting it .
 Teller used the results of the boosted-fission ""George"" test to confirm the fusion of heavy hydrogen elements before preparing for their first true multi-stage, Teller-Ulam hydrogen bomb test . Teller pushed the notion further, and used the result of the 'George
 Oppenheimer and Bethe were initially against the weapon, but now see it as unstoppable . Many scientists, initially against it, changed their previous opinions, seeing the development as unstoppable.
 Mike used liquid deuterium as its fusion fuel and a large fission weapon as its trigger . Mike used a large weapon as his trigger . The weapon was created by a large nuclear device .
 Truman had initially tried to create a media blackout about the test . He hoped it would not become an issue in the upcoming presidential election . Truman announced the development of the hydrogen bomb on January 7, 1953 .
 The Soviet Union exploded its first thermonuclear device on August 12, 1953, labeled ""Joe-4" by the West . The device was designed by the physicist Andrei Sakharov .
 The Soviet device was a deliverable weapon, which the U.S. did not yet have . This created concern within the United States government and military . Unlike the Soviet device, it was deliveredable weapon .
 The technical differences were fairly oblique to the American public and politicians . Still, it was a powerful propaganda tool for the Soviet Union .
 Following the Mike blast by less than a year, Joe-4 seemed to validate claims that the bombs were inevitable and vindicate those who had supported the program .
 Oppenheimer's security clearance was revoked in 1954 during McCarthyism . He was accused of being unreliable, unreliable, and supporting the U.S. hydrogen bomb program . He had made long-standing left-wing ties in the 1930s, and had not supported the American .
 Edward Teller participated in the hearing as the only major scientist to testify against Oppenheimer, resulting in his virtual expulsion from the physics community . The hearing resulted in the death of Teller as a major scientist in the physics world .
 On March 1, 1954, the United States detonated its first practical thermonuclear weapon, known as the ""Shrimp" device of the Castle Bravo test, at Bikini Atoll .
 The device yielded 15 megatons, more than twice its expected yield, and became the worst radiological disaster in U.S. history . It was the worst radiation disaster in United States .
 Efforts were made to recover the cargo of contaminated fish but at least two large tuna were probably sold and eaten . Efforts to recover contaminated fish were unsuccessful .
 A further 75 tons of tuna caught between March and December were found to be unfit for human consumption . 75 tons found to have been found unfit to be eaten by humans .
 When the crew member died and the full results of the contamination were made public by the U.S., Japanese concerns were reignited . The hydrogen bomb age had a profound effect on the thoughts of nuclear war in the popular and military mind .
 With only fission bombs, nuclear war was something that possibly could be limited . With only nuclear bombs, it was possible to prevent a nuclear war . The U.S. government was able to prevent nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Proponents brushed aside as grave exaggeration claims that such weapons could lead to worldwide death or harm . Proponents say they are not concerned that weapons could harm the world .
 Even in the decades before fission weapons, there had been speculation about the possibility for human beings to end all life on the planet, either by accident or purposeful maliciousness . Technology had not provided the capacity for such action, but technology had not .
 The great power of hydrogen bombs made worldwide annihilation possible . It was made possible with the power of the hydrogen bombs .
 Castle Bravo incident raised a number of questions about the survivability of a nuclear war . Castle Bravo was the site of the Castle Bravo nuclear attack in the 1950s .
 Government scientists in both the United States and the USSR insisted that fusion weapons, unlike fission weapons, were cleaner, as fusion reactions did not produce the dangerously radioactive by-products .
 This fission stage made fusion weapons considerably more dirty than they were made out to be . It was the first time fusion weapons were made as dirty as they were claimed .
 This was evident in the towering cloud of deadly fallout that followed the Bravo test . The test was the first of a series of nuclear weapons tests in the U.S. history .
 When the Soviet Union tested its first megaton device in 1955, the possibility of a limited nuclear war seemed even more remote in the public and political mind . The possibility of such a nuclear war became more remote .
 Even cities and countries that were not direct targets would suffer fallout contamination . Even countries that weren't directly hit would suffer contamination .
 Fission products would disperse via normal weather patterns and embed in soil and water around the planet . Extremely harmful fission products could be embedded in soil, water and soil around the world .
 Speculation began to run towards what fallout and dust from a full-scale nuclear exchange would do to the world as a whole .
 The fate of the world was now tied to the fate of bomb-wielding superpowers . In this way, the future of the planet was tied to those who had the power of the bomb .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Deterrence and brinkmanship is the focus of this section .
 November 1951 nuclear test at the Nevada Test Site, from Operation Buster, with a yield of 21 kilotons . Operation Buster was the first nuclear test to be carried out in Nevada . November 1951 test was a nuclear test in Nevada, Nevada .
 It was the first U.S. nuclear field exercise conducted on land; troops shown are 6 mi from the blast .
 The U.S. and the USSR both endeavored, in the 1950s and the early 1960s, to prevent the other power from acquiring nuclear supremacy .
 The first atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were large, custom-made devices, requiring highly trained personnel for their arming and deployment . As one instance of this mindset, in the early 1950s it was proposed to drop a nuclear bomb on the Moon as a globally visible demonstration of
 They could be dropped only from the largest bomber planes, the B-29 Superfortress . Each plane could only carry a single bomb in its hold . They were dropped from the smallest bomber planes .
 This ratio of one plane to one bomb was still fairly impressive in comparison with conventional, non-nuclear weapons . But against other nuclear-armed countries it was considered a grave danger .
 In the immediate postwar years, the U.S. spent much effort on making the bombs ""G.I.-proof" rather than Nobel Prize-winning scientists .
 In the 1950s, the U.S. undertook a nuclear testing program to improve the nuclear arsenal . The United States had a nuclear test program to test its nuclear weapons .
 Many prominent scientists and statesmen lobbied for a ban on nuclear testing . Because testing was seen as a sign of technological development, halts on testing were often called for as stand-ins .
 In 1958, the U.S., USSR, and the United Kingdom declared a temporary testing moratorium for both political and health reasons . By 1961 the Soviet Union had broken the moratorium and began testing with great frequency . Both the USSR and the US began testing in the United States .
 The weapon was largely impractical for actual military use, but was hot enough to induce third-degree burns at a distance of 62 mi away . It was designed to induce burns at 62 mi from a distance .
 In 1963, all nuclear and many non-nuclear states signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty, pledging to refrain from testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, underwater, or in outer space . The treaty was signed by many states in 1963 .
 Most tests were considerably more modest, and worked for direct technical purposes as well as their potential political overtones . Most tests work for technical purposes, but also for political purposes, as well .
 The other was a program of miniaturization, reducing the size of the nuclear weapons . The two programs were aimed at miniaturizing nuclear weapons and reducing their size .
 Smaller bombs meant that bombers could carry more of them, and also that they could be carried on the new generation of rockets in development in the 1950s and 1960s . The bombs were carried by bombers and bombers in the 1960s and 1950s .
 United States rocket science received a large boost in the postwar years, largely with the help of engineers acquired from the Nazi rocketry program . The U.S. rocket science was developed in the wake of World War II .
 Wernher von Braun helped design the V-2 rockets the Nazis launched across the English Channel . These included scientists such as von Braun, who helped design V-1 rockets .
 The introduction of nuclear armed rockets, like the MGR-1 Honest John, reflected a change in both nuclear technology and strategy .
 Long-range bomber aircraft, such as the B-52 Stratofortress, allowed deployment of a wide range of strategic nuclear weapons . Long range bomber aircraft were capable of deploying a range of nuclear weapons.
 A SSM-N-8 Regulus is launched from USS Halibut . The U.S. employed submarines with Regulus cruise missiles in the submarine-based strategic deterrent role .
 Early nuclear-armed rockets were surface-to-surface missiles with relatively short ranges and yields around twice the size of the first fission weapons . Early nuclear armed rockets, such as the MGR-1 Honest John, were deployed by the U.S. in 1953 .
 The limited range meant they could only be used in certain types of military situations . They were only limited to certain situations, such as the use of the limited range .
 Strategic weapons rely on long-range bombers that could penetrate deep into enemy territory . Strategic weapons could threaten an entire country, but not an entire nation .
 In operations like Chrome Dome, SAC kept nuclear-armed planes in the air 24 hours a day, ready for an order to attack Moscow . SAC also kept nuclear weapons in place 24 hours of the day .
 These technological possibilities enabled nuclear strategy to develop a logic considerably different from previous military thinking . The technology enabled the development of a nuclear strategy that was very different from military thinking, the author says .
 The threat of nuclear warfare was so awful, it was first thought that it might make any war of the future impossible . Because of the threat, the threat was thought to be so awful it might have made any war impossible .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower's doctrine of 'massive retaliation' was a message to the USSR . If the Red Army attempted to invade parts of Europe not given to the Eastern bloc during the Potsdam Conference, nuclear weapons would be used against Soviet troops and potentially the Soviet leaders .
 With the development of more rapid-response technologies, this policy began to shift . With the . development of . rapid response technologies , this . policy began . to shift.
 First strike meant the first use of nuclear weapons by one nuclear-equipped nation against another nuclear-armed nation . First strike was the first strike by one nation to use nuclear weapons against another . First use of first strike was in the 1950s and 1960s .
 If the attacking nation did not prevent the attacked nation from a nuclear response, the attack nation would respond with a second strike . The attack would be followed by a second nuclear strike against the attacking country .
 In this situation, whether the U.S. first attacked the USSR or the USSR first attacked, the result would be that both nations would be damaged to the point of utter social collapse . The United States and the USSR would both be damaged in this way .
 According to game theory, starting a nuclear war was suicidal, no logical country would shoot first . No logical nation would start shooting first, game theory says . Game theory says starting nuclear war would be suicidal .
 If a country could launch a first strike that utterly destroyed the target country's ability to respond, that might give that country the confidence to initiate a nuclear war . However, if a nation could launch an attack that destroys its ability to retaliate, that could give it confidence to start a war
 The object of a country operating by the MAD doctrine is to deny the opposing country this first strike capability . MAD doctrine aims to deny an opposing country the ability to strike .
 The English phrase MAD was often known by, ""nuclear deterrence,"" was translated by the French as ""dissuasion,"" and ""terrorization" by the Soviets . The phrase was often translated by, "nuclear deterrence"
 Winston Churchill said the greater the threat of mutual destruction, the safer the world would be . Winston Churchill summed up the paradox of nuclear war as ""the worse things get, the better they are" Winston Churchill .
 This philosophy made a number of technological and political demands on participating nations . This philosophy was made by participating nations, including Russia and China .
 It should always be assumed that an enemy nation may be trying to acquire first strike capability, which must always be avoided, it said .
 In American politics this translated into demands to avoid ""bomber gaps"" and ""missile gaps" where the Soviet Union could potentially outshoot the Americans . The Soviet Union was the target of the 'missile gap'
 It also encouraged the production of thousands of nuclear weapons by both the U.S. and the USSR, far more than needed to destroy the major civilian and military infrastructures of the opposing country .
 These policies and strategies were satirized in the 1964 Stanley Kubrick film Dr. Dr. Stanley Kubrick's film .
 Dr. Strangelove, in which the Soviets, unable to keep up with the US's first strike capability, instead plan for MAD by building a Doomsday Machine . The end of the world is brought about after a mad United States General orders a nuclear attack on the USSR .
 With early warning systems, it was thought that the strikes of nuclear war would come from dark rooms filled with computers, not the battlefield of the wars of old . Early warning systems were thought to be more reliable than the old .
 The policy also encouraged the development of the first early warning systems .
 With long-range bombers, from the start of a nuclear attack to its conclusion was mere hours . With long range bombers, it could be mere hours for a bomber to launch a bomb .
 Planners reasoned that conventional command and control systems could not adequately react to a nuclear attack . Planners took great lengths to develop computer systems that could look for enemy attacks .
 The United States poured massive funding into development of SAGE, a system that could track and intercept enemy bomber aircraft using information from remote radar stations . The U.S. system was developed in the 1980s and '90s .
 It was the first computer system to feature real-time processing, multiplexing, and display devices .
 It was the first general computing machine, and a direct predecessor of modern computers . The first general computer machine was built in 1903 . It was also known as a precursor to modern computers.
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Emergence of the anti-nuclear movement was the birth of the nuclear industry .
 The bomb exploded with a yield equivalent to 12,500 tonnes of TNT . It destroyed nearly 50,000 buildings and killed approximately 75,000 people . The blast and thermal wave of the bomb destroyed nearly .
 Operation Crossroads was a series of nuclear weapon tests conducted by the U.S. at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean in the summer of 1946 . Subsequently, the world's nuclear weapons stockpiles grew .
 Bikini's native residents were evicted from their homes and resettled on smaller, uninhabited islands where they were unable to sustain themselves . To prepare the Bikini atoll for the nuclear tests, the atoll was evacuated .
 Also involved in the debate was the scientific community, through associations such as the Federation of Atomic Scientists .
 Radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons testing was first drawn to public attention in 1954 when a Hydrogen bomb test in the Pacific contaminated the crew of the Japanese fishing boat Lucky Dragon . The crew of Lucky Dragon was contaminated by a hydrogen bomb test .
 The Russell–Einstein Manifesto was issued in London on July 9, 1955, by Bertrand Russell in the midst of the Cold War . Russell issued the document in a bid to counter the growing anti-war sentiment .
 It highlighted the dangers posed by nuclear weapons and called for world leaders to seek peaceful resolutions to conflict .
 The signatories included eleven pre-eminent intellectuals and scientists, including Albert Einstein, who signed it just days before his death on April 18, 1955 . Albert Einstein signed it days before he died .
 A few days after the manifesto was released, Cyrus S Eaton offered to sponsor a conference in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, his birthplace .
 This conference was to be the first of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, held in July 1957 . It was the first Pugwash conference on science and world affairs to be held .
 The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the four-day marches .
 At the height of the Cold War, 50,000 women marched in 60 cities in the U.S. to demonstrate against nuclear weapons . Women Strike for Peace demonstrated in 1961 .
 Linus Pauling and his wife presented the United Nations with the petition signed by more than 11,000 scientists calling for an end to nuclear-weapon testing . It was the largest national women's peace protest of the 20th century .
 Above-ground nuclear testing posed significant public health risks in the form of radioactive fallout spread via milk from cows that had ingested contaminated grass . The ""Baby Tooth Survey" headed by Dr Louise Reiss .
 Submarine-launched ballistic missiles with multiple warheads made defending against nuclear attack impractical . Submarine launched ballistic missiles could be used to defend against nuclear attacks .
 By the 1960s, both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had developed intercontinental ballistic missiles . The missiles could be launched from extremely remote areas far away from their target .
 They had also developed submarine-launched ballistic missiles, which had less range but could be launched from submarines very close to the target without any radar warning .
 This made any protection from nuclear missiles increasingly impractical . It made any national protection from nukes increasingly impossible .
 The international politics of brinkmanship led leaders to exclaim their willingness to participate in a nuclear war rather than concede any advantage to their opponents, feeding public fears that their generation may be the last .
 Civil defense programs undertaken by both superpowers, exemplified by the construction of fallout shelters and urging civilians about the survivability of nuclear war, did little to ease public concerns . Civil defense efforts undertaken by the superpowers .
 The U.S. concluded that the Soviet Union was planning to station Soviet nuclear missiles on the island . The island was under the control of communist Fidel Castro .
 On October 22, Kennedy announced the discoveries in a televised address . Kennedy said the discoveries were made on October 22 .
 The missiles had 2,400 mile range, and would allow the Soviet Union to quickly destroy many major American cities on the Eastern Seaboard if a nuclear war began . The missiles would be able to destroy many of America's major cities .
 The leaders of the two superpowers stood nose to nose, seemingly poised over the beginnings of a third world war . The leaders stood nose-to-nose in the face of the first world war.
 Khrushchev's ambitions for putting weapons on the island were motivated in part by the fact that the U.S. had stationed similar weapons in Britain, Italy, and nearby Turkey . The United States had previously attempted to sponsor an invasion of Cuba the year before in the failed Bay of
 Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy offering to withdraw all missiles if Kennedy committed to a policy of no future invasions of Cuba . Kennedy made the offer on October 26, 1962 .
 A day later, the Soviets sent another message, this time demanding that the U.S. remove its missiles from Turkey before any missiles were withdrawn from Cuba . The Soviets demanded that the United States remove the missiles before any of them were withdrawn .
 On the same day, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba and another almost intercepted over the Soviet Union, as Soviet merchant ships neared the quarantine zone . The planes were shot down in Cuba and intercepted over Soviet Union .
 Kennedy responded by accepting the first deal publicly, and sending his brother Robert to the Soviet embassy to accept the second deal privately . Kennedy accepted the first and second deals, but accepted the second .
 On October 28, Soviet ships stopped at the quarantine line and, after some hesitation, turned back towards the Soviet Union . The Soviet ships returned to the USSR on October 28 .
 The Crisis was later seen as the closest the U.S. and the USSR ever came to nuclear war . The crisis was narrowly averted by last-minute compromise by both superpowers .
 Fears of communication difficulties led to the installment of the first hotline . The hotline was a direct link between the superpowers . It allowed them to more easily discuss future military activities .
 It had been made clear that missiles, bombers, submarines, and computerized firing systems made escalating any situation to Armageddon far more easy than anybody desired .
 After stepping so close to the brink, both the U.S. and the USSR worked to reduce their nuclear tensions in the years following . The United States and the Soviet Union were able to work to reduce tensions .
 The era of using massive nuclear tests as a form of saber rattling ended . Testing underground continued, but the worldwide fallout risks were purposefully reduced .
 NATO decided to deploy cruise and Pershing II missiles in Western Europe in response to Soviet deployment of intermediate range mobile missiles . In the early 1980s, a ""dangerous Soviet-US nuclear confrontation"" arose . NATO deployed cruise missiles in Europe in December 1979 .
 As the nuclear abolitionist movement grew, there were many protests at the Nevada Test Site . Nuclear abolitionists protested against the nuclear program .
 Greenpeace, The American Peace Test, The Western Shoshone, and Nevada Desert Experience are among the groups organizing this renewal of anti-nuclear activism . Four of the significant groups organizing the renewal were Greenpeace .
 There have been at least four major false alarms, the most recent in 1995 . The most recent resulted in the activation of nuclear attack early warning protocols .
 A computer chip failure appeared to show a random number of attacking missiles . A rare alignment of the Sun, the United States missile fields and a Soviet early-warning satellite caused it to confuse high-altitude clouds with missile launches . President Yeltsin activated his nuclear briefcase for the
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Initial proliferation This section has additional citations to verify .
 The United Kingdom had been an integral part of the Manhattan Project following the Quebec Agreement in 1943 . The U.K. had been integral .
 The McMahon Act by the United States in 1946 unilaterally broke this partnership . It prevented the passage of any further information to the United Kingdom . The U.S. passed the McMahon Act in 1946 .
 The British Government, under Clement Attlee, determined that a British Bomb was essential . The British government determined that the bomb was essential to the UK .
 Because of British involvement in the Manhattan Project, Britain had extensive knowledge in some areas, but not in others . Because of UK involvement in project, British knowledge was limited to some areas .
 An improved version of 'Fat Man' was developed in 1952 . A successful test took place on 3 October 1952 . The United Kingdom also had an atomic bomb .
 At first these were free-fall bombs, intended for use by the V Force of jet bombers . At first they were . intended to be used by . the V . Force of . jet bombers.
 A Vickers Valiant dropped the first UK nuclear weapon on 11 October 1956 at Maralinga, South Australia . It was dropped by a Vickers Valiant vehicle on 11 October 1956 .
 Anglo-American cooperation on nuclear weapons was restored by the 1958 US-UK Mutual Defence Agreement .
 The United Kingdom has bought U.S. designs for submarine missiles and fitted its own warheads . As a result of this and the Polaris Sales Agreement, the UK has bought United States designs for submarines .
 France had been heavily involved in nuclear research before World War II through the work of the Joliot-Curies .
 This was discontinued after the war because of the instability of the Fourth Republic and lack of finances . This was stopped after the Second World War because of instability .
 In the 1950s, France launched a civil nuclear research program, which produced plutonium as a byproduct . However, the program ended in the 1960s, with plutonium being produced .
 In 1956, France formed a secret Committee for the Military Applications of Atomic Energy and a development program for delivery vehicles . The Committee was formed in 1956 .
 With the return of Charles de Gaulle to the French presidency in 1958, final decisions to build a bomb were made, which led to a successful test in 1960 . The test took place in the summer of that year in France .
 In 1951, China and the Soviet Union signed an agreement whereby China supplied uranium ore in exchange for technical assistance in producing nuclear weapons . China supplied the uranium ore to the Soviets in return for technical help in producing nukes .
 In 1953, China established a research program under the guise of civilian nuclear energy . China established the program in 1953 . It is believed to be the first country to develop a nuclear reactor .
 Throughout the 1950s the Soviet Union provided large amounts of equipment . The Soviet Union was heavily relied on by the Soviets during the Cold War .
 In 1959, the Soviets refused to donate a bomb for copying purposes . As relations between the two countries worsened the Soviets reduced the amount of assistance . The Soviet Union refused to give a bomb to copy the bomb .
 Chinese first gained possession of nuclear weapons in 1964, making it the fifth country to have them . China is the only country in the world to have nuclear weapons .
 It tested its first atomic bomb at Lop Nur on October 16, 1964 . It tested a nuclear missile on October 25, 1966; and a thermonuclear bomb on June 14, 1967 .
 China conducted a total of 45 nuclear tests; although the country has never become a signatory to the Limited Test Ban Treaty, it conducted its last nuclear test in 1996 . The country conducted its final nuclear test, which took place in 1995 .
 In the 1980s, China's nuclear weapons program was a source of nuclear proliferation, as China transferred its CHIC-4 technology to Pakistan . China transferred the technology to the Pakistani military in the 1990s .
 China became a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a nuclear weapon state in 1992 . China joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group in 2004 and joined the N.P.N.G. in 2004 .
 China declared a policy of ""no first use" in 1964, the only nuclear weapons state to announce such a policy . This declaration has no effect on its capabilities and there are no diplomatic means of verifying or enforcing it .
 Cold War ICBMs, like the American Minuteman missile, allowed nations to deliver nuclear weapons thousands of miles away with relative ease . Cold War I-BMMs were used to carry nuclear weapons .
 30,000 women held hands around the 6 miles perimeter of the RAF Greenham Common base, in protest against the decision to site American cruise missiles there . The base was the site of U.S. cruise missiles .
 After World War II, the balance of power between the Eastern and Western blocs and the fear of global destruction prevented the further military use of atomic bombs . The fear of destruction prevented further use of nuclear weapons .
 This fear was even a central part of Cold War strategy, referred to as the doctrine of Mutually Assured Destruction . The fear of M.A. Destruction was even part of the doctrine .
 The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty was signed by the U.S. and the USSR in 1972 to curtail the development of nuclear weapons and missile defense . The treaty was a treaty to curtail development of ballistic missiles that carry nuclear weapons .
 Each side sought to ensure it had the firepower to destroy the opposition in all possible scenarios . This doctrine resulted in a large increase in the number of nuclear weapons, as each side sought the firepower .
 Early delivery systems for nuclear devices were primarily bombers like the United States B-29 Superfortress and Convair B-36, and later the B-52 Stratofortress . The U.S. bombers were used to deliver nuclear devices .
 These systems were used to launch satellites, such as Sputnik, and to propel the Space Race . They were developed to create Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles that could deliver nuclear weapons anywhere on the globe .
 Plans and treaties, beginning with the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, restricted deployment of these systems . After the fall of the Soviet Union, system development essentially halted . Many weapons were disabled and destroyed .
 On January 27, 1967, more than 60 nations signed the Outer Space Treaty, banning nuclear weapons in space . The treaty was signed by 60 nations .
 Most of the lost weapons were recovered, the Spanish device after three months' effort . The DSV Alvin and DSV Aluminaut recovered the weapons .
 Greenpeace believes that there are around forty nonUnited States nuclear devices that have been lost and not recovered, compared to eleven lost by America . The Soviet Union was less forthcoming about such incidents, but the environmental group believes there are forty nonU.S. nuclear devices .
 The U.S. has tried to recover Soviet devices, notably in the 1974 Project Azorian using a specialist salvage vessel Hughes Glomar Explorer to raise a Soviet submarine .
 If such data were to exist, the subject matter would be classified, and could not be disclosed . The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 essentially ended the Cold War .
 The end of the Cold War failed to end the threat of nuclear weapon use . However, global fears of nuclear war reduced substantially substantially .
 Boris Yeltsin, on January 26, 1992, announced that Russia planned to stop targeting U.S. cities with nuclear weapons . The move was a major move of symbolic de-escalation . The U.N. nuclear weapons were banned in the 1990s, but not in
 The designing, testing, producing, deploying, deploying and defending against nuclear weapons is one of the largest expenditures for the nations which possess nuclear weapons . Cost is estimated at $1.5 billion per year .
 The total expenditures for U.S. nuclear weapons from 1940 to 1998 was $5. trillion in 1996 dollars . The total public debt at the end of fiscal year 1998 at $5,478,189,000,000 in 1998 dollars .
 The entire public debt in 1998 was equal to the cost of research, development, and deployment of U.S. nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons-related programs during the Cold War .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Second nuclear age is the second nuclear age .
 Second nuclear age can be seen as proliferation of nuclear weapons among lesser powers . The second nuclear age is seen as for reasons other than the American-Soviet-Chinese rivalry .
 India embarked relatively early on a program aimed at nuclear weapons capability, but accelerated this after the Sino-Indian War of 1962 . India embarked on a nuclear weapons program early in the 1960s .
 Bhutto of Pakistan launched scientific research on nuclear weapons . After the collapse of Eastern Military High Command and the disintegration of Pakistan as a result of the 1971 Winter war, Pakistan launched nuclear weapons research . Pakistan was defeated in the Winter War of 1971 .
 The Indian test caused Pakistan to spur its programme, and the ISI conducted successful espionage operations in the Netherlands, while also developing the programme indigenously .
 India tested fission and perhaps fusion devices in 1998 . Pakistan successfully tested nuclear devices that same year, raising concerns they would use nuclear weapons on each other .
 All of the former Soviet bloc countries with nuclear weapons transferred their warheads to Russia by 1996 . The former Soviet-bloited countries transferred their nuclear weapons to Russia .
 South Africa dismantled its nuclear weapon program in the 1990s . South Africa also had an active program to develop uranium-based nuclear weapons .
 Experts do not believe it actually tested such a weapon, though it later claimed it constructed several crude devices that it eventually dismantled . Experts believe it was only a crude device that it dismantled .
 Known as the Vela Incident, it was speculated to have been a South African or possibly Israeli nuclear weapons test, though some feel that it may have been caused by natural events or a detector malfunction .
 Several key U.S. scientists involved in the American bomb making program clandestinely helped the Israelis and thus played an important role in nuclear proliferation . Several key United States scientists helped the Israeli .
 Khan of Pakistan's programme confessed to having been a key mover in ""proliferation activities" seen as part of an international proliferation network of materials, knowledge, and machines from Pakistan to Libya, Iran, and North Korea . Khan's programme is seen as one of the key m
 The first claimed detonation was the 2006 North Korean nuclear test, conducted on October 9, 2006 . North Korea's first nuclear test was conducted in 2006 .
 On May 25, 2009, North Korea continued nuclear testing, violating United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718 . North Korea violated UN Security Council resolution 1718 by continuing nuclear testing . The U.N. resolution was passed in 2009 .
 A third test was conducted on 13 February 2013, two tests were conducted in 2016 in January and September, followed by test a year later in September 2017 . A year later, a year after the test, a third was conducted in February 2013 .
 In 2022 during the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis, Russian President Vladimir Putin alleged that Ukraine was on the path to receiving nuclear weapons . Putin, as he had lightly done in the past, said that Ukraine would receive nuclear weapons in the future .
 Putin: There was a 'real danger' that Western allies could help supply Ukraine with nuclear arms . Ukraine appeared to be on the path to joining NATO, Putin said . Putin said there was a "real danger" that Western . allies could supply Ukraine, which appeared to . join NATO
 Critics labelled Putin's claims as 'conspiracy theories' designed to build a case for an invasion of Ukraine . Critics labelled the claims as ""conspiracy  theories"
 Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls and the Making of British Nuclear Culture 1939–59 . Fuchs' work on the making of British nuclear culture 1939-59 .
 A Technical History of Los Alamos During the Oppenheimer Years, 1943–1945. A Technical Historian of the Alamos, 1943-1945. The Oppenheim years were the most productive years of the atomic age .
 National Museum of Nuclear Science & History & History/Atomic Heritage Foundation . The museum is located in Washington, DC .
 The total figure will likely be equal to the $5 trillion national debt . ISSN 0096-3402.
 An Annotated Chronology, 1969–1994 . Archived 2001-09-27 at the Library of Congress Web Archives. An Annotation Chronology .
 Colin S Gray, Paul Bracken, The Second Nuclear Age, and Paul S. Gray, , . Paul Bracksen, . Paul Gray, . Colin S . Gray, wrote "Presidents in the Nuclear Age" at the JFK Library, Boston, October 12, 2009
 Comparative table of the histories and arsenals of the five NPT-designated nuclear powers as of 1993 . Comparable table .