 The author examines the February 1963 release of Josyf Slipyj, the Ukrainian Greek Catholic archbishop, by the Soviet government . The author draws on original documentation from several archives .
 The Second Vatican Council and the process of aggiornamento set major changes in motion for the Church . The process was set up in the 1960s .
 English translations of quotations in this article are the author’s . Unless otherwise indicated, the author of this article has provided an English translation of some of the quotes .
 The first and second volumes set the church historical background for this study . The second and third volumes of this study will set the background for the study .
 The extraordinary capacity of John XXIII’s humane and conciliatory attitude became most tangible in his remarkable encyclical letter, Pacem in Terris, of April 11, 1963 .
 The encyclical was promulgated at a time when anticommunist sentiments were a strong presence within the gatherings of ‘his” ecumenical council . It is a document that can be seen as a worthy testament to the pope’s peacekeeping efforts .
 This article will tend to confirm the pivotal role of John XXIII, but will by no means describe the full scope of his geopolitical impact . A detailed analysis of the way in which the Vatican repositioned itself within the overall context of the cold war also falls outside the scope of this
 On the Russian Orthodox Church under communist rule, see Dimitri Vladimirovich Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime 1917–1982, 2 vols. On the subject of this article, please contact us at http://www.mailonline.com/
 Thenmonsignor Johannes Willebrands was secretary of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity . He was also the then-secretary of the Christian Unity Secretariat .
 Political tensions reached a fearful climax in the Cuba crisis . memories of the casualties of World War II were still fresh in the Netherlands .
 John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Pope John XXIII all contributed to Slipyj’s release from exile . The interaction of protagonists such as U.S. Catholic president Kennedy,6 Soviet premier Nikita .
 In the period discussed in this article Cousins met with Khrushchev, Kennedy, and John XXIII . He maintained contacts among these leaders .
 Cousins’s book appears to have been based largely upon his book . Many other accounts appear to be based on the book, including that of Cousins .
 The intention here is not to offer a simple repetition or a synthetic overview of the existing literature . Rather, a reassessment of this event will be presented from a church historiographer’s perspective .
 The often underestimated, if not unknown, role played by individuals such as Félix A Morlion, O.P., and Johannes Willebrands will be highlighted . In addition, the often underestimated and unknown role of individuals such a . person such as . Fé
 Details of the contacts between Vatican officials and politicians on both sides of the ideological divide will be presented . In this account, details of the meetings took place before and after Slipyj’s release from Moscow .
 The same is to be said for several studies briefly discussing Slipyj’s release in Vatican II in Moscow, 1959–1965, ed. ed. Pope II in Russia, 1959-65 .
 On Willebrands’s biography, see Karim Schelkens, Johannes Gerardus Maria Wille Brands, in Bio-bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon, 31 (Nordhausen, forthcoming), highlighting the importance and characteristics of Wil
 These items were delivered to Suenens through the mediation of Curtis Roosevelt (grandson of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt) and Morlion, with permission from Monsignor Igino .
 Suenens at Vatican II,’ in The Belgian Contribution to the Second Vatican Council, ed. ed. “The Belgian Contributory to the Vatican II’s . The Belgian contribution to the . Second Vatican . Council was published by the Belgian Catholic Church in
 This study will benefit from recent publications that feature other relevant sources, such as recent publications . It will also benefit from the publication of other relevant material .
 Given the distinctive nature of Slipyj’s personal situation, some background information is necessary about the position of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the post–World War II era . The rise of Roman Catholic ecumenism in the same period, and the clash between the Ukrainian di
 A detailed reconstruction of the timeline of Slipyj’s release will be offered . Within this complex setting, a detailed reconstruction is offered .
 To understand the difficulties surrounding the release of Slipyj from Soviet incarceration, it is necessary to look at the origins of his exile . Ukrainian Greek Catholicism after World War II .
 These are to be understood within the context of the bipolar political situation characterizing the post–World War II era . The bipolar situation characterizes the post-WWII era .
 Andrej Sheptytsky, the Lviv metropolitan for the UGCC, passed away in November 1944 . His territory in Western Ukraine had already become part of the Soviet empire .
 Ukrainian Greek Catholics had been in communion with the Holy See since the Union of Brest in 1595–96 . During the war, the communist occupier’s primary concerns had not been in the religious field .
 Sheptytsky had established four Ukrainian exarchates in October 1939 . Two months later he secretly ordained Slipyj as bishop . Slipj was the rector of the Greek Catholic Theological Academy in Lviv .
 On April 11, 1945, the Ukrainian Catholic bishops, including Slipyj, were arrested . The arrests took place in 1945, when the first Ukrainian Catholic bishop was arrested .
 Pius XII condemned communism in encyclical Orientales Omnes of December 23, 1945 . Most of them were accused of collaboration with Nazi rule and sentenced to forced labor and exile .
 The pope stated later: “Sed res ipsae atque eventus facile declarant in suaque luce ponunt quaenam fuerit ac sit harum saevitiarum causa.” The pope later stated:“
 Even when religious liberty was included in the USSR’s constitution, it was merely a formal liberty, for in reality, the Greek Catholic Church had no real right to existence . The Church was not allowed to exist .
 The Vatican under Pius XII repeatedly rebuked communism17 and sharply criticized the Russian Orthodox Church . In reaction, the Vatican rebuked Communism17 . The Russian Orthodox church had become subject to state government .
 The end of the 1950s was marked by repressions of Ukrainian Catholics as well as other religious minorities . Khrushchev’s February 25, 1956,“Secret Speech” contributed to de-Stalinization of the USSR .
 Vatican's presentation of itself as an anticommunist stronghold in the decades before the Second Vatican Council . The establishment of new ecumenical contacts on an international level facilitated attitudes quite different from the one found in the 1928 encyclical Mortalium Animos .
 A Roman Catholic awareness and engagement in the ecumenical movement was not lacking before and during World War II,20 it was mostly thereafter .
 The documents on this mock synod of 1946 were published by Patriarch Pimen, L’vovskij tserkovnyi sobor . A year later Willebrands established the Catholic Conference .
 The Catholic Conference for Ecumenical Questions was engaged not only with the WCC but also with individual members of other religions, including those behind the Iron Curtain . The WCC was engaged in the process of reaching out to members of the Communist Party .
 Russian Orthodox Church contacts with other denominations were most relevant . Most relevant in this context were the contacts between the Russian Orthodox church and other denominations .
 A fortiori after the second WCC assembly at Evanston in 1954, an ongoing process of correspondence was set up between Geneva and Moscow, resulting in a meeting on August 8–10, 1958, in Utrecht . As a result, the WCC was set to meet
 The Utrecht talks revealed the internal complexity of the Russian Orthodox Church and its attitude to the West, as well as its willingness to engage in further communication . These initial contacts proved to be crucial, even when no Roman Catholic participants were present .
 Russian delegates at Utrecht meeting inquired about the relationship between the WCC and the Roman Catholic Church . Both the 1949 Instruction and the activities of the Catholic Conference and Istina were discussed .
 The “Confidential Report” reads: “The delegates of the Church in Russia asked about the relationship of the WCC with the Catholic Church.” The report was leaked to the Russian Church .
 Watson, Père Couturier, and the WCC’s Commission on Faith and Order, but the idea is the same . Watson is a former member of the World Order of Order .
 Russian Orthodox Church decided to join WCC in April 1961,26 and this would be confirmed and accepted during the WCC conference in New Delhi . As a result of the Utrecht talks, the Russian Orthodox church decided to .
 The Vatican has undergone a thorough transformation at the Vatican . The Vatican is undergoing a major overhaul .
 On October 28, 1958, John XXIII was elected pope . On January 25, 1959, he convoked an ecumenical council . He convoked the council in order to address the world's major issues .
 The Rhodes incident made it painfully clear that the Vatican urgently needed an ‘official address’ for ecumenical affairs . This decision would have far-reaching consequences for both the development of Catholic ecumenism and the relationship among the Vatican, the Kremlin, and the Moscow Patriarchate
 The June 5, 1960, motu proprio proprio Superno Dei Nutu announced the establishment of ten preconciliar commissions and three secretariats that included a Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity . Cardinal Augustin Bea28 was the first president of the Secretariat
 Given the SPCU’s mandate to invite “there were some difficulties with the Roman Catholic Church concerning the persecution of Protestant minorities in Catholic countries. “ There was some difficulties . concerning the . persecution of Protestants in Catholic . countries. Given the . mandate to . invite
 Two delegates from the Moscow Patriarchate had come to Geneva in June 1959 to study the WCC organization, as well as arrange a December visit by Visser ’t Hooft to Moscow . This note mentions the fact that two delegates . had come . to Geneva .
 “From the Security of the Fortress to the Lure of the Quest,” in Alberigo and Komonchak, History of Vatican II, 2:1–54. “The Vatican II was founded by the Catholic Church in 1968 .
 The SPCU’s invitation to Moscow to send official observers to the Second Vatican Council was rejected by Moscow . Moscow had initially rejected the invitation, which arose from the invitation to send observers to Vatican Council .
 The issue of Russian Orthodox observers at the Second Vatican Council turned out to be far more complex, because of the difficult bilateral relationships between various Orthodox Patriarchates . Boris Nikodim, the metropolitan of Leningrad and Minsk, spoke in favor of sending WCC observers .
 On August 13, Wilillebrands, present in Paris, had private talks with Visser ’t Hooft; Nikodim; and archpriest Vitali Borovoj, a professor at Leningrad Ecclesiastical Academy .
 Russian Orthodox Church in Moscow would require presence in Moscow as a condition for obtaining cooperation from the church . Putin learned that establishing further contacts with the church was not impossible, but would require his presence .
 Willebrands discussed briefly the fate of the Catholic Church under Soviet rule with Nikodim, then asked Bea for permission to undertake the journey . Bea then asked for permission for the trip to the Vatican .
 SPCU’s invitation for sending WCC observers to the Council was welcomed by Nikodim . Nikodims was key to obtaining a positive reaction to the invitation, the report says .
 KDC,Archives Willebrands, 68:“Rapport du P Hamer, Comité central du Conseil Oecuménique des Églises,” Paris,August 24, 1962 . KDC: “Ramport du
 Kurojedov, the new president of the Soviet Government Council for Church Affairs, had taken a negative stance toward John XXIII’s initiative to convoke the Council .
 Anonymous article Non possumus published in June 1960 issue of Zˇurnal Moskovskoj Patriarchii—the periodical of the Moscow Patriarchate .
 Russian government had to grant permission to Catholic bishops in Russian territory to participate in the Council . Catholic bishops had to be approved by the Russian government .
 He kept complete records of conversations he held there from September 27 to October 2, 1962 . The main discussion topic was the practical organization of the Council, including the role of observers .
 Russians pointed out that the Council should avoid an explicit connection of communist atheism with specific nations . Also, the Russians said that the council should avoid a explicit connection with specific countries .
 Bea proceeds proceeds:“Data questa assicurazione ufficiale e autorevole si pu��ò continuare di trattare la questione degli Osservatori.”.
 Rev.ma vada per questo scopo anche a Mosca, come ha visitedato altri Patriarcati . Rev. Rev. Ma.ma has visited a number of other Patriarcatis in the past, including in Rome and in Italy .
 Cela n’est pas vrai, mais nous demandons de comprendre notre situation . Cela  n'est pas  vrais: "Cela n'toure noure    cela noure
 Nicodème entendu des rumeurs que certains Vicaires apostoliques en Russie demandé un visa pour aller au Concile . Concernant la position des évêques catholiques in Russie .
 To understand the reaction of the SPCU’s invitation to the Moscow Patriarchate, a look at the preparation in Rome for the Council is necessary . Nikodim articulated the central issue with powerful clarity .
 In the Council’s preparation phase, the bishops’ vota were collected and organized into a manageable list of topics . In the council's preparation, bishops' vota topics were collected into manageable lists . The Cold War in Rome was the first time the Cold War was declared
 From summer 1960 onward the preconciliar commissions were active in Rome, which included several UGCC representatives . The preconciliaries were active from summer 1960 onwards .
 Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Ss.R., the Ukrainian metropolitan of Winnipeg, and John XXIII at Castel Gandolfo on September 30, 1961 . Noteworthy is the conversation between Maxim Hermanauk and John . XXIII .
 The Holy Father greeted me in Bulgarian—kak su—“how are you”, offering the courtesy of using a Slavic language . Upon entering the Holy Father .
 The invitation, in some form (to show a solidarity of faith in one God against atheistic communism), to the representatives of all who profess one God on the occasion of the Ecumenical Council .
 The invitation, in some form, of Orthodox and Protestants to this Council . The invitation is an invitation, some form of an Orthodox and Protestant council .
 The persecution of the Church in Ukraine and the martyrdom of our nation, especially the great Metropolitan J Slipyj. The great Metropolitan of the Ukraine, especially in Ukraine, will be remembered .
 The Holy Father confirmed, concerning, concerning the first two points, that this is very complex and is in the stage of study . He said: "This is a very complex issue and in the stages of study"
 Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Sss.R., Ukrainian metropolitan of Winnipeg, at the Second Vatican Council . Maxim Hermanuuk was a Ukrainian metropolitan .
 Members of the Ukrainian diaspora episcopate were hoping that the Council would address the suppression of the Greek Catholic churches in the Soviet Union .
 15 members of the Ukrainian diaspora hierarchy gathered in Rome to set a public agenda . The Council’s solemn opening session will be held in Rome .
 Several steps were initiated at that meeting such as the preparation of a brochure and a letter to the Council Fathers informing them of the situation of Catholic martyrs of the UGCC and Slipyj .
 The Council Diaries of Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Ss.R., Metropolitan of Winnipeg, 1960–1965, annotated . The diary will be published as The Council diaries .
 Borovoj, who had attended Utrecht and Paris meetings, also frequently visited the WCC headquarters at Geneva as a delegate for his church . Vladimir Kotliarov, vice-superior of the Russian Religious Mission at Jerusalem, was vice-delegate to the Russian religious mission
 The Ukrainian diaspora bishops arrived in Rome on October 12 . Action was swiftly taken by the diasporporals . The bishops are now in Rome .
 Hornjak on the issue of the ratification of the text of a common letter of our Ukrainian Bishops to all the Fathers of the Council regarding ”the observers” of the Russian Orthodox Church at the Council . Hornjaks: The text of the letter of the Ukrainian B
 I was entrusted with preparing an outline of our lines of thought, and Most Rev. Rev. John Defterios was the author of the book .
 Afterwards we will determine when that letter is to be given to the Fathers of the Council . Afterwards, the Fathers will decide when to give the letter to the fathers of the council .
 As Nikodim had predicted, the Ukrainian diaspora bishops were deeply shocked by the presence of Russian Orthodox observers . Many of their own bishops were still in exile or imprisoned .
 Maximos IV from Antioch, the Patriarch of Armenia and the Maronite Patriarch. Maximos III from Antioch . Maximos I from Antioch and the Patriarch from Armenia . The Patriarch's visit to Armenia was the first visit to the Armenian capital, Yerimabad .
 Among those present were also ‘observers’ of the Russian Orthodox Church—Vitali Borovoj and Vladimir Kotliarov . Among those at the event were also—one knows not why and what for—the 'observer' of the church .
 This is a real misfortune for the Council and for all its manifestations. This is the Council, and all its forms, it has been said .
 Russian Orthodox Church and Soviet government presented as a single entity, making clear that the Council should denounce both rather than invite “communist representatives” to Rome . At this point, the Ukrainian hierarchy felt deserted by the Vatican administration, and the Ukrainian hierarchs felt that they needed to
 On October 25, Willebrands and Bea were aware of the intention of the Ukrainian bishops to publicly protest the presence of the Russian observers at the Second Vatican Council . Their initiative was hardly welcomed by the SPCU.
 Cardinal Amleto Cicognani, secretary of state for Holy See, made a note on the matter . Cardinale, in turn, sent a note to the Vatican secretary for the Holy See .
 He felt the Vatican diplomats would opt for a modus vivendi with the Soviet Union, rather than for a clear support of the Ukrainian martyrs . He also felt there was a risk that the Vatican might opt for an agreement with the Soviets .
 John XXIII personally asked Bea to prevent such an action by the Ukrainian bishops . Bea met with Ukrainian Metropolitan Ambrosij Senysyn to inform him that the pope wished the bishops to refrain from action against the Russian observers .
 The negotiations leading to Slipyj’s release must be understood . These factors contribute to the extremely complex background against which the negotiations leading up to his release must also be understood, says the author .
 When it came to the Vatican’s attitude toward communism John XXIII showed an astoundingly open and humanist attitude from the earliest period of his pontificate . From Andover to Rome, the Vatican's attitude to communism was a humanist .
 This is illustrated by a remarkable peacekeeping initiative from the pope’s side . Pope Francis has been involved in the peacekeeping effort in the past .
 First was the possibility of establishing an ‘international university council’ Council . The council would consider establishing an 'international university' Council .
 Ukrainian bishops are planning to make public objections against the presence of Russian observers, with Msgr. Bea . Cardinal Bea informs me that he has learned from a reliable source, that the Ukrainian bishops plan to make objections .
 The cardinal orders me to contact Msgr. Francis Francis to prevent such action from happening . It is needed to prevent it from happening, he says . Francis says .
 Morlion and John XXIII talked about the need for a series of books to explain to nonbelievers, including those under communist rule . The new and more pastoral approach of the Catholic Church, they said .
 The pope intended that these six books would be issued after events at the Vatican . Pope intended to issue them after events in Vatican City .
 With John XXIII’s approval Morlion contacted Harper and Brothers in search of a writer who could advise him on his project . The project is set to be completed in the next year .
 Cousins and Morlion quickly became friends, and this friendship would have significant ecclesiastical and political implications . Cousins became friends with Morlions, and the friendship would lead to a friendship between them .
 Morlion observed talks that took place on eve of U.S. congressional elections . Talks took place amid mounting tensions of the Cuba crisis . This time, through the mediation of Cousins, the talks took place .
 Morlion then telephoned Cardinale, who stated that such a plan was underway and that Kennedy would be kept informed of the plan . Kennedy was kept informed .
 On that day Morlion twice telephoned the Vatican, making the case for Cousins as a possible link between the Vatican and the Kremlin . Cousins is the son of Russian President Vladimir Putin, Vladimir Putin's former ally .
 The result of these communications is indicated by Cardinale, who made clear that the pope was interested in receiving Cousins . The pope is interested in sending Cousins to the Vatican .
 On October 25, 1962, John XXIII delivered a speech on the radio that asked all parties to avoid nuclear warfare and casualties . The speech was broadcast by the U.S. President of the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 In the course of the next days both Khrushchev and Kennedy gave proof of restraint . In the meantime, the world was in a state of chaos .
 He is a rather unique case in having obtained special personal confidence of Nikita Khrushchev as proved by certain questions asked him which cannot be explained as ordinary moves of dissimulation . He is not a typical Russian politician, but he is a unique case .
 This has been favored by Khrushchev's books and actions for peace which have been linked to organizations such as SANE which are not under his control . This is also favored by his books, which he has written and acted for peace .
 He is widely known as a humanist who is not identified with any particular creed . He owes no allegiance to any church and is widely considered an atheist .
 He is seen by Nikita Khrushchev and his friends as a typical leader of a new peace loving generation, which owes primary allegiance to the human family and the cause of peace .
 The U.S. did not have a formal diplomatic relationship with the Holy See . At the time the United States had no formal diplomatic relations with the Vatican .
 Morlion’s three-hour talk with these men would prove quite important, as he solicited permission for Cousins to travel to Moscow and meet with Khrushchev55 after a visit to the Vatican .
 Morlion had managed to send Cousins to Moscow with a specifically religious agenda . In other words, the Russian government is sending him to Moscow .
 On October 29 Morlion had another transatlantic phone conversation with Cardinale regarding the possibility of a visit by Cousins to the Vatican . In late November Cousins received a phone call from Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the United States, who indicated that Cousins could meet with
 A triangular structure of private contacts was established among Washington, Rome, and Moscow based on the personal contacts established by Cousins and Morlion .
 The presence of Russian Orthodox observers at the Second Vatican Council stirred controversy, but could have been expected, given John XXIII’s overall approach to outreach . contacts had been evolving between the Vatican and the Kremlin since 1961 .
 The SPCU's ecumenical contacts were largely separate from its ecumenarian endeavors, but equally important . Such contacts were mostly separate from the SPC U.S. efforts to reach out to the world .
 In late November 1961, John XXIII addressed a personal letter to Khrushchev,58 who in March 1958 had become premier of the Soviet Union . The letter was highly symbolic that in November 1961 it was sent by John XXII .
 On October 29, Morlion had a second conversation with the Russian delegates . He handed them a note he had prepared for Khrushchev that described the intentions of John XXIII and the upcoming book project on new Vatican policies .
 Andrea Riccardi and Augusto D’Angelo, 393. Il sogno di un tempo nuovo, ed. ed. D'Angelo , 393 . D‘Angelo: "Io, Io, ii, Ii, and Io
 Ukrainian bishops at the Council, who noted the turn taken in Cardinale’s press conference, decided to continue their course of action .
 Hermaniuk would comment on this in an interview with the Ukrainian Weekly, July 26, 1987, 4, 4 . He would later say he and the other 14 signed a joint letter calling for goodwill in releasing Slipyj. The letter was signed by the Ukrainian Catholic delegation of the
 Up until that point, the issue was too sensitive for any of the bishops to want to handle . The issue has been too sensitive to handle.
 II Giornale d’Italia was published on November 22, 1962 . So we printed in the daily newspaper, II Giorno d'Italia .
 The bishops attending Vatican II learned first-hand that they had no official voice . That day all of the bishops attending . Vatican II . learned first .hand that we had no voice .
 Pope John XXIII’s efforts in diplomacy were aimed at obtaining Slipyj's release . The Ukrainians had clearly not realized that their action was hardly appreciated by the pope . The pope's efforts were in vain .
 USSR ambassador to Italy was Amintore Fanfani, the Roman Catholic prime minister of Italy . Kozyrev was the Soviet ambassador to the Italian Republic . Kozrev was a member of the Soviet Union .
 After these conversations, Kozyrev believed an improved Holy See-Soviet Union relationship was on the horizon . This would later prove to be a somewhat premature expectation .
 Morlion and Cousins traveled to Rome to meet with Cardinals Cicognani and Bea, Monsignor Angelo Dell’Acqua, and Cardinale . They met with the Vatican on December 12, 2013 .
 The non-Catholic Cousins, who did not meet with John XXIII due to the pope’s illness, was now acting as an unofficial intermediary for the pope on this trip to the Kremlin .
 Certains évêques ukrainiens se sont désolidarisés de cette déclaration . U.S. has declared a state-sanctioned state of war in Ukraine .
 Le Secrétariat a jugé bon, d’accord avec la Secréerie d'État, de faire un communiqué de presse . Le secrétaires d'Etat    joked bon d'
 In Moscow, he wanted to raise the topic of Metropolitan J Slipyj, but His Eminence Card. Card. was not mentioned . He wanted to talk about Metropolitan J slipyj .
 The topic of Catholic suppression under Soviet rule was broached by Bea . Bea was fully informed about the state of church affairs in Moscow by Willebrands only three weeks before67 .
 Members of the religious community had been imprisoned inside the Soviet Union, he said . For many years he said, members of the . religious community were imprisoned inside Soviet Union .
 It would be a most favorable augury if at least one of them could be released, he said . Would there be any particular person he had in mind, he asked .
 The Holy Father would like the Archbishop to live out those few years in peace at some seminary, where he would be among his own . There is no intention to exploit the Archbishop's release for propaganda purposes .
 On December 14, Cousins flew from Rome to Moscow for a long conversation with Khrushchev . Cousins flew to Moscow on December 14 for a visit to meet with the former leader .
 English version was sent to Kennedy, and an Italian version to John XXIII, Cardinale, Dell’Acqua,Tisserant, and Bea . 16-page report by Cousins offers a full report of the dialogue .
 Khrushchev was well aware of Willebrands’s first Moscow visit just before the Cuba crisis, Cousins says .
 Khrushchev used about fifteen minutes to explain thoroughly the case of Bishop Slipyj, whom he had known . He had followed this case personally, when he was President of the Cabinet of Ukraine, from 1940 to 1950 .
 He gave a detailed history of the religious events in Ukraine, expounding thoroughly the political questions around the figure of his predecessor, His Excellency Bishop Prince Sheptytsky .
 Khrushchev says he does not know where bishop Slipyj is now, nor whether he is alive or not; but I shall deal with the matter and have his case examined,” which seems to recognize the potential for enormous scandal .
 Khrushchev: "I will have the case examined, and I do not exclude a release, provided there are guarantees that nobody will make a political case out of it" Cousins pressed further, stating that the Vatican would promise that it would not exploit any publicity .
 Khrushchev indicated that “it was not possible to go back to the situation that had existed under the Czar, when the priests were his gendarmes.” Sheptytsky .
 "I would like to have improved relationships with the Vatican but this is not the way to do it," says Archbishop of Cambridge .
 The tumultuous first period of the Second Vatican Council had come to a close . The overall new direction shaping Roman Catholicism was gradually evolving .
 Cousins met with Morlion, Dell’Acqua, Cardinale, and Bea, plus the dean of cardinals, Eugène Tisserant .
 Bea's vivid interest in the possibility of religious amelioration and the release of Slipyj. He reported on his conversation at the Kremlin and again noted Bea’s vivid interest .
 The pope's diplomatic sensitivity and personal desire for world peace on a humanitarian basis were clear, says Pope John XXIII . On the basis of his own report he had a lengthy conversation with John XXII .
 Pope John has profound convictions about the issue of war and peace in our time . War can no longer be considered a purely political question, he writes . The effects of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons on man, on the human germplasm, and the natural environment make the issue
 The Holy Father has no desire to create any embarrassment for the President or to undertake any initiatives that are unacceptable to the President . But the Holy Father does not want to make any initiatives unacceptable to him or the Chairman of the .
 I was grateful for the opportunity to report to you personally concerning my visit with Mr Khrushchev, from whom I sought assurances of enlarged religious freedom inside the Soviet Union . I was able to report on my visit to the Soviet Soviet Union, from where I sought .
 "He recognizes your desire to do everything possible to keep the differences now separating the nations from becoming the combustible material of a nuclear war"
 He welcomes the establishment of unofficial and confidential contacts or communications . He welcomes establishment of informal contacts or . communications .
 He will give consideration to your request that Holy Literature be made increasingly available, with respect to both publication and distribution . He will consider a proposal for Holy Literature to be published more widely .
 Cousins concluded that, like Vatican policy, Soviet policy at the summit was in transition, with Khrushchev searching for a workable relation to the West . Cousins concludes that a basic agreement among the three parties was moving toward fruition .
 The pope allowed for the offices of the Vatican to be made available for the purpose of averting or abating geopolitical crisis . The Vatican's offices will be available to avert or abate geopolitical crisis, the pope said .
 The Vatican was emerging as a fully accredited subject in international politics, maintaining its “third way” between Washington and Moscow . Seemingly, the Vatican was even willing to engage in actual mediation between political powers .
 Second, the absence of nuclear conflict was to be maintained through mutual respect for the conditions that make this possible . The absence of conflict was described as peaceful coexistence or competitive coexistence .
 Third, beyond the negative condition of absence of nuclear conflict, the possibility emerged for positive action. Third, from the possibility of positive action, it is possible to take action against nuclear weapons .
 Such positive action was to be rooted in a broad ‘humanistic consensus’ designed to foster the full development of human resources and capacities on the planet . This perspective could be shared by all parties involved .
 The fate of Slipyj has been reduced to a simple result of grand diplomacy among major political players . However, it does not reflect the full picture of the situation in Serbia .
 Willebrands and Cousins were key players behind the scenes in Slipyj’s release . Both had been key players in the release .
 Both had interacted with major figures behind the Iron Curtain . They were well aware that any type of accusation of political bias must be avoided .
 Both were skilled in diplomatic encounters within their domain, both skilled in diplomacy . Willebrands in ecumenical venues .
 Pope John XXIII asked his old friend Testa to contact the Russian observers at the Council in view of a possible release of Slipyj . Both knew of the pope’s personal longing79 for the liberation of Slipj .
 Cousins’s return to the U.S. is a period of calm set in after his return from the United States . Cousins is a star of the NBA, but he has been in the NBA since 2009 .
 Soviet government officials discussed Borovoj's report on the Second Vatican Council . They invited him to elaborate on it in January 1963 . The report was published in 1963 .
 "Any betterment of the human situation in this world ... is of importance to the United States," President Obama said .
 "The national interest and the human interest come together in our fundamental objectives as a nation," says President Obama . "We are committed to the national interest," says Obama .
 See the confidential note in KDC, Archives Willebrands, “Contacts avec les autorités du Patriarcat de Moscou,” in which a conversation is mentioned in view of Slipyj’s liberation among Testa, Be
 It was clear that the pope was highly respected inside the Kremlin, as had become evident during the December 14 CousinsKhrushchev talk . The pope is highly respected in the Kremlin .
 Borovoj was taking a personal risk to obtain the release of the Ukrainian archbishop . The move indicated a kind of benevolence toward the West and a more open stance toward ecumenical engagement .
 In Vatican circles, Monsignor Pietro Pavan was preparing an encyclical letter . It would be promulgated on April 11 under the title of Pacem in Terris .
 The encyclical, presented by Suenens at the U.N. in May 1963, would prove to be a worthy and lasting testimony of John XXIII’s endeavors to safeguard world peace . For Vatican diplomats, it meant the official opening up of a ‘third
 In that regard the encyclical remains a milestone that inaugurated a long process of the Catholic Church’s dealings with the communist world . In that .
 Khrushchev’s decision to release Slipyj from Siberian exile without further conditions and without a new trial .
 Slipyj was released from prison on January 25 . Kozyrev informed Fanfani of his release, and the news spread quickly .
 On that same day, Cardinale and Dell’Acqua met with Willebrands88 from the SPCU . Bea Bea, who was in Copenhagen, was in the absence of Bea .
 Slipyj made his way from Moscow to Rome to Rome . The pair spoke to each other on their way to the Italian capital . They discussed practical issues regarding his release from jail .
 On the preparation of this encyclical, see also Turbanti, Un concilio per il mondo moderno, 227. On this topic, see Turbante, Un Conciliio per Il mondo Moderno .
 “Pour ce cas, tu devrais prendre contact avec le citoyen italien,” January 25, 1963, 1: “I’ai parlé de cette affaire. Kozyrev”
 “Je lui ai dit that le Saint Siège avait reçu des nouvelles .’sarchevêque Josyf Slipyj serait mis en libertéj sans conditions. Kozyrev,” January
 The Ukrainian episcopate's actions were still fresh in memory . The central issue was the avoidance of press sensationalism, as the actions of the Ukrainian .
 The same sense of diplomacy surfaced when Willebrands expressed a need to visit the Moscow Patriarchate to ensure that inadvertent offense was not given .
 Kozyrev’s wish to improve the relationship between the Holy See and the Soviet Union also was evident . The Soviet Union and Holy See were close allies during the Cold War .
 When I said ‘No’, he was a little disappointed and said: “I thought there was something else you needed to tell me again.” When he said “No” he was disappointed and then said:“I think you need to tell
 The Ambassador responded: “In my opinion, the time has come to discuss the details. The time is now,” he said .
 Willebrands would prepare for his second journey to Moscow, with departure scheduled for February 1, 1963 . In the subsequent days he would prepare to leave for Moscow .
 Two days before, John XXIII had a personal message delivered to him, as well as the gift of a rosary for Slipyj .
 As for Slipyj’s release, it appeared that the Soviets thought it crucial that it was not to be considered a rehabilitation . As for the Soviets, it seemed it was crucial that the release was not considered rehabilitation .
 It was emphasized that a new trial would not be held and conditions were not attached to the 90 KDC, Archives Willebrands, “Conversation avec S. Exc.”
 Je sais qu’il y a eu des contacts au sujet d’une telle possibilité en princiption, mais je ne connais pas .
 Si possono dare a Mr Willebrands almeno una ventina di medaglie d’argento del Concilio . Si possano dare a mano d'argento a Mr. Willebands almano .
 On February 1, 1963, Willebrands arrived in Moscow and was met by Borovoj, who escorted him to the Hotel Metropol . The two men met at the hotel in Moscow .
 The next morning, he met with Vladimir Kurojedov, who in 1960 had been vehemently against Russian participation in the Second Vatican Council . He met with the president of the Soviet Council for Ecclesiastical Affairs, Peter Makkarsev, and other officials .
 Slipyj would spend some time at the Greek Catholic Abbey of Grottaferrata . Vatican would distribute a brief and sober press statement .
 Willebrands made clear that the SPCU’s intentions lay primarily in the field of reuniting Christianity as well as developing improved relationships with other religions and organizations .
 Question de première importance, notamment la position de votre église dans l’Union soviétique . The position of votre Église in lautautaut sovietique is a question of importance .
 In the afternoon Willebrands paid his visit to the Moscow Patriarchate’s Office for External Relationships, where he had a short conversation with the Estonian bishop Alexis of Tallin . The day after he visited the monastery at Zagorsk for a meeting with Arch
 Willebrands met Slipyj at the early morning of that day at the Hotel Moskva . Of greater interest is the fact that on the . early morning, that day WilleBrands met with SlipyJ at the hotel Moskova .
 "I told him that I understood deeply his desire to see his church and his family again, but I could not determine the possibility of such a journey," he said . "I understand deeply that he wanted to see them again," he added .
 Willebrands presented Slipyj with a schedule for the journey outlined by Testa and Dell’Acqua . The pair made clear that this was a question of conscience, with Slipj making clear that he was expected to come to Rome .
 Slipyj had decided to ship his luggage to Lviv and stay with Willebrands . He also was considering how he should respond to the Russian accusation that he had simply acted to save his own life and liberty .
 In the afternoon, Slipyj clandestinely ordained Basil Velychskovsky as bishop, thereby strengthening the underground episcopate in Ukraine under Soviet rule .
 Slipyj and Willebrands took the train to Vienna, where Papal Nuncio Opilio Rossi received them on February 6, 1963 . From Austria they traveled to Rome, Italy, where they were greeted by the papal nuncio .
 On February 10 Slipyj arrived at Grottaferrata, where “for the first time in seventeen years he fully celebrated the high Slavic rite.” The first time he had been there for 17 years was “to celebrate’t the first high Slav
 Two days later he received a letter from the Apostolic Delegate in Ottawa, His Eminence Sebastiano Baggio, on the occasion of the liberation of our dear Metropolitan Josyf Slipyj. He wrote: “Today I received a very nice letter from . His Emin
 That was an extraordinarily nice gesture from the side of a personal representative of the Vicar of Christ. "That was an extraordinary nice gesture," he said .
 Morlion states that before creating the sensational news that Soviet Russia has asked and obtained diplomatic relations the Holy See must be able to prove that it has guarantees that stalinist terror and totalitarianism are irreversibly suppressed .
 In this report constant tension is evident between Bea and Kozyrev, who hopes for the immediate establishment of official diplomatic relations . Bea insists on preparatory unofficial contacts, and wants to establish diplomatic relations immediately .
 A week later, Willebrands met with Kozyrev to inform him of the events during his Moscow trip . A week after the trip, the pair met again to discuss the situation .
 Kozyrev made it quite clear that “si le Vatican désire des relations avec l’Union soviétique—et je crois bien que cela serait utile—on ne peut pas poser des conditions.” Kozy
 Freedom outside the school, of family meetings in which children are given supplementary spiritual instruction in the tradition of their great nation and full loyalty to the rightful authorities .
 Freedom of expression for organs (similar to the one permitted for the Russian Orthodox Church) on which different religious and spiritual tendencies can develop, holy literature can disseminate and commented . Holy literature can be disseminated and commented.
 Freedom of charitable action, particularly in the use of savings and individuals and of enterprises for the help to the underprivileged in undeveloped nations .
 The road toward official relations between Rome and Moscow would not be an easy one . It was clear that the road to official relations with Moscow would be not be easy one.
 John XXIII granted an audience on March 7 to Alexei Adjubei, son-in-law of Khrushchev . He was attending the presentation of the International Balzan Peace Prize to the pope on March 10 . The pope granted the visit to the Russian president on March
 We are hopeful that nations will come to a better recognition of the natural ties that bind them together as men . Love, not fear, must dominate the relationships between individuals and between nations, we say .
 John’s decision to receive Adhzubei and accept the prize was highly controversial in Italian right-wing circles and received much negative press attention . Bea did not attend a planned meeting between Bea and Adhzubi, but sent Willebrands in his stead
 At this meeting, Willebrands clearly and openly addressed the issue of the UGCC under suppression . The meeting addressed the problem of the issue .
 Meselis, mais il n’est pas normal de n'avoir qu’un seul évêque dans ce pays catholique .
 En Ukraine notre église, qui autrefois comptait cinq millions of membres, officiellement n'existe plus . Notre Église notre-église comptente cinquille, Ukraine, et compt