 This article examines the role played by the general public in the course of such foreign policy crises . This article is based on the role of the public in such crises .
 It also looks at how that role could be strengthened, given their stake in these decisions . It also examines how it could also be strengthened .
 Americans have to confront the reality of nuclear war . Americans have been gradually compelled to confront reality of the reality .
 As that reality sinks in, it is easy to react fatalistically. Nevertheless, as that reality sink in it's easy to think fatalistically . Nevertheless, it's important to remember that the world is changing .
 It's not difficult to envision a president and his or his advisers meeting clandestinely meeting and quietly making decisions in a secluded war room .
 In such a situation, there would seem to be little role for the average citizen, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Once the crisis had begun, those citizens would be left to wait for the ultimate policy decisions and their aftermath . Those citizens would then be left waiting for the aftermath of the crisis to begin .
 The following case study of a well known and serious foreign policy crisis should help shed light on these questions . The case study is a case of a serious and serious crisis in the Middle East .
 Th subject of John Kennedy came up, and I was quite surprised by their infatuation wit our second youngest president . The subject was the subject of a series of questions about JFK .
 A few isolated Soviet elites seem to have made extremely critical judgments with implications for the very lives of the entire Soviet citizenry . With control over media coverage as the events unfolded, with little chance of being held strictly accountable by domestic historians, a few isolated .
 It should have been clear to the American decision makers involved that media analysts and historians would ultimately know and critically discuss most of what was going on. Media analysts should have known and critically discussed most of the story, the author says .
 The public will be able to apply at least indirect general constraint on their decisions . That knowledge allowed the public to apply a very indirect general constraints on decisions .
 "To do so would have required timely information and a forum for conveying their views," the author says . The author of this article has not been able to reach out to the public for comment .
 Research Approach James Rosenau presents a valuable model which posits a four-step flow of political information . The model is based on a model that posits the flow of information in four steps .
 Their views are then relayed and interpreted by ""opinion leaders,""-g., reporters, editorialists, and columnists in the mass mediaand disseminated more broadly . Their views then relayed by reporters, editors, and columns in mass media .
 Much of what is conveyed will only be directly consumed by the ""attentive public,""g.e.g., those people who carefully monitor news stories .
 ""opinion leaders"" are seen as being involved in a two-way flow of communication . Besides the core of his model described above, "opinion leader" is also involved in two-ways of communication.
 They provide the ""attentive public"" and ""mass public"" with information when they report and interpret events, but also when they speculate about developments and debate alternatives .
 Public opinion polls convey public sentiment to policy makers by publishing public opinion polls, reporting on demonstrations and counterdemonstrations, and speculating on the public mood .
 In the political arena, this process can be seen as contributing to democracy by facilitating the flow of political information and providing a forum for popular input . The political process is seen as a way to contribute to democracy .
 The ""mass public"" has a greater opportunity to set outer limits of public policy, while the ""opinion makers"" and ""attentives"" set inner parameters . Thus, the mass public has greater chance to set inner limits .
 In trying to discern the interplay between elites, intermediaries, and the larger American public, major press forums of the day have been analyzed . Then, in an attempt to discern this interplay, the U.S. press will be analyzed .
 These dailies and weeklies were chosen because of their national circulation, breadth and depth of coverage, and common use as a forum by ""opinion makers"" Granted, the ""attentive public"" is more likely to read these sources than are their ""mass public"" counterparts
 The first events of the crisis itself were developing amidst a heightening off-year, congressional election campaign . The crisis itself was developing during the heightening of the congressional elections campaign .
 Many Republicans were critical of John Kennedy's inaction in Berlin and Cuba . Many Republicans had been critical of his inaction in both areas .
 The president had sent a high-level emissary to Havana in an attempt to negotiate the release of counter-revolutionaries seized by Fidel Castro's forces during the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion .
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton met in Washington, D.C. last week . The White House hopes to secure a compromise on a compromise agreement .
 Cuba had been in the news for some time, especially as more became known about the build-up of Soviet-made armaments on the island . Cuba had built up its own armaments in the 1980s .
 Little occurred to attract the close attention that the U.S.-Soviet confrontation over Berlin was receiving . But in the first two weeks of October, little occurred .
 Just prior to recess, the United States Senate voted 86-1 to use any force necessary to stop the ""advance of communism"" in the Western Hemisphere . The United States voted to use force to stop communism .
 Soviet declaration that any attack on its ally, Cuba, would be seen as an act of aggression against the Soviet Union . That move was answered by the Soviet declaration of an attack on Cuba .
 At the same time, the Soviets publicly admitted that they had indeed been sending sizable numbers of arms and technicians to Cuba .
 Kennedy praised Congress but called the Republicans ""obstructionists,"" and lambasted Capehart for his proposal . Kennedy called Capehart's proposal an "irrational" proposal . Capehart called Kennedy's proposal to the Senate of Representatives an 'irrational' proposal .
 On October twelfth, James Reston attacked Republicans for irresponsibly twisting and jumbling a very sensitive Cuban issue . Reston noted that the administration was only inviting such attacks by its conspicuous silence on the precise size and nature of the Soviet presence there . At the same time, he
 As the first photographic evidence of offensive weapons was presented to the inner circle of elite decision makers late that evening, constant surveillance was ordered . The president was not awakened .
 A few Republican candidates, as well as some of the press, called Kennedy ""a profile in American indecision"" and demanded either a blockade or an invasion immediately .
 The entire inner circle, essentially sixteen men, first met to consider the newest photographic evidence . The inner circle first met in order to discuss the latest photographic evidence.
 Kennedy opposed any proposal to recognize Cuba or escalate pressure on that country . Kennedy was quoted as strongly opposing any proposal either to recognize or escalate the pressure on Cuba .
 Sentiment soon drifted toward a surgical air strike; although Robert Kennedy argued against a ""Pearl Harbor in reverse,"" and Robert McNamara was beginning to side with him . Sentiment began to drift toward an air strike .
 In the press, Republican campaign chiefs declared that Cuba had become the primary issue of the campaign . Cuba has become a primary issue for the Republican presidential candidate .
 The Bay of Pigs was being called the biggest communist victory in a decade . It was the biggest victory in the country's history . And it was also the biggest Communist victory in 10 years .
 A Gallup Poll showed 60 percent of the public fearing that an invasion would trigger a larger war, and subsequently opposing such a move . All the same, a Gallup poll showed that a majority of Americans oppose an invasion .
 Andrei Gromyko continued to deny any offensive intentions . Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei had been questioned closely by the KGB .
 Unconvinced, the American elites decided to impose a blockadean option which did not preclude any of the others . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. elites, but it was not the only option .
 He had drawn some scattered jeers, but the crowds had generally been quite large and supportive .
 The Washington Post editors accused both Eisenhower and Kennedy of producing far more rhetoric than concrete plans in terms of these highly important foreign policy issues . Meanwhile, the Soviets claimed to have had nothing to do with any talk of a Cuba-Berlin deal .
 The Washington Post accused Republicans of running against Fidel Castro instead of their Democratic opponents . Yet on the same day, with obviously different partisan intentions, the Washington Post said Republicans were running against Castro .
 The elites continued to conceal their activities and had shown considerable unity of purpose by avoiding major leaks to the press . But the press had already begun to see through the facade .
 By Sunday they had pieced together most of the larger story . Thus while they ran routine stories about regularly scheduled meetings and military ""maneuvers"" in the Caribbean, by Sunday they were piecing together .
 The president appealed to the publishers, urging them to wait until he could first notify the United States Congress and major allies . Yet, at that point, the president directly appealed to them . He urged them to delay publication until he first notified Congress and allies .
 The publishers deferred to his judgment and held off, knowing that an address to the nation was scheduled for the following evening . The publishers held off .
 The president prepared to announce the blockade that would commence the following morning . The blockade began the day after the president announced it .
 There were rumors about an impending showdown and the likelihood of a presidential address to the nation that evening . Meanwhile, there were many rumors about a showdown and a possible showdown .
 90 percent of those polled had opposed an invasion, even though they expressed some confusion over what "short of war" might work . Nevertheless, a full 90 percent said they would not be willing to invade .
 Another article saw Cuba as an ""albatross"" around Kennedy's neck since his inauguration . The author believed that an invasion would only cause a Berlin crisis on the top of it all .
 The daily press included rumors of offensive missiles . The White House denied any intention of an invasion but otherwise remained silent .
 Eisenhower publicly declared that such critical matters of foreign policy should no longer be campaign issues . Eisenhower made the announcement in a speech on foreign policy in 1953 .
 Roscoe Drummond called for the Soviets to get out of the Western Hemisphere . Drummond wrote that the Soviets should not be allowed to stay in the Western hemisphere .
 In the traditionally isolationist Midwest, a poll found a ""new belligerency,"" with more than two-thirds of the people now ready for some type of military action .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy were equally responsible for the situation because of their ""do nothing"" policies . George Sokolsky echoed an earlier notion that Eisenhower and . Kennedy should publicly debate the issue .
 With the blockade in place, aerial reconnaisance indicated rapid construction efforts . Aerial reconaisance indicated construction efforts were under way .
 Soviet submarines were accompanying their ships in clear defiance of the president's warning . In addition, it was learned that Soviet submarines had accompanied their ships . The Soviets were accompanied by Soviet submarines .
 The president's speech received editorial endorsement from both the Times and the Post . The speech dominated the papers .
 The speech itself was essentially factual in nature, and the public was about as informed of the administration's intentions as anyone else .
 The Post conducted a small ""man on the street"" survey and found mixed emotions -fear, relief, concern, pride, distress, confusion, and so on .
 Walter Lippmann called our missiles on the Soviet border in Turkey an albatross . He warned that we could not expect to have both the Monroe Doctrine in this hemisphere and the Truman Doctrine in theirs .
 Roy Rubottum and William Wieland withheld already authorized arms from Cuba's beleaguered anticommunist dictator, Fulgencio Batista . He was referring to a case where they withheld arms .
 Khrushchev used diplomatic channels to issue a counterthreat, although apparently he had already ordered the advancing cargo ships to delay . The Soviet Union responded by issuing a counter-threat using diplomatic channels .
 U.N. Secretary General U-Thant proposed that both sides halt in place; but Kennedy continued to demand immediate removal of the now nearly operational offensive missiles .
 The press, on the other hand, contained numerous stories, rumors, and editorial opinions . The press contains numerous stories and rumors, but the press contained many of them .
 Political parties said to be reassessing how all of this would affect the campaign . Political parties are said to have reassessed how all the political parties are looking at the situation .
 The Post ran a question-answer feature to try and clarify some of the issues at hand .
 A Gallup poll showed 84 percent of Americans supporting the president's approach, and only 4 percent opposed to it .
 On the editorial pages, James Reston emphasized Soviet misjudgments, and Joseph Alsop called this a reassertion of posture in the face of Soviet arrogance .
 Marquis Childs: "The step that President Kennedy has now taken cannot be separated from the current congressional campaign" as he was under attack by his own party for both economic problems and the minimal interest Democratic voters seemed to be showing in the upcoming elections .
 Soviet oil tankers continued toward Cuba; and the ""Bucharest"" was hailed, then allowed to proceed . Soviet oil tanker was hailed and allowed to continue .
 Domestically, the stock market edged back up; the ""man on the street"" appeared anxious but supportive . While press editorials also conveyed support, the market remained positive .
 British pacifist Bertrand Russell had written to Khrushchev urging him to exercise restraint in the face of these ""unjustifiable acts" Yet, it was reported that British . pacifist Russell had . written to . Khrush . Russell urged him to . exercise restraint . in the
 Tension mounted in inner circle as missile construction sped forward . Tensions mounted in the inner circle .
 A crucial decision would have to be made shortly concerning an air strike or an invasion . A decision would be made on whether to use air strikes or invasion of Syria .
 The Soviets, however, ordered their cargo ships back; they offered to withdraw missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . The Soviets ordered the ships back, but offered to pull missiles back if the United States did not invade Cuba.
 Khrushchev then sent an official cable formally proposing that alternative . That option was essentially acceptable to the U.S. side, and that option was formally proposed . The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to the option .
 On the home front, newspaper editors continued to endorse the president's actions . The White House has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 Campaign rhetoric was beginning to reappear, e.g., from Eisenhower and Dirksen . Yet, campaign rhetoric was still being used .
 In addition, letters were printed which sharply debated the blockade choice from a variety of perspectives .
 Khrushchev had sent a second cable, this time taking a much more belligerent stance . He demanded that U.S. missiles be simultaneously removed from Turkey . The cable also demanded that the missiles be removed .
 Cargo ships were once again steaming toward Cuba, and a showdown on the high seas seemed inevitable . Cargo ships began steaming to Cuba, where a showdown was inevitable .
 U.S. U-2 reconnaisance plane was shot down over Cuba and another accidentally wandered over Soviet air space . Another U.2 plane accidentally wandered into Soviet airspace over Cuba . Then, a U.N. aircraft was accidentally shot down .
 U.S. responded to Khrushchev's first proposal, and this soon defused the crisis . At Robert Kennedy's suggestion, the United States responded to first proposal .
 Reports of demonstrations and counter-demonstrations in front of the White House . The first reports of counter-protestors were reported in the days of the crisis .
 Congresspersons were seen as ""hitching onto"" the Cuban theme, although with quite varying approaches, e.g., Senator Barry Goldwater attacked both Eisenhower and Kennedy for years of inaction .
 Editorials and columnists continued to support the president's demand for immediate withdrawal of the missiles . Roscoe Drummond even saw this as the turning point in the Cold War where either the United States would capitulate or the Soviets would be set back .
 The nation was unaware of its resolution, and the nation continued to debate alternatives . Meanwhile, unaware of the resolution, the nation was debating alternatives .
 Reston and the Times' editors weighed both sides of the ""missile swap"" without drawing any clear conclusions . Richard Nixon and Richard Nixon supported Kennedy's hard line . Former Vice President Richard Nixon backed Kennedy .
 Congressional leaders grumbled about being rushed back to Washington only to find a blockade decision already made . Congressional leaders say they were rushed back from Washington to find the decision was already made.
 News analyst Alfred Friendly conjectured that Khrushchev must have ""gotten the message"" as the U.S. deadline neared . Alfred Friendly speculated that Khrrushchev may have gotten the message .
 Congress, like the ""man on the street,"" was left expressing ambivalent feelings . Relief, hope and caution were the primary sentiments expressed . Congress was left with an ambivalent response .
 Marquis Childs felt the accusation he felt was in bad taste . Childs said the president had hardly finished speaking when certain of his more cynical critics were saying that the time of the crisis had been dictated by political considerations .
 The Post editors went even further, stating that a few public figures and some sections of the press demonstrated a meanness of spirit during the worst of the crisis . The public as a whole has given the president hearty support .
 In view of the reconnaisance reports that began arriving on the 15th of October, an agenda was set by the 16th and the blockade decision was made on the 18th . The blockade decision to blockade the Strait of Malawi was made in view of reports that arrived on the
 The solution was worked out between the leaders of both countries over the weekend of the 26th and 27th . The solutionwithdrawal for a ""no invasion"" pledgewas then worked out .
 The public seems to have been relatively well informed, but generally not until after each major decision had been made . The public seemed to be relatively well-informed, but not as well informed .
 "opinion leaders,"" ""attentive public,"" and ""mass public" expressed views on an issue prior to the elites' decisions, these were based largely on relatively stale information and considerable speculation . Therefore, when the ""opinion leader"s,"" "attent
 Much of the information was available, but it was not timely enough to allow informed popular input prior to the critical decisions . Overall, then, much of the info was available but it wasn't timely .
 A variety of views were printed, even in the heat of the crisis, in the face of some clear editorial disapproval, and after the Republican leadership had set the issue aside .
 There was considerable debate as the crisis reached its most critical stages on Friday the 26th and Saturday the 27th . A certain degree of unanimity seemed to exist immediately following the president's Monday night address .
 Editorialists and partisan politicians had been offering conflicting policy views for months prior to the crisis . Editorialists, politicians, editorialists and politicians offer conflicting views .
 This included discussion of what to do if the Soviets counter U.S. moves by occupying Berlin . This included how to deal with the situation in Berlin .
 Public opinion polls were published on the 17th and 22nd, focusing on the invasion alternative . Prior to announcement of the blockade, public opinion polls focused on the alternative .
 Demonstrations took place and received considerable coverage at the very peak of the ordeal . Demonstrators also took to the streets to protest against the government .
 Overall, then, the initial elite decisions took place under some public pressure for actionor at least an accounting .
 The main course was set without much direct public input . Yet, considerable insulation surrounded the agenda and blockade decisions; .
 Once the blockade was announced, however, a variety of views were published concerning the existing course of action, as well as alternative courses .
 These discussions may have set certain parameters around the final decision, although there is no direct evidence of such constraints . There are no direct indications that such constraints have been set .
 If there had been massive popular opposition to the ""blockade until withdrawal"" strategy, that might well have affected Kennedy's negotiating posture . If there were massive popular support for the strategy, it might have affected his negotiating stance .
 Given considerable support, or at least a mixed or uncertain response, the elites would seem to have been relatively free to press their selected course of action . But given considerable support or a mixed response, they seem to be relatively free .
 How far the public was willing to go, and how far the elites would have gone in the absence of popular support, was never actually put to a test . The public was never put to the test .
 There is really very little timesave for the president's post-inaugural ""honeymoon period" that partisan mobilization is not taking place . Nonetheless, with elections for national government positions every two years, there is really little timesaving for President Obama .
 Although there was more intensity than normal at this particular moment, it was still essentially politics as usual . Therefore, although there was somewhat more intensity . It was still largely political as usual at this moment .
 Sokolsky says the administration and the Navy are at odds in the battle over the Navy . The administration and Navy have been at odds for years over the budget .
 Such a check provides an additional avenue for public input, but does not involve elected officials . The bureaucrats' views of their own autonomy are limited by their own views of themselves .
 The role of pundits and the public was reduced to advising based on speculation and judgment after the fact . Yet the elites managed to withhold most important information until after major decisions had already been made .
 The public probably had about as much opportunity for input as possible given what elites will almost inevitably see as a need for secrecy and latitude once such a crisis begins . Nonetheless, the public had a much more opportunity to input than it could have been .
 There are steps that could be taken to enhance popular input in these circumstances if that is desired . However, there are steps to take to enhance the popular input .
 The media must continue its aggressive reporting, editorial debates, and timely polling in the midst of such events . In particular, the media needs to continue reporting and editorial debates .
 Journalists need to provide in-depth reporting of potentially dangerous problems prior to their reaching crisis proportions . But more important than that, they need to be able to provide more compelling arguments for secrecy .
 CNN iReporters have a major educational responsibility beyond their reporting function . They have a responsibility beyond the reporting function, they say . CNN iReport: "They clearly have a big educational responsibility"
 A small group of political elites can launch the U.S. down the path of nuclear destruction simply by virtue of the authority it commands and the insulation that is presently inherent in crisis decision making . Nevertheless, it is quite clear that despite all of this, a small .
 Some pre-conditions appear to be necessary if the president and his or her advisers are to be constrained, says CNN's John Sutter . Therefore, some pre-Conditions appear necessary, he says .
 These would reduce the level of destructive power at the president's command, not only reducing the stakes but buying more time for open discussion . The president's power should be reduced to less destructive power, not less destructive .
 Given that the U.S. sees its military aggressions as defensive and Soviet's as offensive, something has to give . The Soviet Union sees its as offensive and the American's as defensive . The United States sees it as defensive, the Soviet Union as offensive .
 That was the conclusion of one of the final lectures I prepared for delivery in the Soviet Union .
 It was a message that at least some Soviet authorities obviously did not want to present . It was not the first time Soviet authorities had presented such a message .
 Government authorities in the United States welcome the message . Unfortunately, it is probably not much more welcome by the U.S.
 If both sides were eventually to heed that warning, it might significantly reduce the need for foreign policy crises decision making in the first place . Yet, if both sides fail to heed the warning, the crisis might be less likely .