 The Saudi-Iranian Rivalry and the Future of Middle East Security . Monograph reviews the outlook of the Middle Eastern countries, including Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Kuwait, Bahrain, Yemen, Libya, Lebanon, Israel, and Syria .
 Iran and Saudi Arabia are becoming the two behemoth forces in the Middle East . Saudi Arabia and Iran are the two biggest powers in the region .
 Iran’s closest Arab allies are Syria and the Palestinian territories that support Hamas and Hezbollah . Saudi Arabia has most control over Gulf-area Arab states and is a close ally with the U.S.
 The author presents several conclusions and recommendations for the U.S. policymakers to consider . The author emphasizes strategic interests as a way to bolster peaceful negotiations with Mideast states .
 The authors examine the legal status of various activities in cyberspace, including what constitutes a hostile activity . The authors explore this issue from the Russian perspective .
 The authors adequately present each side of the argument and confirm that to date an agreement on this expanding field of conflict has not yet been met . To date, an agreement has not been met, they say .
 The authors present implications for U.S. policy makers to consider . This includes taking a closer observation of how Russia defines cyber warfare and information weapons .
 U.S. policymakers may be better equipped to strategize their defense . After determining Russian interpretations, they can strategize with their own country .
 Students participating in cybersecurity and foreign policy programs may be interested in this text . This text includes the words "cybersecurity" and "foreign policy" students .
 Students pursuing a law degree may find this text informative for international law classes . Students may also find this information useful for their law degree classes .
 Political scientists, diplomats, international law attorneys, intelligence community teams, and military strategists should keep this text on their bookshelf for referral for guidance .
 An unclassified monograph examines past and present joint and Army cyberspace military operations . The monograph also examines how these operations may fit into the complex and dynamic sphere of international deterrence and escalation .
 Cyber Command provides information about the founding and responsibilities of the military units that comprise the United States Cyber Command . Cyber Command is responsible for offensive and defensive initiatives .
 These operations were developed to provide a deterrence to a nuclear threat, prior to the 21st century . Primarily, these operations were designed to provide deterrence to the nuclear threat .
 These defenses are used to influence national response across the intelligence community and law enforcement as a method for deterrence and escalation to possibly reduce risk . Now, these defenses are being used as a way of deterrence and possibly reducing risk .
 Military science and cyberspace or cybersecurity students may be interested in this text . Use this text to help students understand today's featured news stories in the weekly Newsquiz .
 U.S. military personnel, United States international community, law enforcement, and historians may find this book useful in their operations . Additionally, the book is available for purchase from Amazon.com .
 The U.S. Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute recently published a few timely monographs . The monographs focus on national security, public policy and international relations topics .
 Strategic Studies Institute conducts strategic research and analysis to support the United States Army War College curricula . The Institute provides direct analysis for Army and Department of Defense leadership .
 SSI is composed of civilian research professors, uniformed military officers, and a professional support staff . SSI consists of civilian researchers and uniformed officers . The SSI team is based in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 SSI has a web of partnerships with strategic analysts around the world, including the foremost thinkers in the field of security and military strategy . SSI is based in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 SSI: About half of SSI’s publications are written by external partners . In most years, about half of these external partners write for us .
 The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and IAEA have had frequent mention in the mainstream news media recently due to ongoing nuclear weapon development discussions with Iran, as well as increased tensions with the Soviet Union .
 This book reviews the Nuclear Nonproproliferation Treaty agreements that the U.S. has with many countries from an historical perspective . The book is based on historical perspective of the nuclear nonproligion agreements signed by many countries .
 This work includes an array of essays by different contributors that analyze different articles of the Nuclear Nonproliferation treaty and provide their insights to the reader . Although a bit technical in nature, this work does include essays by various contributors .
 Work defines responsibilities of the International Atomic Emergency Agency and practices for safeguarding nuclear programs, including coverage of nuclear program inspections .
 This book also contains insights about nuclear weapons treaties with other countries that are already in place with the USA . It also provides some background to those treaties . The book also provides insights about the treaties already agreed with the US .
 This text explores how treaty agreements work, mentioning ‘Articles’ within the treaty that often pertain to terms of conditions that each country should abide .
 Many political scientists, historians, and diplomats may be familiar with this process . But many American citizens who are not routinely involved in negotiations with these diplomatic matters might benefit .
 Students may be interested in this material to stay on top of current events for their global studies classes . Also high school students may be able to use this material for Global Studies classes .
 This monograph focuses on the making of nuclear fuel– a process that is expensive and complex . It is a monograph on the process of making nuclear fuel .
 The first section of this book features “Nuclear Proliferation Matters,” which covers the argument that nuclear weapons proliferation is more likely to occur with the spread of civilian nuclear technology . Such proliferation constitutes a threat to international security, especially if there is nuclear weapons use, but even
 The volume’s second section, “Nuclear Power, Nuclear Weapons—Clarifying the Links,” makes the case that civilian nuclear power programs actually afford a major leg up for any nation seeking development of nuclear weapons option .
 Each chapter within this text has a different contributor to the point of view, but the overall themes are maintained . The overall themes of this text are maintained throughout .
 Some chapters include an analysis of specific Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty Articles which are helpful to make their discussion points understood . Plus, some chapters include analysis of some of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Agreement Articles .
 Some of the contributors’ discussions indicate that the past historical events worked well in policy, but the implementations and enforcements of the policies seemed to be more troublesome . The discussions seem to be focused on the implementation and enforcement of policies .
 Historical events relating to these discussions are presented to the reader to point out a sense of initiatives that will be needed to strengthen the monitoring for greater security .
 This guide helped me better understand the intense negotiations that diplomats and ambassadors in foreign countries must engage in with our allies and other countries to achieve the end result of greater global security .
 This monograph provides the historical perspective that began with fear around the time of World War II and continued through the 1950s to 1960s regarding Russia’s expansion of their missile defense and nuclear weapons programs .
 The U.S. became aware that Russia had started to sell some of its missile defense weapons to rogue states in the Middle East in the late 1990s .
 These countries created another possible harm to the United States, rather than a direct attack from Russia . The U.S. has not been hit by Russia .
 The United States began implementing missile warhead interceptors as part of their long-term defense plan . As a result, the U.S. began implementing interceptors .
 The primary focus within the pages of this book is about America’s expansion plan to build missile defense sites in select European and Asian countries to aid in our national defense strategy . Russia's adversarial challenges to this U.S. strategic plot are Russia's challenges .
 The authors have included primary source excerpts from actual conversations and speeches between world leaders that add to each of their points of discussion throughout this work .
 The United States Army War College’s Strategic Studies Institute has released a title with historical perspectives that can shed insights into today's current events concerning U.S. and Russia missile defense .
 Political science classes with a focus on comparative politics and U.S.-Russian relations may have interest in this book . Use this book as a supplemental reading text or reference for research .
 Matthew Brentzel takes a look at the capabilities of the U.S. Weapons of Mass Destruction response teams .
 "Every so often, I look back on those horrific atrocities committed on September 11, 2001," says President Obama . "I look back at those horrific attacks on 9/11," says Obama .
 Teachers were reluctant to inform us of what was going on in middle school, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I remember being in middle . school, where teachers were reluctant"
 I also remember the news stories questioning the capability of our country to deal with such a catastrophe . I remember the stories questioning our ability to cope with the disaster .
 Although we are surrounded by fear and uncertainty in trying times, we can always find relief by looking towards the brave men and women that put their lives on the line for the good of our country .
 Pearl Harbor was the first major Pearl Harbor attack to hit the U.S. Navy in 1941 . The attack was a major event in the United States and Japan .
 We can all agree that these events were truly awful, but we must accept that we live in troubled times and events like these may be minor compared to the crises that could occur . We must accept the fact that events like this may not be major compared to other crises that may occur .
 Four WMD Crises that could Transform U.S. Security, by the Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction takes a stab at discussing this heated topic in a serious but effective manner .
 There are times when prevention is not enough and response is necessary, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 While reading this book, at first I was taken aback by its willingness to accept the possible losses in one of the scenarios, but this approach enlightens the reader by stressing the high importance of applying appropriate countermeasures .
 Report delves into four different crisis simulations in detail, including preventative measures and how we can be ready to counter such events . This clear, concise report delves in four different crises simulations .
 It also goes on to discuss the policy implications of each of these crises for the United States as a whole .
 This book helped me realize that we will be able to move on as a nation even though the events it describes could severely alter our future . In addition, although at first I was reluctant to believe it, this book helped .