 Third Edition A HISTORY OF MODERN EUROPE . From the Renaissance to the Present A History of Modern Europe has become a classic .
 A history of Europe from the Renaissance to the present, the book addresses Europe’s rich diversity while remaining focused on the central themes of the European experience . The book addresses the politics of states and people, the causes and effects of economic and social change, to Europe's interactions with
 He is the author and editor of many books on the history of modern France . He is also the author of many other books .
 The firm soon expanded its program beyond the Institute, publishing books by celebrated academics from U.S. and abroad .
 By midcentury, the two major pillars of Norton’s publishing program were firmly established . Trade books and college texts were established by midcentury .
 W Norton & Company stands as the largest and oldest publishing house owned wholly by its employees . W Norton and Company is owned by employees and is the largest publishing house in the world .
 The relatively recent disappearance in 1989-1992 of a more recent empire, that of the Soviet Union, has also had an enormous impact on Europe, and indeed much of the world . Europe's international relations are transforming international relations while presenting imposing challenges .
 It is commonplace now to consider the U.S. as the one remaining superpower, with an informal empire stretching across the globe . Russia, to be sure, remains a major power, but it is commonplace to consider Russia as a major superpower .
 Trade with Africa, Asia, and the Americas led to colonization and empire . Trade with Asia, Africa, and America led to colonial expansion .
 Within Europe, rivalries between empires reflected consolidation and expansion of state power and also shaped the evolution of warfare . In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Ottoman Turkish Empire and the Austrian Habsburg and Russian Empires, and Britain and France in the eighteenth century .
 Napoleon's empire extended through much of the European continent and led to conquests as far as Egypt . During the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century, Napoleon's conquests included Egypt and France .
 The rise and fall of empires is a major theme in the third edition of A History of Modern Europe . The rise of empires—Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, Ottoman, British, French, and that of the Soviet Union -- is the major theme .
 More than ever, the history of Europe cannot be understood without attention to Europe’s interaction with cultures in the rest of the world . The history of European history can be understood only by looking at the interaction between cultures in Europe and the world.
 Europeans have for centuries learned from Muslim, Asian, African, and American cultures . Europeans, to be sure, have learned from Muslims, Asian and African cultures .
 The influence of the Ottoman Empire in Eastern Europe and the Balkans commands additional attention in this volume . This volume looks at the impact of the Empire's influence in the Balkans and Eastern Europe .
 At the same time, through commercial contact, conquest, and intellectual, religious, and political influence, the European powers and cultures have affected the histories of non-Western peoples . Preface as well as, finally, decolonization, has affected European powers, and cultures .
 At the same time, national identities developed in the newly independent states that were once colonies . National identities have also developed in newly independent countries .
 The third edition emphasizes the dynamism of European trade, settlement, and conquest . It also emphasizes the impact of European peoples on Asia, Africa, and the Americas .
 Comparisons are made between the Spanish Empire in Latin America and the English colonies in the Americas . Comparisons were made between Spanish Empire and English colonies .
 Unlike the Spanish Empire, trade was the basis of the burgeoning English Empire . Trade was the foundation of the English Empire.
 The Spanish Empire reflected the combination of absolutism of the Spanish monarchy and the determination to convert—by force if necessary—the indigenous populations to Catholicism .
 Many settlers came to the North American English colonies in search of religious freedom . In sharp contrast, many settlers came in search for religious freedom in North America .
 English colonists sought not to convert the indigenous peoples to Christianity, but rather to push them out of colonial areas of settlement . And, again in contrast to the building of the Spanish Empire a century earlier, the English colonists wanted to push the indigenous out .
 Spanish colonies reflected state centralization . English counterparts evolved in pattern of decentralization that would culminate in the federalist structure of the United States .
 British rule in India, particularly interesting because of the cultural interaction that took place there, receives more well-deserved attention .
 Dutch rule in Southeast Asia and the response of China and Japan to the Western powers . The Dutch expansion of Dutch rule and response to the West's influence in Asia is a key factor .
 The section on the middle classes has been moved to Chapter 14, “The Industrial Revolution,” so that “Liberal Challenges to Restoration Europe” stands alone as Chapter 15 . The section is now Chapter 15, with the section on middle classes moved to .
 I have amplified the discussion of the National Socialism of the Nazis and fascism as a European-wide phenomenon during the inter-war period . I have . amplified the . discussion of National Socialism . and fascism .
 Decolonialization and the Cold War are two of the major occurrences in the decades that followed the war . The Cold War was a major event in the years following the World War II .
 We move away from the traditional textbook strategy of continually contrasting Western and Eastern Europe. We move to the new model of Western Europe, we say . We move from a Western-Eastern model to a more Western-Western model of Europe .
 A History of Modem Europe places the emergence of the concept of political Preface xxv sovereignty not only in early modern England and the Dutch Republic, but also in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth .
 We offer expanded coverage of the heroic rising of the Jews of the Warsaw ghetto against the Nazis in 1943 . The Warsaw Uprising took place little more than a year after the Holocaust .
 We explore the roots of the economic and political problems that continue to beset Western and Eastern Europe . We demonstrate how simmering ethnic tensions that burst into bloody civil war in Bosnia after the disintegration of Yugoslavia echoed the quarrels that eroded the stately Habsburg monarchy a century earlier
 The third edition draws on exciting studies in the social history of ideas, approaches that stand at the intersection of intellectual, social, and cultural history . The new edition of this edition of the book is available now .
 Volume 1 explains how artistic patronage during the Renaissance and the Golden Age of Dutch culture reveals some of the social foundations of art . Volume 1 explores the social origins of art and patronage of art in the Netherlands .
 Recent studies on the family economy, village and neighborhood life, and the changing structure of work have all enriched this book's account of the transformation of European society .
 The account of the emergence of mass politics in the 19th century draws on recent studies of popular culture and the symbolism and power of language .
 "We retain a narrative framework with the goals of both analyzing the central themes of the European experience and telling a story," says the author .
 This book stresses the dynamics of economic, social, political, and cultural change, but within the context of the amazing diversity of Europe . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a German-born British journalist .
 The history of modern Europe and its influence in the world presents extraordinary characters, well known and little known, little known . This is a look at the lives of some of the world's most famous people .
 Inevitably, we discuss the monstrous Adolf Hitler, examining the sources of his growing popularity in Germany in the wake of World War 1, and Joseph Stalin, discussing his Communist state and murderous purges . We also discuss the source of Hitler's popularity in the aftermath of the war .
 Men and women have also played a significant role in Europe’s story, making their own histories . But ordinary men and women also played significant roles in Europe's story, says historian .
 This book evokes the lives of both leaders and ordinary people in periods of rapid economic and political change, revolution, and war . This book is based on the experiences of people in rapid economic, political change and revolution, revolution .
 Medieval Europe was a maze of overlapping political and judicial authorities in medieval Europe . Medieval Europe had overlapping political, judicial authorities during the period .
 In 1 500, virtually all Europeans defined themselves in terms of family, village, town, neighborhood, and religious solidarities . In 1,000 years, the population of 1,500 Europeans was defined as Europeans .
 dynastic states consolidated and extended their territories . Over the next three centuries, dynastic . states consolidated . territories . increasing the reach of their effective authority .
 Portugal, Spain, England, France, the Netherlands, and Russia built vast empires that reached into other continents . Portugal and Spain were the first nations to conquer the Americas .
 With the rise of nationalism in the wake of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era, demands of ethnic groups for national states encouraged the unification of Italy and Germany . Croats, Hungarians, and Romanians were anxious for their own national states .
 Ordinary people demanded freedom and political sovereignty, with revolution both a reflection of and a motor for political change . The revolution is a reflection and motor for change in the world, and revolution both reflected and drove change .
 The emergence of liberalism in the nineteenth century and the quest for democratic political structures and mass politics have transformed Europe, beginning in Western Europe, has transformed Europe .
 Even autocracies of Russia and Central and Eastern Europe were not immune to change . The quest for democracy still continues in the quest for freedom still continues .
 The book also considers how wars themselves have often generated political and social change . It discusses dynastic rivalries and nationalism .
 French financial and military contributions to the American War of Independence accentuated the financial crisis of the monarchy of France, helping to spark the French Revolution . French financial contributions helped spark the revolution .
 French armies of military conscripts contributed to emergence of nationalism in Britain and France in the eighteenth century . Conscripts replaced the professional armies of the age of aristocracy .
 The defeat of the Russian army by the Japanese in 1905 brought political concessions that helped prepare the way for the Russian Revolution of 1917 . The Russian army was defeated by Japan in 1905 .
 The German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian Empires disappeared in the wake of World War I and World War II . The economic and social impact of these wars generated political instability, facilitating the emergence of fascism and communism .
 World War 1 and the role played by colonized peoples gave impetus to movements for independence within the British, French, and Dutch Empires that would ultimately be successful, transforming the world today .
 Religion has also been a significant factor in the lives of Europeans and, at times, in the quest for freedom in the modern world . Like politics, religion has also played a significant role in European life .
 Catholicism was a unifying force in the Middle Ages . For centuries European popular culture was based on religious belief . Catholic culture was a big part of European culture .
 Imperial missionaries carried their religions into Africa and Asia in the aggressive quest for converts . Imperial missionaries were aggressive in their aggressive quest to convert .
 Spanish conquerors forced indigenous populations in the Americas to convert to Christianity . Spaniards forced indigenous people to convert their religion .
 Religion has been a frequently divisive force in modern European history . After the Reformation in the sixteenth century, states extended their authority over religion . Religious minorities demanded the right to practice their own religion .
 Religious intolerance has scarred the European experience, ranging from the expulsion of Jews and Muslims from Spain at the end of the fifteenth century, to Louis XlV’s abrogation of religious toleration for Protestants .
 Religious conflict in Northern Ireland and bloody civil war and atrocities perpetuated in Bosnia in the 1990s recall the ravaging of Central Europe during the Thirty Years’ War .
 The causes and effects of economic change are another thread that weaves through the history of modern Europe . Economic change is a key part of the continent's history, with the rise of the Eurozone as a result .
 The expansion of commerce in the early modern period owed much to the development of the means of raising investment capital and obtaining credit . It led to the European empires that followed, and directly led to European empires .
 Industrial Revolution began in England in the eighteenth century and spread to continental Europe in the nineteenth . Industrial Revolution depended on a rise in population and thus of agricultural production, but also manifested significant continuities with the past .
 Industrial Revolution drew on technology that had been in place for centuries . Industrial Revolution was the beginning of the Industrial Revolution .
 European empires are an important, fascinating part of the story, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Here, too, European empires is an important part of this story," he says .
 European history remains crucial to understanding the contemporary world . European history is crucial for understanding the modern world .
 The political, religious, economic, and global concerns that affect Europe and the world today can best be addressed by examining their roots and development . European concerns can be addressed only by examining the roots of their development .
 Globalization has carried movement between the continents to new levels . Globalization is an important part of the world's history . The U.S. has seen a rise in economic growth in recent years .
 For centuries, Europe sent waves of emigrants to other parts of the world, particularly North and South America . Europe has been sending emigrants from Europe to the Americas for centuries .
 The arrival of millions of migrants from other continents, particularly Africa and Asia, has posed challenges to European states and Europeans . Europe has been hit by a wave of migrants in recent years .
 The poverty of some of the states of Eastern Europe and the Balkans, and the tragic events in Bosnia in the 1990s, have increased immigration into Western European countries . The poverty and the events in the Balkans have contributed to increased immigration .
 Immigrants have added to the religious and cultural complexity of European states . Immigrants are adding to the cultural and religious complexity of Europe .
 As globalization continues to transform Europe and the world, it becomes even more important and exciting to study the continent's history .
 Europe has entered a new era, even as a daunting global economic crisis and the threat of terror in the post-9/11 world present some unprecedented challenges . With the initiation of a new single currency within most of the member states of the European Union and the continued expansion of that organization
 This third edition enhances our understanding of Europe and the world today . We contemplate the distressing failures and appalling tragedies of the past, but also the exhilarating triumphs that have been part of the European experience .
 Charles Tilly died during the time I was working on the third edition of A History of Modern Europe . Charles died at the time of the publication of the book .
 His friends, colleagues, and former students—I am all three—miss him very much . His friends and colleagues will miss him much much .
 He taught me that it is better not to see history as a series of bins that one opens and then shuts before getting on to the next topic, but rather to look for the big news, the major themes, that have been the dynamics of change .
 He believed in keeping ordinary people fully in view by analyzing, describing, and evoking their histories . At the same time, he believed in .
 I remain indebted to many colleagues and friends who shared their knowledge, expertise, and suggestions with me, including David Underdown, Laura King, Richard Brodhead, Daniel Orlovsky, Mark Steinberg, John Lynn, Linda Colley, Roberto Gonzalez-Echevarria,
 I also want to thank Jeffrey Burds, Harold Selesky, Leslie Page Moch, Richard Stites, David Cannadine, Jim Boyden, Paul Hanson, Michael Burns, Ivan Marcus, Thomas Kaiser, and others .
 I am particularly grateful to Joel Mokyr for his many helpful suggestions . I am also grateful for his help at the end of this article .
 Special thanks also to Jeffrey Brooks, Eric Jennings, Christopher Reid, and Christopher Reid . Aristotle Kallis is the author of a new book, "Aristocrats" The book is available on Amazon.com.
 I greatly appreciate suggestions given by Doron Ben-Atar, Robert Brown, Alexander Ganse, Bradley Woodworth, David Goldfrank, Adel Allouche, Leon Plantagna, Michael Sibalis, James McMillan, Steven W'heatcroft, Rachel F
 The third edition benefited greatly from conferences organized by the Civic Space Institute at the Larzowski School of Law and Commerce in Warsaw .
 Donald Lamm, former chairman of the board and former president of Norton, has always embodied the best in publishing . Lamm is a friend of the late publisher, who died in 2011 .
 CNN.com's John Sutter and Steve Forman first proposed this project to me . The project is a collaboration between the two editors of this week's show .
 Sandy Lifland’s deft and patient work as developmental editor contributed greatly to the first edition of this week's book . The book will be published in September 2015 .
 Sarah England, then Steve’s assistant and now an editor at Norton, was extremely helpful throughout the preparation of the second edition . Kate Feighery and JoAnn Simony were for the third edition .
 A special thanks to Carol Merriman, who has patiently lived with and encouraged this and other projects for many years .
 The third edition of A History of Modern Europe is dedicated to Laura Merriman and to Christopher Merrimans .
 Spanish and Portuguese conquerors and merchants expanding their trade routes laid the foundations for the first transoceanic European empires . The first trans-European empires were based in Spain, Portugal and Spain .
 During the Italian Renaissance, humanists rediscovered texts from classical Greece and Rome . The Italian Renaissance lasted from about 1330 to 1530, during which texts were rediscovered in Italy .
 Renaissance artists and scholars celebrated the beauty of nature and the dignity of mankind . Renaissance artists helped shape the intellectual and cultural history of the modern world .
 After a period when almost all of Western Europe adhered to Roman Catholicism, abuses in the Church would lead to cries for reform that would not be stilled until most of Europe was divided between Protestants and Catholics . Moreover, after a period of abuses, abuses would lead for reform to be
 By 1540, the Reformation had carved out large zones of Protestant allegiance in central and northern Europe, as well as in England and parts of France . The Reformation was first organized in 1515, when it began in France and England .
 Religious conflict and wars would tear Europe apart, leading to reform in the Church but leaving permanent religious divisions . Once there had been near-uniformity of belief and worship, Europe was divided .
 At age 14, he joined his brothers as a trader in spices, silks, and woolen goods . At age fourteen, he traded in spices and silks .
 He traded, above all, with the Adriatic port of Venice, where he learned double-entry bookkeeping . It was then unknown in the German states . He learned double entry bookkeeping, which was unknown in Germany .
 Jacob Fugger amassed a vast fortune, and he loaned sizable sums to various rulers in Central Europe . Fugger loaned money to the rulers of Central Europe.
 Fuggers name soon became known “in every kingdom and every region, even among the heathens’s name, Fuggers said . Fuggers’ name became known in every kingdom ‘in every region’ “including the heathen,” Fuggers
 Jacob Fugger says he intended to go on making money until he dropped dead . Fugger said he wanted to make money 'until he drops dead' Fugger: 'I intend to go make money until I drop dead'
 Fuggers' family history intersected with economic growth and statemaking in Central Europe . Fuggers were a major figure in the history of the Fuggers in Europe's history .
 Fuggers emerged as the wealthiest and most influential of the international banking families that financed warring states, answering the call of the highest bidder . The Fuggers are known for their role in financing warring nations .
 Fuggers helped Charles V become Holy Roman emperor by providing funds with which the scheming Habsburg could bribe the princes who were electors to vote for him . In 1519, the Fuggers provided funds for Charles V's election as Holy Roman Emperor .
 Fuggers raised and transported the money that made possible imperial foreign policy . Fuggers helped make possible foreign policy in the U.S. The Fuggers were a key figure in the development of the American empire .
 Fugger family helped merchants and manufacturers find credit for their enterprises . Loaning money to ambitious rulers, as well as to popes and military entrepreneurs, the Fuggers family rose to princely status .
 The growth of trade and manufacturing ultimately changed the face of Europe . Trade and manufacturing led to the creation of the Eurozone .
 The expanding economy contributed to a sense that many Europeans are tired of living in a tough place .
 The by-products of trade and exploration were an increasing exchange of ideas and a growing interconnectedness among European states . European states are now more interconnected than ever before, writes David Cameron .
 Although famine, disease, and war still trampled their victims across Europe, significant improvements in the standard of living occurred in Europe's history .
 European population rose in the late fifteenth century and continued to rise throughout the sixteenth century . European population increased in the early 15th century and the 16th century .
 One-third of the European population lost to the Black Death in the mid-fourteenth century .
 The expansion of the population revived European commerce, particularly in the Mediterranean region and in England and northwestern Europe, where the Fuggers and other merchant-bankers were financing new industry and trade .
 Towns multiplied and merchants grew more prosperous, building elegant houses near markets . Towns multiplied, and merchants began to build elegant homes near markets. Towns grew prosperous .
 The pace of change was quickened by several inventions that would help shape the emergence of the modern world . Inventors invented inventions such as the invention of the wheeler-wheeler-chair and the invention-chair .
 Gunpowder, first used in China and adopted by Europeans in the fourteenth century, made warfare more deadly . Gunpowder gradually eliminated the heavily armed knight, gradually eliminating the armed knight .
 The invention of the printing press in the mid-fifteenth century engendered a cultural revolution first felt in religious life . The Bible and other religious texts now more widely available to be read and debated .
 The compass was first used by Chinese and Mediterranean navigators Medieval Continuities 5 in the eleventh or twelfth century . It now helped guide European exploration across the oceans .
 Spanish and Portuguese conquerors and merchants seeking riches in the New World established the first European transoceanic empires . Spaniards and merchants sought riches in New World in search of riches .
 Population growth, trade and manufacturing facilitated the establishment of colonies across the oceans by the European powers . The use of gunpowder and the compass and the development of printing all stimulated and facilitated the creation of colonies in Europe .
 England and France emerged as exceptions amid the territorial fragmentation that characterized medieval Europe . France and England emerged as sovereign states in medieval times .
 Smaller territories also began to coalesce into larger units and rulers consolidated their authority .
 European society took on the shape it would have for centuries, with three orders --clergy, nobles, and peasants . Three orders stood in relationships of mutual obligation to each other .
 Material wellbeing remained at a subsistence level for most peasants but improved overall . Commercial trade across greater distances began to rise in the eleventh century . Material wellbeing continued to improve overall as commercial trade grew in the tenth century .
 Small-scale textile manufacturing developed as towns grew, particularly in Italy and northwestern Europe during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries . Moreover, small-scale manufacturing developed in Italy, northwestern Europe .
 With the end of the Roman Empire in the fifth century, Europe experienced an influx of new peoples . The Fragmentation of Europe was the beginning of the modern era .
 From the east came the Magyars from the east, who settled in Central Europe, where they were converted to Christianity . From the west, they settled in central Europe and converted Christianity .
 From Scandinavia came the so-called Northmen , who reached Ukraine, and who for the most part became Christians . The Northmen are Christians .
 Arabs invaded Europe in the eighth century, expanding their influence into North Africa, as well as Spain, in the 8th century . Arabs invaded Spain in the seventh century, extending their influence to North Africa and Spain .
 Mongols poured into what is now Russia and Ukraine, sacking Kiev in the 1230s, before their empire began to collapse in the fifteenth century . Mongols sacked Kiev before the collapse of their empire in the 15th century .
 The princely state of Muscovy, which had been one of their tributaries, gradually expanded in size . It reached the southern Ural Mountains and the Caspian Sea and emerged as a dynastic state . Muscovie was one of the tributary tribut
 This multitude of influences contributed to both the political and cultural fragmentation of Europe . The European continent was influenced by many of the world's cultures .
 Economic, political, and judicial institutions were overwhelmingly local . The city's economic and political institutions were dominated by local people .
 Territories and cities were subject to a confused array of overlapping jurisdictions . Territories were once subject to an array of overlangated jurisdictions .
 The city-states of Italy and the trading towns of northern Germany managed to preserve their independence from territorial rulers . Italy and Germany's cities and trading towns managed to maintain their independence .
 Paris, for example, was dotted with enclaves of ecclesiastical authority . Paris was once home to an ecclesiastical enclave .
 The legal concepts, principles, and procedures of civil law evolved from Roman law . Roman law was based on the rational interpretation of written law applied to human affairs . Civil law is based on a rational interpretation, applied to the human affairs of the world .
 Civil laws were decreed and sanctioned by rulers, whose authority stemmed in part from their right to make or impose laws . Civil law was decreed by rulers who made or imposed laws .
 The development of civil law, then, was conducive to the development of sovereign states . Civil law was closely associated with the power of rulers of states with the force of law, says historian .
 Canon law was established by the pope for the Western Church . It codified in Latin the canons of Church councils and the revealed authorities of the Bible and Church fathers . Canon law is the law of the Catholic Church .
 As with civil law, canon law helped affirm, at least in principle, the authority of spiritual rulers . The law closely linked the law to authority of the rulers in general, whose subjects owed them personal allegiance .
 Cross-cutting allegiances were often the norm in the late Middle Ages . The most common was to be to both secular and ecclesiastical authorities .
 Subjects of competing authorities used the system to exploit jurisdictional conflicts to their own ends, whenever possible . Subjects of rival authorities used to exploit the system for their own purposes .
 This sometimes served to reinforce the influence of multiple authorities, such as the presence of multiple police officers .
 The effective authority of rulers could end up being rather distant . Thus, the effectiveness of rulers may end up be rather distant.
 Customary, or common law, was a codification of established custom, implying a constant reference to decisions taken earlier by judges . Customary law was codified by judges and codified into common law .
 It was the usual mode of law in all areas where Roman law was not used . Roman law used to be used in areas not covered by Roman law . It was also used in the rest of the Roman empire .
 In Western Europe, customary law developed out of the customs of feudalism . feudalism was a set of reciprocal economic, social, and political relationships that encouraged decentralized power structures . The feudalism led to the development of customary law .
 In England, common law unified the customary law for the whole land . Laws were overseen by local courts, which contributed to the decentralization of English royal authority .
 customary law helped corporate groups (such as guilds, which were craft associations) or individuals assert their interests and rights . Unlike Roman law, customary law established precedents that, at least in principle, could override the ruler’s intervention .
 Europe's political fragmentation was accompanied by cultural fragmentation, reinforced by the many languages spoken . Europe’s political fragmentation has also been accompanied by the cultural fragmentation of Europe .
 Latin, the language of culture, was still spoken in university towns . The “Latin Quarter” in Paris is the Latin Quarter of Paris .
 Distances and difficulties in travel and communication were also imposing . Distances, difficulties and travel was also imposing, say experts .
 The shortest time to travel from Madrid to Venice was twenty-two days . The longest, in bad weather, was four times that . The shortest travel time to Venice to Madrid was four days .
 Christendom had been split between the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church following the Great Schism between the two churches in 1054 . After the collapse of the Roman Empire, the Roman Roman Empire had been left behind .
 The claim by the bishop of Rome—the pope—to authority over all Eastern Christians led to the break, culminating in the pope’s excommunication of the patriarch of Constantinople . A festering doctrinal dispute over the nature of the Holy Trinity led to this break .
 By 1500, the Eastern Orthodox Church held the allegiance of most of the people in Russia and the Balkans . It was the largest church in the world, followed by the Roman Catholic Church in 15th century .
 The Roman Catholic and Orthodox worlds met in the eastern part of Central Europe . Poland, Bohemia, and Hungary looking to the West .
 Christianity, as an alternate source of allegiance and power claiming to be a universal state, presented a potential impediment to state authority . Christianity presented as an alternative source of loyalty and power . Christianity was an alternative to state power .
 As both the Church and the monarchies became more centralized, conflict between them became inevitable . The Church and monarchies have been at odds for centuries .
 The Church itself had been a centralized religious authority since the end of the Roman Empire . The papacy in Rome was independent of secular rule, leaving the papacy independent .
 After the middle of the eleventh century, the popes were elected by the Church cardinals, each of whom had been appointed by a previous pope . Each of the cardinals was appointed by the previous pope, the pope was elected by cardinals .
 Bishops and abbots pledged obedience to the pope in return for tenure over abbey lands and ecclesiastical revenues . Bishops, abbots pledge obedience to pope in exchange for land and revenues .
 In the Ottoman Empire, religious and political sovereignty rested in the same person, the sultan . The sultan was the head of the state, not the king .
 In contrast, rulers of territorial states in Europe had succeeded in making themselves largely autonomous from Church authority .
 Although the Church was wealthy and powerful, princes were unwilling to let the Church interfere with their authority . The Church owned about 25 percent of the land of Catalonia and Castile and perhaps 65 percent in southern Italy .
 During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, rulers refused to allow ecclesiastical courts in their territories . During the 14th and 15th century, rulers in Europe and Latin America refused ecclesiastical court cases .
 The pope commanded his bishops and other clergy to be loyal to the rulers of secular states . The pope also ordered his bishops to stay loyal to secular states in order of loyalty .
 During the medieval period, Western Christians attempted to win back lands conquered by Muslims, especially seeking to recapture Jerusalem . Western Christians were trying to regain control of conquered lands, especially Jerusalem .
 In 1204, the Crusaders conquered the Eastern Orthodox Byzantine Empire . The Empire had extended from eastern Italy to the Black Sea’s eastern end . The Crusaders believed the Orthodox religion to be heresy, believing it was heresy .
 In the mid-fourteenth century, the Ottoman Turks conquered two-thirds of Anatolia, much of the Balkan Peninsula, and Greece . In the 15th century, they conquered much of Anatolian, much of the Balkans, Greece and Anatolia .
 Islam stretched from southern Spain and North Africa to northern India and beyond to islands in Southeast Asia . By 1400, Islam had spread from Spain and Africa to Asia .
 During the fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, the Byzantine Empire (which was Greek in culture and Eastern Orthodox Christian in religion) was Map 1. The Byzantine Empire was map 1. It was map Map 1 . Map 1 is map of the Roman Empire from the 14th century to
 The Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople after a lengthy siege in 1453 . The final act of the decline of the Byzantine Empire was the capture of Constantinople .
 During the next four decades, the Ottomans doubled their European territory . They conquered Serbia in 1459, Bosnia in 1463, Albania in 1479, and Herzogovina in 1483 . During the same period, they also conquered Bosnia, Albania and Albania, Herzog
 The addition of Hungary extended the Ottoman Empire to the Danube River . The addition was part of the empire that extended to the end of the Empire .
 Ottoman Turks possessed a large army and a strong navy . Much of it recruited from converts to Islam, notably the infantry .
 During the first half of the sixteenth century, the Ottomans also absorbed Egypt and moved into Iran . They reached Baghdad in what is now Iraq in 1 534, and then the Persian Gulf . During the early 15th century, they absorbed Egypt, reached Iran, reaching Baghdad
 This was the apogee of the Ottoman Empire, which made use of loyal elites at the local level to bring in the revenues that financed the state . The Ottoman Empire used loyal elites to raise the revenues .
 For the next several centuries, Roman Catholic Europe would view Islam as a perpetual threat to its religion and culture . For the rest of the time, it would be viewed as a constant threat to the Catholic faith .
 A sizable majority of the myriad populations the Ottoman Turks ruled remained Christian . Yet a sizable majority remained Christian and allowed to practice their religion .
 The Islamic Ottoman Turks accepted nonMuslims in their empire . The latter represented a significant majority of the population . Despite the existence of a common Islamic high culture, the Ottoman Turks always accepted non Muslims .
 Christian states systematically persecuted and expelled Muslims . Christians systematically persecuted Muslims in Christian states . Muslims were persecuted by Christian states, but not persecuted .
 For centuries, Western writers outdid each other in describing the Ottoman Turks as “the scourge of God” Western writers described them as barbaric, despotic, and cruel . The Ottoman Turks were the subject of many of the world’s most famous stories .
 The Russian Orthodox Church, Greek Orthodox Church and Roman Catholic Church coexisted remarkably well in the Balkans under Ottoman Turkish rule . However, the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Church co-existed in the region under Ottoman rule .
 Ottomans established the millet system, which allowed autonomy for religious minorities, with leaders of religious communities appointed by the sultan . The millets system was established by the Ottoman sultan in 1903 .
 Much of Europe confronted a huge semicircle of states under direct or indirect Turkish control . Much of the region was under Turkish control, with many of them directly or indirectly .
 Western powers were forced into a series of defensive wars against Islam, which to the West was embodied by the Ottoman Empire . The Western powers had launched Christian crusades against the Muslims .
 To aid in their defense, the Venetians constructed a series of fortifications along the Adriatic coast . The Venetian built the fortifications in order to defend their territory .
 Burghers were town residents whose entrepreneurial activity made possible the economic dynamism of medieval Europe between 1000 and 1350 . Burghers, despite their increasing importance, were outside this classical typology . Burgher activity was made possible by the town's entrepreneurial activity .
 They could only be tried in ecclesiastical courts, and, in the evolution of the modern state, their status as a group apart would come into question . But they would be able to be tried at the highest court in the world .
 secular clergy ministered to the population as a whole . The secular clergy was priests who did not belong to a specific religious order .
 Most secular clergy were as poor as their parishioners, but bishops generally were from noble families . Most of the secular clergy of the time were poor .
 Nobles owned most of the land, with their status and income stemming from this, as well as from their military functions . Nobles were able to buy the land for their military service .
 Noble titles connoted superiority of birth, and noble families usually intermarried . Noble families often intermarried in order to maintain their status . Noble titles were often used to refer to superiority or superiority in birth .
 Nobles were not supposed to work but were to stand ready to defend their monarch and the interests and honor of their families . Nobles should not have to work, they were meant to defend the monarch and their family .
 Peasants made up about 85 percent of the population of Europe in 1500, lived in villages or in small settlements on the lands of nobles, dependent on the latter for protection in exchange for labor . Peasant population made up 85 percent .
 Peasants had no legal status, with the exception of those who owned land . Peaspants were not allowed to have a legal status . Peasant farmers were not included in the society .
 In some places, they were considered barely better than animals by the lords who oppressed them and the clergy . The clergy told them their lot in life was to suffer in anticipation of heavenly rewards . In some parts of the world, the children of the poor were barely better .
 Villages or, within towns, formed the universe of most Europeans . Villages and parishes formed the world's most populated areas . Village or, in towns, parishes, was the subject of daily life .
 Local solidarities took precedence over those to the rulers of states, whose effective reach in many places remained quite limited .
 Many villages were, for all intents and purposes, virtually self-governing . Village councils decided which crops would be planted on common land and set the date . The poor man, the artisan, and the lord in the late fifteenth century. Villagers in the 15th century
 For ordinary laborers, three-quarters of their earnings went to purchase food . Three-quarters went to buy food for ordinary laborers .
 The poor wandered everywhere their feet could carry them, finding work where they could, sometimes begging, sometimes stealing . Sometimes the poor wandered wherever they could find work, sometimes beg or steal, sometimes steal .
 Acts of charity, encouraged by the Catholic Church, helped many poor people survive . The Catholic Church viewed such acts as essential for salvation .
 Townspeople and villagers alike feared the poor outsider, particularly gypsies . Poor beggars from within communities were tolerated and sometimes given assistance . Gypsies were often given assistance by townspeople .
 Banditry was pervasive most everywhere, for example, between Venetian and Turkish territory, between the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples, and in the Pyrenees Mountains .
 Robin Hood is the thirteenth-century English bandit and popular hero alleged to have stolen from the rich to give to the poor . The story of Robin Hood had its continental counterparts in France .
 Feudalism developed during the 9th and 10th century in response to the collapse of the authority of territorial rulers . It was the first form of a form of state-sanctioned state .
 Between aboutd. and 1030, law and order broke down in much of Europe, and violence became the norm . Violence was the norm between 1030 and 1060 .
 This unstable period was characterized by warfare between clans and between territorial lords, attended by retinues of armed men, as well as the ravages of predatory bands .
 The power structure (king, lords, vassals, and peasants) that emerged in feudal times was a reaction against the anarchy and instability of earlier years . It emerged from feudal times as a reaction to earlier years of anarchy .
 Feudalism also should be seen in the context of an overwhelmingly agricultural economy, where rulers and lords retained great estates . It should also be seen as an overall agricultural economy .
 Despite an increase in the power of great lords, there remained a crucial difference between a king and a lord . The king and lord was not a king but a king .
 Kings were anointed by the ecclesiastical authority in a sacred rite, and therefore claimed to rule ‘by the grace of God” even when they were incapable of coercing the great lords and their families .
 Lords received protection and the use of lands to which, at least in principle, they retained rights . Their vassals received, in exchange, protection . The lords retained rights to their vassalates .
 The heirs of vassals would inherit the same conditions, although a vassal had to pay the lord a fee upon inheriting an estate . The heir of the lord would inherit same conditions as the heir of a lord .
 Vassals agreed to fight for their lord for a certain number of days a year and to ransom the lord if he were captured . The lord was captured by his vassals and killed in the battle .
 Vassals could join together to oppose a king who failed to meet his 12 Ch. Ch. The king's 12 Champs.
 Elaborate ceremonies featuring solemn oaths, sworn before God and blessed by churchmen, specified the mutual obligations of lord and vassal . Elaborately ceremonies were held in the Middle Ages .
 feudalism was a system in which the more powerful extracted revenue or services from the less powerful, with the peasantry at the bottom of social hierarchy, the weakest of them all . The peasantry was the weakest in the social hierarchy .
 Feudalism finally waned in the monarchical states in the late fourteenth century . The emergence of stronger state structures, as well as the reimposition of the authority of the Roman Catholic Church in much of Europe .
 feudal relationships dissolved as the strength of rulers increased and the independence of nobles declined in stronger states . The independence of noblemen declined in strong states .
 The development of a money economy (payment in gold or silver, or in coins minted by rulers) increasingly made feudal relationships obsolete .
 One sign of this was the shift to cash payment by peasants to lords, instead of payment in services, crops, or animals . The shift in cash payment to lords was seen as a sign of the rise in peasants' power .
 As wages rose because of a shortage of labor, peasants were able to improve their legal status . The peasants are now able to get better legal status as a result .
 When lords tried to reimpose feudal relationships, some spectacular rebellions occurred . Some of the most successful attempts to re-establish feudal relationships were made in medieval times .
 The Peasants’ Revolt in England in 1381 was the result of a revolt by peasants against royal troops . The Jacquerie of 1358 was the first French revolt in Flanders in 1358 .
 There was unrest among the urban poor, as ordinary people resisted attempts to return to the way things were before . There was also unrest among ordinary people, as well as the poor .
 In this Italian miniature from 1492, a vassal kneels to formally certify his allegiance to his lord and cement their mutual obligations to each other .
 Monarchies of Western Europe gradually brought the feudal era to a close . Medieval Continuities of the medieval era were dominated by monarchies of Europe .
 Agriculture lay at the base of the European economy, in which the ownership of land was the principal determinant of status . A Subsistence Economy was the basis of the economy .
 Peasants were constantly engaged in a protracted and, more often, losing battle against nature . Peasant farmers were engaged in protracted and losing battle with nature, says historian .
 Much land was of poor quality, including hilly and rocky terrain or marshland that could not be farmed . Much of the land was not farmed, with hilly terrain and marshland not being farmed.
 In most of Europe, small plots, poor and exhausted soil, and traditional farming techniques limited yields . Small plots and poor soil are common factors in farming in Europe .
 Villages held some land in common, originally granted by lords . Villages were granted land by lords, and villages held land common in common . Villagers were granted some land grants by lords or lords .
 Common land offered the landless poor a necessary resource for survival . This was economically wasteful, but for centuries common land offered a resource for the poor . Common land was not economically wasteful .
 Under the best of circumstances, peasants had to save about one-fifth to one-eighth of their seed for replanting the following year . The best-case scenario involves saving about one fifth to one eighth of their seeds .
 Peasants also had to pay part of what meager benefits they managed to extract from the land to lords, by virtue of the latter’s status and ownership of land . Peasant lords were lords of the land, and lords of land were lords .
 Lords increasingly found it more advantageous to rent out plots of land . Lords commuted labor services to cash, which they spent on goods, including luxuries .
 These tithes had traditionally been in-kind, but they were increasingly monetized during the late Middle Ages . The tithes were traditionally in kind, but were monetized in the late medieval period .
 In a fundamentally subsistence economy, this left the rural poor with little on which to get by . The rural poor, that is, most families, are often left out of pocketing their money . This is a fundamental problem for rural poor .
 Even with the rise in population, lords in the thirteenth century had faced frequent shortages of labor and forced to grant favorable terms to peasants . Lords in the 13th century were faced with labor shortages and had to grant peasants favorable terms .
 Many peasants in Western Europe succeeded in purchasing their freedom, transforming their obligations into rents paid to the lords . Many peasants were able to purchase their freedom from their obligations to their lords .
 Even free peasants still had to pay feudal dues to lords and fees for the right to mill grain, brew beer, or bake bread, monopolies that lords retained .
 Serfdom began to disappear in France and southern England in the twelfth century . It was the first time it had been abolished in England and France .
 Rulers had reason to encourage the movement toward a free peasantry in Western Europe, because free peasants could be taxed . Serfs were legally attached to the land they worked, but serfs were dependent on the lords who owned the land .
 In Western Europe, the free peasantry reflected the growth in the authority of rulers and the relative decline in that of nobles . Free peasantry reflects the growth of the power of rulers in Western Europe .
 In the West, most peasant holdings were increasingly protected by civic law or custom . Most peasant holdings in the West are increasingly protected in civic law .
 On that special day, they would probably eat as well as they ever would . They would probably be eating well, they said .
 In contrast to the emergence of a free peasantry in the West, most peasants in Eastern and Central Europe lost their freedom during the sixteenth century . They were forced to become serfs as landowners sought to assure themselves of a stable labor supply .
 This was a sign that nobles there were carving out territorial domination independent from that of kings and other rulers, as in Poland . This was in itself a sign of a growing trend in Europe .
 Free peasants moved toward the frontiers of Europe in search of land, which they brought under cultivation . Free peasants were driven to Europe to find land under cultivation.
 Peddlers, artisans, and agricultural laborers traveled great distances in search of work . Peddler and artisans were among those traveling to find work .
 Hundreds of thousands of rural people migrate seasonally from the Pyrenees, Alps, and other mountainous regions to undertake construction work in towns .
 For peasants, meat was something that lords and burghers ate, fruit was rare, and vegetables were poor . rye bread, soup, and perhaps peas, cabbage, and beans were the staples of the peasant s diet, depending on region .
 In southern France, grain made from chestnuts served as the bread of the poor . The grain was made of chestnuts and sold to the poor in southern France .
 Beer was limited to northern Europe, particularly the German states, England, and Scandinavia . Beer was also limited to Germany and England .
 Agricultural growth had been steady until the beginning of the fourteenth century . Agricultural growth slowed down until the mid-fifteenth century in the wake of the Black Death . The Black Death was the result of the plague in the 15th century .
 Once the population began to grow again, plots that had been abandoned were plowed once more . But once the population grew again, the plots that were abandoned had been plowed again .
 In regions of relatively fertile land, the “three-field system” became more common . The ‘three-fields system’ is common in areas of fertile land .
 A third of all land fallow in order to replenish its fertility during the growing season . This left about a third of the land in need of replenishing its fertility . The land was left fallow for the first time in the past year .
 This mode of agricultural production necessitated relatively sizable landholdings, and thus could not be used on small peasant plots . The mode of farming required relatively large landholds .
 A seigneur could force the peasants to give more attention to cultivation in the interest of the lord, leaving less time to supplement the family economy by hunting, fishing, or looking after livestock . Yet this did not necessarily aid the peasant family, because dependency on a lord could force them
 Farming techniques and tools improved during the fifteenth century . Overall, however, farming tools and techniques improved during that period .
 Innovations such as mills and metal harvesting implements were introduced . Innovations were not adopted in some places until much later .
 These methods would remain basically the same until the nineteenth century . The methods would be used in the early years .
 Many could survive (and a minority did quite well) when famine, disease, and war left them alone, selling what produce they had left over after replanting and obligations to lords and the Church had been paid up for that year .
 The medieval innovation of the three-field system allowed for the renewal of one field by leaving it fallow for a season . Medieval innovation allowed for one field to be renewed for the rest of the season .
 Some lords became market-oriented farmers in response to increased population . Some lords were market-orientated farmers . Others were farmers who sold their wares .
 In England, Flanders, northern France, and Sicily, grain was intensively cultivated for the market . In Flanders and Sicily grain was cultivated intensively to meet demand for grain .
 Urban growth encouraged cash-crop farming, enriching nearby landlords, merchants, and wealthy peasants . Urban growth in urban areas enriched nearby landlords and peasants .
 Prosperous agriculture was to be found in the rich valley of the Po River in central Italy and the plains of Valencia in Spain . The Beauce, between the Loire River and Paris, was the most fertile valley in France .
 Landowners brought more land under cultivation, cleared forests, drained marshes and swamps, and where possible, irrigated arid fields . Landowners cleared forests and drained swamps to make land more fertile .
 Religion played an enormous part in the lives of Europeans in the Middle Ages . Religion and popular culture played a huge part in Europe's history .
 Christianity shaped a general system of belief and values that defined the way most people viewed themselves and the world in which they lived . Christianity shaped Christianity .
 The Church, its faith and learning preserved during the so-called Dark Ages before the medieval period, viewed itself as a unifying force in Europe . The Church was viewed as unifying forces in Europe during the Dark Ages .
 This gave the clergy great prestige and moral authority as distributors of the sacraments . Christians believed that salvation could not be achieved without the help of the clergy . This gave them prestige and authority .
 When preachers passed through villages, the faithful waited long into the night to have their confessions heard . The faithful waited for their confessions to be heard in villages .
 The Italian Renaissance would rediscover the dignity of humanity, but did so within the context of Christian belief . The Renaissance, to be sure, would . rediscover . humanity .
 Religious themes and subjects permeated virtually all medieval art and music . Religious themes were prevalent throughout the medieval period .
 In the twelfth century, magnificent Gothic cathedrals began to be built . The Gothic cathedral is one of the world's most famous Gothic buildings .
 The construction of these colossal churches often lasted as long as a century, absorbing enormous resources, and paid for by gifts, large and small, from people of all walks of life .
 Church bells tolled the hours (clocks would remain novelties until the end of the sixteenth century) and called people to Mass .
 Western Christendom was interlocked with Western civilization, although Muslim and Jewish heritages remained strong in Spain and Turkish areas .
 Jews remained outcasts, although in general they did not live apart from the Christian population until the fifteenth century, when they were forced to do so by civil and ecclesiastical authorities . Jews were outcasts until they lived apart from Christian population in the 15th century .
 Venice established the first Jewish "ghetto" in 1516 . The popes forced Jews in Rome to wear distinctive badges . Venice established its first Jewish “ghetto"" in 1515 .
 Jews, forbidden to enter certain trades, were forced to wander in search of towns where they could live in relative peace . Many Jews were forced into certain trades and forced to leave their homes to live in towns .
 Storytellers, both amateur and professional, kept oral traditions of popular culture alive at a time when most people were illiterate . Medieval Continuities 17. 17 .
 Accomplished storytellers passed on their tales during evening gatherings, when villagers, principally women, gathered together to mend garments, tell stories, and keep warm .
 Many of these stories and tales reflected the fatalism of societies in which most people died relatively young . Many of the stories reflect the fatalities of societies that most people die relatively young, such as the deaths of many .
 Most people believed in magic and the presence of the supernatural on earth . Most people believe in magic, and the belief in the supernatural .
 By such views, sorcerers or saints could intervene between people and the bad luck that might befall them, says the author .
 People believed rubbing certain saints’ images could bring good fortune . Rubying certain saints' images was believed to be a sign of good luck .
 Villagers whipped statues of saints that had failed them . Villagers whip statues of the saints that failed them in some parts of France . When the wine harvest failed, villagers whipped statues .
 In some places it was believed that it was a good sign to encounter a wolf, deer, or bear, that a stork landing on a house assured its occupants of wealth and longevity . A white-robed monk in the morning was a bad omen and a black-ro
 Such beliefs helped peasants cope with a world in which droughts, harvest failures, accidents, and myriad fatal illnesses could bring personal and family catastrophe . Such beliefs were used to cope with the realities of a world of catastrophe .
 A "cunning man" might discover the identity of a thief by placing papers with names inside little clay balls . The guilty party’s name would be the first to unravel inside a bucket of water . A ‘cunning’ man would then try to find the identity
 At the beginning of Lent in some places in Western Europe, frolicking young men carried torches of blazing straw through village to ensure agricultural and sexual fertility .
 Carnival was the highlight of the year for most people in early modern Europe . Carnival was a highlight of early modern European life . Carnival is a celebration of life in Europe and the Carnival of the Year .
 People ate and drank as at no other time, tossing flour, eggs, and fruit at each other and playing games . People threw flour and eggs, tossing fruit, eggs and fruit, and played games .
 Ordinary people could poke fun at the powerful in elaborately staged farces and parades . Spoofing the behavior of judges, nobles, and clergymen was a popular form of satire .
 Late Middle Ages brought significant economic, social, and political changes that shaped the emergence of early modern Europe . The Emergence of Early Modern Europe is a look at the history of the late Middle Ages .
 Following the devastation of the Black Death in the fourteenth century, Europe’s population slowly revived and then grew . After the devastation the population slowly grew, Europe's population grew .
 More land was brought into cultivation, providing a greater supply of food . More land in cultivation was brought in by the government .
 The balance between life and death remained precarious . famine, disease, and war still intervened frequently to check population growth . Yet the balance remained precarious, with famine and disease frequently intervening frequently .
 The continent’s trade and manufacturing developed rapidly, particularly in the Mediterranean region and northwestern Europe . However, the continent's manufacturing and trade has developed rapidly .
 Prosperous banking families provided capital for traders and manufacturers, as they did for states . Basic mechanisms for the transfer of credit evolved, and basic mechanisms evolved .
 Trade with Asia and the Middle East developed at a rapid pace, catching up with the amount of trade Europeans carried out with the Muslim world .
 Towns grew in size, and their merchants became more prosperous, reflecting the importance of trade and textile manufacturing on urban growth . Towns grew larger, and merchants became prosperous .
 As merchant families grew richer, some merchant families purchased land and noble titles . As they grew richer they purchased land, some merchants purchased titles and land .
 The growing prosperity of many towns in Western Europe reflected their relative independence from territorial rulers . The entrepreneurial elite of many Western European towns reflected their independence from the rulers .
 One of the characteristics of this independent status was the proliferation of guilds and other organizations that reflected a more dynamic economy . Guilds and organizations reflected a 'more dynamic economy'
 During the period from 1350 to 1450, rulers of France, Spain, England, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Hungary consolidated their authority over their territories .
 The Iberian Peninsula was divided between Castile and Aragon in 1469 . The borders of The Emergence of Early Modern Europe 19 have not changed since the late Middle Ages .
 East Central and Central Europe (Hungary, Bohemia, and Poland-Lithuania, a confederation created in 1386 and which early in the sixteenth century extended from the Baltic to the Black Sea) were already well defined .
 Small territorial fragments lay in the German states or Italy . Most of the small territorial fragments were in Italy or Germany .
 Europe’s population had almost doubled between 1000 and 1300, rising from about 40 million to about 75 million people . Europe's population has almost doubled since 1000 to 1300 . Europe has 75 million inhabitants .
 Early in the fourteenth century, the population began to decline, probably because of rampant disease . The population declined early in the 14th century, probably due to rampant disease.
 The Black Death ravaged Europe in the middle of the century, killing between a third and half of the European population . Then, in the mid-century, it ravaged Europe, killing up to a third of the population .
 The bubonic plague reached Constantinople from Asia in 1347 . Spread by fleas carried by rats, the plague reached the city from Asia . The plague was spread by rats and spread by flea fleas .
 Victims died horrible deaths, some in a few days, others lingering in agony . Some of the victims died in agony, others in agony. Victims were often left in agony for days or agonized .
 Some villages were completely abandoned, as people tried to flee the path of the scourge . Some villages are completely abandoned as people try to flee .
 In vain, states and cities tried frantically to prevent the arrival of travelers, fearful that they carried plague with them . States and cities were fearful that travelers would carry plague .
 Europe only began to recover during the second half of the fifteenth century, thanks to a lull in epidemics and the absence of destructive wars . Europe only recovered from epidemics thanks to lull in epidemic epidemics .
 The bubonic plague was the worst of epidemics, but influenza, typhus, malaria, typhoid, and smallpox also carried off many people, particularly the poor, who suffered from inadequate nutrition .
 Europeans looked to the heavens not only in prayer but also to watch for bad weather that could ruin harvests, including floods . Europeans also prayed for protection from bad weather, including bad weather .
 Famine still devastated regularly, killing infants, children, and old people in the greatest numbers . Famine was a natural disaster that checked population growth, killing off infants and children .
 Life expectancy, once one had made it out of infancy and childhood alive, was about forty years . Life expectancy in the U.S. was about 40 years .
 A fifth of all babies born died before they reached their first birthday . About a fifth of babies born in the UK have died before reaching the age of one .
 Christ, who died at age thirty-three, was not considered to have died young . Christ's death was considered a sign that he was not too young .
 The European population in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries 1500 1600 Spain and Portugal 9.5 million people . The European Population in the Seventeenth and Ninety-Nineteenth Centuries .
 Couples may have limited births through sexual abstinence . Furthermore, couples may also have limited birth rates through abstinence .
 The fact that one partner often died prematurely also served as a check on population . It was also a good check on the number of people who died prematurely .
 Most English men married at between twenty-six and twenty-nine years of age . Most English women marry at between 24 and 24 years old, men at between 26 and 29 years old .
 Parents played a major and often determining role in choosing partners for their children . Marriages were often arranged . Parents played major role in arranging marriages for children .
 For families of means, particularly nobles, the promise of a sizable dowry counted for much . For many, it was a boon to their families, particularly noble families .
 By the end of the sixteenth century, at least in England, the inclinations of the bride and groom were sometimes difficult to ignore . Yet evidence suggests some evidence suggests that .
 For the poor, marriage could offer the chance of improving one s situation . Marriage could offer an opportunity to improve one's situation, says CNN.com .
 A young woman whose family could provide a dowry, however modest, or who had a skill, was an attractive prospective spouse, as was a young man with a trade . A young girl with a skill or a trade would be attractive to a prospective spouse .
 Wives remained subservient to their husbands in the ‘economy of makeshifts’ in the poor household . Their role as managers of income and as workers gave them some minimal degree of equality .
 Sexual infidelity, while common, ran against the grain of a popular sense of justice, which placed a premium on loyalty and mutual obligation between marriage partners . Infidelity was common in the United States, but it ran against a popular belief of justice .
 The Emergence of Early Modern Europe 21 itance and the protection of family property by leading to the appearance of unanticipated offspring . Such liaisons might also jeopardize the system of inheriting and protecting family property .
 About a fifth of English brides were pregnant at the time of their wedding . Sexual relations between couples expecting to marry were very common in England .
 In some places, extended families were common; parents and sometimes other relatives lived with couples . Parents and other relatives were common in some places .
 In some places, such as England, the nuclear family was the most common household in the world .
 When children of the lower classes began working lives, their obligations to their parents did not end . When children began their working lives they had obligations to parents . Children began working at the age of 14 or 15 .
 Often, however, they left home in search of work, rarely, if ever, to return . Often, though, they often did not return to work .
 Poor turned to family and neighbors for help in bad times, as well as for help with harvests, if they owned land . The poor turned to relatives and neighbors to help with bad times .
 An expanding economy began in medieval society in the eleventh century . Trade and manufacture began to be an important part of medieval society .
 During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, merchants greatly increased the amount of products carried on land routes and in the low galley-ships that hugged the Mediterranean coastline . Merchants increased their products on land and in low-gathered ships more confident than ever before that their goods would
 In the markets of Flanders and northern France, olive oil, fruit, and wine from the Mediterranean region were exchanged for timber, cereals, and salted herring .
 With the expansion in commercial activity, the money economy slowly developed . The money economy has slowly developed in China .
 Trade and barter remained important, particularly for peasants, most of whom were part of a subsistence economy . Yet trade and bartering remained important for peasants .
 Late Middle Ages brought a significant rise in the availability of credit to states and entrepreneurs . Yet overall, the late Middle Ages saw a rise in credit to state and entrepreneurs, author says .
 Banking families in Venice and other Italian city-states were already well-established in the thirteenth century . Banking families already well established in the city of Venice .
 Some merchants were no longer itinerant travelers, but rather sedentary entrepreneurs . They were able to raise capital, such as from borrowing from banking families or other merchants .
 They also developed bills of exchange, which were orders drawn upon an agent to pay another merchant money at a future date, perhaps in another country and in another currency .
 Merchants began to work on a commission basis, and some specialized in transporting goods . Here and there, merchants began to . work on commission basis .
 They began to keep registers of profits and losses, using double-entry bookkeeping . They used to be used to record profits and loss .
 All these changes facilitated a commercial boom in the sixteenth century . The multiplicity of states and the tolls between and within them hindered commerce .
 Large-scale production, however, was limited to mining and textiles, as well as arms manufacturing and shipbuilding . Production was also limited to textiles and arms manufacturing .
 The production of textiles, whether for distant markets or local consumption, dominated the manufacturing economy . Textiles dominated the industry in the 1960s and 1970s . Textile production was a major factor in the manufacturing industry .
 Techniques for the production of silk had been imported from China into Europe by Arabs in the tenth century . Techniques for silk had previously been imported into Europe from China .
 First centered in the Italian states, production spread across the Alps to the German states, France, and Spain . Production no longer depended on imported silk from Persia and Asia . Production spread during the second half of the fifteenth century to Germany and France .
 The manufacture of cloth developed in Tuscany, northern France, Flanders, and the Netherlands . Cloth was developed in Italy, Italy, France and Flanders .
 The woolens industry of Flanders, which had begun during the medieval period, boomed . It was centered in the towns of Ypres, Ghent, and Bruges, centered in Ypres .
 England became a major producer of woolen goods in the fourteenth century . England continued to export wool to the continent, continuing to export it .
 Antwerp emerged as Europe’s first important center of international trade in Belgium . The city was the first city to become an important hub for international trade trade .
 Urban merchants and artisans were organized into guilds . Guilds regulated production and distribution, thus protecting, at least in principle, guild members and consumers . The guilds were organized in 18th century .
 Apprentices who learned their craft became journeymen and, if all went well, could eventually become masters . They could join a masters’ guild and employ journeymen or train apprentices .
 Through the guilds, masters could preserve the quality of work within their particular trades and, at the same time, the reputations of their town . The guilds were established in the 1920s and 1930s .
 During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, it became increasingly difficult for journeymen to become independent master craftsmen . Journeymen became increasingly hard to become masters craftsmen in the 1500s .
 Early in the sixteenth century, some German journeymen refused to work for masters who paid them less than they desired or were used to receiving .
 The Emergence of Early Modern Europe 23: The Cottage Industry of the Cottage . In the cottage industry, merchant-capitalists put spinning, weaving, and other work into the countryside .
 Some craftsmen worked outside the walls of cities or in the countryside to avoid guild monopolies and specifications on wages and piece rates . Craftsmen also worked outside of the walls to avoid Guild monopolies .
 Merchant-capitalists who owned raw materials put out spinning, weaving, and other work into the countryside, where labor was cheaper .
 Rural production spread rapidly in northern Italy, the Netherlands, northern France, and England between 1450 and 1550 . Rural production also spread in the Netherlands and England .
 Hundreds of thousands of peasants produced woolen or linen yarn or wove it into cloth . Urban workers dyed, bleached, or shrunk the cloth, which merchants then sold . Merchants then sold the cloth .
 This “cottage industry” (also sometimes called ‘domestic industry’) would remain an important part of the manufacturing process well into the nineteenth century .
 During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, European towns grew rapidly in both number and size . The growth of European towns reflects economic development and increased security in medieval Europe .
 Fortified stone ramparts, gates, and towers gave towns unique visible characteristics . Fortified walls, gates and towers were built in medieval times .
 Towns were residence of most courts, hospitals, and fraternal associations, such as religious confraternities and guilds . Towns were the residence of many courts and hospitals, including hospitals and religious confaternities .
 In addition to the ‘bourgeois’ or ‘burghers’ , most towns had a relatively large number of clergy living within their walls .
 Town dwellers remained a relatively small minority of the population, no more than about 15 percent . However, even there town dwellers are still a relatively large minority .
 In 1500 only about 6 percent of Europeans resided in towns of more than 10,000 people . In 1500, only 6 percent lived in towns that had more than ten,000 inhabitants .
 Only Constantinople, Naples, Milan, Paris, and Venice had more than 100,000 inhabitants . Only Constantinople and Naples, Naples and Milan, Milan and Paris, were more than 200,000 .
 Venice, Florence, Genoa, Milan, Milan and Pisa became independent city-states in about 1100 . Venice established control over surrounding smaller towns and villages, establishing control .
 The decline of the Byzantine Empire and the inability of the Holy Roman Empire to establish its authority throughout Italy prevented the development of large territorial states on the peninsula .
 The prosperity of the city-states, too, impeded the creation of a single state, or even two or three major ones, too . City-states impeded creation of one state or two or more major ones .
 In northern Europe, as well, the growth of cities and towns was linked to the expansion of long-distance trade and commerce . The growth of towns and cities in northern Europe was also linked to long distance trade .
 In northern Germany, independent trading towns were enriched by the Baltic grain trade . Polish landowners exported grain to the Netherlands and other Western countries .
 Liibeck and Hamburg with other northern German trading cities formed the Hanseatic League . It was a federation established to defend against banditry . The League was established in 1881 .
 These towns began to thrive in the mid-twelfth century establishing networks of trade that reached from London to Novgorod in northwestern Russia .
 The Polish Baltic port of Gdansk had its own currency, fleet, army, and diplomats . Poland had a fleet, currency, army and diplomats, and had own currency .
 Towns in southern Germany formed leagues to resist territorial lords and protect trade routes . Likewise, towns in southern German towns formed leagues in response to territorial lords .
 The fairs were held outside Champagne in northern France, as well as Lyon and Beaucaire farther south on the Rhone . They served as trading points between northern Europe and Mediterranean merchants .
 Landowners, particularly in regions of commercialized agriculture, sell produce in town markets . Landowners sell their produce in the town markets, especially in commercialized regions of agriculture .
 Paris (theology), Montpellier , and Bologna were major university centers . Theology, theology, and theology were major universities in Italy .
 Oxford and Cambridge Universities were founded in the thirteenth century . Oxford University was founded in 13th century . Cambridge University is the oldest university in England .
 The term refers to a corporately organized body of students or masters in one town . Rather, the term was used to refer to a group of people or masters living in a town . The term was first used in the United States .
 Literacy rose faster in towns than in the countryside, as the equivalent of secondary education— limited to a privileged few— shifted from rural monasteries to town church or grammar schools .
 Many peasants still lived in towns, working fields outside town walls during the day and returning home before the gates slammed shut at nightfall . Town and country seemed in some ways worlds apart .
 In feudal Europe, towns stood as zones of freedom, because their residents were not, in most cases, bound by service obligations to lords . Town was once a zone of freedom in feudal Europe .
 Towns purchased charters of exemption from taxes from taxes in exchange for payments . Towns bought charters to avoid paying taxes in return for tax exemptions . Towns paid $1.5 million for charters that exempt themselves from taxes .
 Urban oligarchs jealously guarded this municipal independence against nobles and rulers eager to attain revenue and political consolidation . The city of New York City has been a model of democracy in the United States .
 In some cases, rulers actively sought alliances with towns against nobles . In others, rulers sought to protect their towns from nobles .
 Towns could also loan money to kings waging war against recalcitrant vassals or other rulers, including popes . Towns could have loaned money to warring kings and other rulers . Towns also loaned the money to king waging war with recalcitrants vassal vass
 Where territorial rulers were weak, towns obtained the greatest degree of freedom . Italy and Germany had the greatest freedom of towns .
 Towns developed less rapidly in areas where rulers and nobles exercised strong authority . Towns developed more rapidly when they were ruled by strong rulers . Towns were less developed when ruled by nobles .
 Traditions of municipal liberties would leave a significant heritage in Western Europe, ultimately shaping the emergence of constitutional forms of government . Traditions were left behind a significant legacy in Europe .
 Social relationships in the countryside were largely defined by personal obligations in towns . In towns these were replaced by collective rights through guilds and other associations .
 Urban medieval confraternities struggled to maintain their independence from rulers and rural nobles . In England, northern France, the Netherlands, Flanders, and Switzerland, they struggled with rulers and peasants .
 Eastern European towns were not able to stem the tide of the increasing power of nobles and, in the case of Russia, the tsars . Lacking the associational infrastructure of many towns in Western Europe, many towns were unable to cope with the growing power of the nobles and the ts
 As the Muscovite state expanded its authority, the tsars ran roughshod over urban pretensions . The tsars took over the city of Moscow from Moscow to Moscow .
 Most towns in East enjoyed none of the special charters of rights that characterized towns in the West . Towns in the East were not granted special rights to citizens of the region .
 Russian rulers considered towns their personal property, and Russian lords demanded the service and allegiance of townspeople .
 By 1500 the largest monarchical kingdoms were taking on some of the characteristics of the modern state . The term “state” was not yet being used to denote a political entity .
 What was “new’t about them was their growing reach, an evolution begun Map 1 . Map 1. What was "new" about them is growing reach .
 Monarchies grew stronger in Western Europe, but weakened in Eastern and Central Europe during the late Middle Ages . Monarchies were actually weakened in East and East Central Europe .
 Struggles for power, civil war, and the growing domination of lords hindered the emergence of strong states there at least until late sixteenth century .
 Sovereign states emerged in Western Europe during the medieval period . They emerged as rulers moved toward greater authority and independence . Sovereign states were formed in medieval Europe .
 These states were not ‘nation-states’ in the modern sense, in which citizens feel that they belong to a nation by being, for example, Spanish, French, or Italian . Yet, to be sure, they were not nation-states in modern sense .
 Such national states, defined by ethnic bonds and cultural and linguistic traditions, would only develop beginning in the mideighteenth century and, above all, the nineteenth century . The nation's first national state was formed in the early 19th century .
 Medieval rulers governed a complex hodgepodge of territories, semi-independent towns, feudal vassals, and corporate institutions . Medieval rulers were largely independent of the crown, exchanging personal and/or corporate privileges for loyalty .
 Between the tenth and fifteenth centuries, France, England, and Spain grew into sovereign states . Their rulers consolidated their territories by establishing their primacy over rivals .
 These rulers made laws and imposed administrative unity to a degree that was unprecedented . These rulers imposed a degree of administrative unity, unprecedented .
 They asserted authority, but not domination, over the nobles of the territories they claimed . They asserted their authority, though not domination .
 Monarchs could raise armies, mint money, impose taxes, summon advisers, and appoint officials to represent and enforce their will . Monarchs were able to command armies, command armies and impose taxes . They could also raise and command armies .
 French kings, their territories clustered around Paris, had little real power during the medieval period . The French kings were kings of France, but their territories were largely confined to Paris .
 Until the mid-fifteenth century, the kings of England held Normandy, Brittany, Maine, Anjou, and Aquitaine . The counts of Flanders held wealthy lands in what is now northern France and southern Belgium . The kings of France and the counts of Belgium held wealthy
 During the last half of the fifteenth century, the French kings ended the de facto independence of large, prosperous provinces that were technically fiefs of the crown . The French king ended the . de facto . independence of the . provinces .
 In 1482, France absorbed Burgundy, whose powerful dukes were related to the kings of France . A decade later Charles VI11 (ruled 1483—1498) invaded Brittany, adding it to France .
 Through timely royal marriages and warfare, French monarchs established the foundations for a stronger, more centralized monarchy . The French monarchy was founded by the French monarchy in 17th century .
 England emerged as a stronger monarchical state during the late medieval period, but with significant differences from its continental counterparts . England also emerged as stronger monarchs during the period .
 The vassals of King John and the people of London rebelled against more taxes he imposed to finance his attempt to recover continental territories lost to France . King John's attempt to reclaim continental territories was unsuccessful .
 Later in the century, King Edward 1 summoned barons, bishops, and representatives from England's major towns in the hope of obtaining their agreement to provide funds for another war against the king of France .
 From that “parley,"" or "parliament,"" came the tradition in England of consultation with leading subjects . The origins of an English constitutional government constrained royal authority . From that "parley"
 Parliaments role as a representative institution increased as the king required new taxes to fight the Hundred Years' War against France . Parliament was required by the king to fund the war .
 In Central Europe, the Holy Roman Empire was not really a sovereign state . The Holy Roman empire was known as the Roman Roman Empire .
 By the end of the thirteenth century, the principle that the Holy Roman emperor would be elected, and not designated by heredity, had been established .
 Considering themselves the successors of the Roman Empire, the Holy Roman emperors saw themselves as the protectors of the papacy and of all Christendom . The Holy Roman Emperor saw himself as a protector of papacy .
 The emperor, selected by seven princes, could not consolidate his authority, levy taxes, raise armies or, increasingly, enforce his will outside of his own hereditary estates . The emperor could not levy taxes or raise armies .
 The Austrian Habsburgs had extended their territories in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries between the Danube River, the Adriatic Sea, and the Little Carpathian Mountains in Eastern Europe . The Austrians were the ruling house in the German Alpine .
 Beginning in 1438, when the first Habsburg was elected Holy Roman emperor, until 1740 (when the male line was extinguished), only Habsbergs held the title of Holy Roman Emperor .
 Smaller states, such as the thirteen cantons of Switzerland, struggled to maintain their autonomy against rising Habsburg power .
 The seal of King John on the Magna Carta was a cornerstone of English common and constitutional law . King John's seal was the seal of his son King John .
 The growth in the number of royal officials helped rulers consolidate more effective power . Early Modern Europe was one of the world's most important states .
 Rulers had always had some kind of advisory council . But the importance of their advisers grew in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries .
 Chanceries, treasuries, and courts of law represented an early stage of bureaucratization . The courts were an early form of bureaucracy in the early 1800s .
 Some humble men of talent began to reach positions of influence within states . Serving as royal officials, some humble men became statesmen .
 In order to meet the expenses of their states, they drew income from taxation, the sale of offices and government bonds . The confiscation of land from recalcitrant nobles was also a source of revenue .
 Like other rulers, popes also centralized administration and finances, selling posts . Popes centralized administration, sold posts, centralized finances and sold posts .
 Rulers imposed taxes on salt, wine, and other goods, impositions from which nobles and clergy were generally exempt .
 States in the sixteenth century became the great collectors and distributors of revenue . States became great collectors of revenue in the 16th century .
 The gradual growth of public debt was another sign of the increased authority of monarchical states . Moreover, public debt is a sign that monarchs have increased their authority .
 Royal dependency on the loans of merchant-bankers enriched the latter, providing more capital for their ventures . The loans enriched the Royal Family, providing them with more capital .
 Rulers, surrounded by courtiers and councils, lived in a grander fashion . They lived with courtiers, councils and councils .
 As they worked to consolidate authority and territories, thrones became increasingly hereditary . Thrones were increasingly hereditary in the Middle Ages .
 Even wealthy people were apt to die young, such succession arrangements, which varied throughout Europe, mattered considerably .
 With the strengthening of sovereign states in the fifteenth century, which entailed the loss of the right to have armies of retainers, nobles depended more on monarchies for the sanction of their power and honor .
 The sale of royal offices, especially in France and Spain, encouraged loyalty to the throne . Sale of royal office offices encouraged loyalty .
 Royal courts now adjudicated property disputes, gradually eroding noble jurisdiction over the kings subjects . In France and many of the German states nobles retained rights of justice over peasants .
 In the fifteenth century, regular channels for diplomacy emerged among the states of Europe . In the 15th century, the European states began regular diplomatic channels .
 Italian city-states were the first to exchange permanent resident ambassadors . The Italian city state was the first city-state to exchange ambassadors .
 By the middle of the century, Florence, Milan, Venice, and the kingdom of Naples all routinely exchanged ambassadors . They provided news and other information, while representing the interests of their states .
 Significant constraints still limited the authority of rulers, however, still limited them .
 We have seen that the privileges of towns, established through the purchase of royal charters of financial immunity, tempered royal power . We have also seen that we have seen how the privileges  of towns were established by the .
 Some regions, nominally incorporated into realms, maintained 30 Ch. Ch. Some regions (for example, Navarre in Spain) kept 30 Chs .
 Distance and physical impediments such as mountains and vast plains also prevented the extension of royal authority .
 In the thirteenth century, rulers convoked assemblies of notable subjects to explain their policies and ask for help . The convoked assembly was convoked by notable subjects in order to discuss their policies .
 They assembled to provide military assistance when they required it, they also heard grievances . Because they depended on those whom they assembled, they often heard grievances, the U.S. heard them .
 From this, parliaments, assemblies, diets, and Estates developed, representing (depending on the place) nobles, clergy, towns, and, in several cases, commoners . Parliaments and assemblies represent nobles and clergy, as well as commoners.
 To meet the extraordinary expenses of wartime, they increasingly borrowed money from wealthy banking families . But to meet the extra expenses, the banks borrowed from wealthy families .
 Rulers also utilized subsidies from friendly powers, imposed special taxes and forced loans, and sold offices . The king's rule was one of the world's most successful monarchies .
 Royal levies to finance warfare through direct taxation could only be imposed with the consent of those taxed, except peasants, who had limited rights . Those taxed could only consent to such levies, except those taxed .
 The dialogue between rulers and assemblies, and the strength and weakness of such representative bodies, over the centuries would define the emergence of modern government in European states .
 The princes of the German states had to ask assemblies of nobles for the right to collect excise taxes . The princes asked for the permission to collect taxes in Germany .
 In Poland-Lithuania and Hungary, noble assemblies were more important than royal authority . Noble assemblies were important in Poland and Hungary .
 Rulers could suspend decisions of those “sovereign bodies’s” bodies, yet such assemblies could not be completely ignored . rulers needed their support, or at least compliance, particularly in time of war .
 They resisted royal taxes, which fell on the poor—the vast majority of the population—whom no one represented . No one represented. The poor were the victims of royal taxes. They were the poor .
 Kings became supreme judges, with royal courts offering litigants and petitioners a final appeal . Kings became, at least in principle, supreme judges (though not for the clergy) as ecclesiastics were generally tried in Church courts .
 The struggle between rulers and the popes dated to the late eleventh century . The popes and Holy Roman emperors had struggled for primacy .
 Popes contested the right of lay rulers to appoint bishops and invest them with signs of spiritual authority, normally a staff and a ring . During the “lay investiture crisis,” which began in 1060, the popes had contested the rights of the lay ruler to appoint
 The clergy taught obedience to secular as well as ecclesiastical rulers . The clergy generally taught obedience .
 Popes granted rulers of France, Spain, and some German towns certain rights over the clergy, including that of naming bishops . Kings were able to further consolidate their power when popes granted them certain rights .
 In the late Middle Ages, stunning developments in warfare and exploration transformed Europe and its relationship with the rest of the world . Transforming Discoveries in the late Mideast, Europe transformed the Middle Ages .
 The invention of printing created a culture of books, facilitating the spread of knowledge, ideas, and debate, at a time when exploration led to developing trade networks across the oceans .
 The face of battle was revolutionized in the late medieval period . Although kings still depended on nobles to raise armies and to command on the battlefield, the look of battle changed dramatically .
 Invented in China, gunpowder was brought to Europe in the thirteenth century by the Arabs . Gunpowder was invented in China and brought to the continent by Arabs .
 Gunpowder moved warfare from “chiefly a matter of violent housekeeping” to sometimes massive struggles between dynastic rivals . Gunpowder made warfare more violent than housekeeping between lords and vassals .
 Gunpowder could propel arrows and, increasingly, lead bullets . First used in battle in the early fourteenth century, gunpowder was used to propel arrows, bullets .
 Gunpowder soon became the explosive for early versions of rifles, muskets, which could be standardized in caliber and ammunition . Clockmakers could produce spring-driven wheel locks that functioned as firing mechanisms .
 The rifle eroded the role of the noble as a privileged warrior . Heavyly armored knights could now be more easily shot off their horses by guns than unseated by lances .
 Cavalrymen now wore light armor, while they might well carry a lance, they also sometimes sometimes were armed with pistols . Cavalry men now wear light armor .
 Pikemen were made of a long wooden pole topped by a sharp iron point . Pikemen protected the infantry while soldiers reloaded . Pikeman's thirteen-foot-long weapons were made from a wooden pole .
 The furious attack of pikemen could tear apart the rows of riflemen as they knelt to reload . It could also tear apart rows of rifles and rifles as they were reloaded .
 Now exploding artillery shells could wound or kill many combatants at once . Explosion could kill many of the world's most dangerous weapons .
 Deadly bombardments during battles had a devastating effect on the morale of the enemy . Deadly bombings during battles were devastating effects on morale of enemy .
 The sleek galleys that raced along the coast of the Mediterranean during the warm summer months gave way to ships large enough to transport heavy cannon . Galleys were larger enough to carry heavy cannon.
 The threat from enemy artillery forced the construction of massive fortifications around towns . The fortifications left the defense with a solid advantage in warfare .
 Victorious armies, frustrated by lengthy sieges, sometimes slaughtered the surviving civilian population . Victorious forces sometimes killed the survivors of those who survived .
 frontier garrisons, artillery units, and the kings household guards were virtually the only true standing armies . Their size increased during the wars of the late fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries .
 During the Hundred Years’ War, major battles were fought with between 7,000 and 15,000 soldiers on each side . During the war, battles took place in England and France between 15 and 20 years .
 During the struggles between the Habsburg and French Valois dynasties on the Italian peninsula in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, armies reached 25,000 men in size .
 Some nobles still had private armies but served their kings as commanders and cavalrymen . Some nobles served as commanders or cavalrymen during their reigns .
 Mercenaries, the original “free lances,” increasingly replaced feudal levies in armies mobilized by rulers to defend or expand their territorial interests . The original ‘free lance’s’ was first “Free lances” in medieval Europe .
 Albanians, Englishmen, Scots, Greeks, Poles, and Swiss pikemen . These might include Albanians and Scots .
 Mercenaries received modest, though irregular, pay and expected acceptable rations and the opportunity to pillage the towns they conquered . Mercenaries were expected to be modest, but irregular, but expected acceptable, rations .
 Soldiers recruited by states recruited from their own populations deserted far less frequently than those recruited by their own population . Assuming these conditions were met, they seem to have deserted less frequently .
 Most states had some kind of conscription, whether a draft of men between the ages of fifteen and sixty or a hasty roundup when war approached . Yet most states had a formalized draft, whether it was a draft or roundup .
 Peasants made up more than three-quarters of armies, as did European population . Peasant soldiers made up three-fifths of armies in Europe, as they did the majority of armies .
 In addition to barely adequate lodging and food, infractions of rules were dealt with harshly . “running the gauntlet” through troops lined up on both sides, dispensing blows with sticks or swords .
 Officers dispensed justice without trial or appeal, and sentences carried out immediately . Sentences carried out without trial and without appeal .
 The severed heads of deserters or other serious offenders were impaled on pikes for several days at the entrance to a camp, sending a clear message . Deserters, others who were serious offenders, were killed or injured in the U.S.
 Except for royal guards, artillery units, and other specialized forces, uniforms were rare in any army . Most soldiers sported some type of identification, such as an armband or a tunic bearing a national or regional symbol .
 Epidemics and disease carried off far more than did wounds received in battle . Disease carried off much more than wounds received from battle .
 The wounded often died from inadequate medical treatment and from neglect . The wounded were often neglected and often died without medical attention .
 The advent of printing in Europe in the fifteenth century in some ways marked the end of the medieval period . The Printing Press and the Power of the Printed Word .
 The invention of woodblock printing and paper occurred in China in the eighth century . Both reached Europe from the Arab world via Spain in the thirteenth century via Spain .
 Paper more readily accommodated scholars, officials, and merchants . Because it was cheaper than parchment, paper was much cheaper than paper .
 Flemish craftsmen invented a kind of oil-based ink in the fifteenth century . The ink was invented in the 15th century by the Flemans .
 By 1500, about 35,000 books were published each year in Europe, and a century later the number had jumped to between 150,000 and 200,000 .
 Accounts of discoveries and adventures in the New World filtered across Europe from Spain, England, and France . Accounts of discovery and adventures across Europe filtered across from Spain to England .
 The number of scholarly libraries, which were really just private collections, grew rapidly in the 1930s and '60s . Private libraries were also growing rapidly .
 Spread of Printing through Europe, 14501508 Towns and dates at which printing shops were established throughout Europe . Locations of printing shops across Europe .
 With the greater dissemination of knowledge came an increase in the number of universities, rising from twenty in 1300 to about seventy in 1500 .
 Literate individuals remained far in the minority of literate individuals . More people learned how to read, but literacy remained a problem .
 In Florence and other prosperous cities, the rate of literacy may have been relatively high . But in the Italian city-states as a whole it is unlikely that more than 1 percent of workers and peasants could read and write .
 Among the upper classes, many more people developed the habit of reading . But among the upper class many more developed the habits of reading in the 1930s .
 Not all that that pleased lay and ecclesiastic leaders, and printing made censorship more difficult . Printing made censorship considerably more difficult for laymen .
 No longer could the destruction of one or two manuscripts hope to root out an idea . The destruction of manuscripts is no longer possible to find out what an idea has been .
 By the last decade of the fifteenth century, the inhabitants of the Iberian Peninsula already had several centuries of navigational and sailing accomplishments behind them . The origins of the European Empire were the result of the Spanish conquests .
 The Portuguese captured a foothold on the Moroccan coast in 1415, beginning two centuries of expansion . The Portuguese had the advantage of the magnificent port of Lisbon, Portugal .
 Early in the fifteenth century, they began to explore the west coast of Africa . They had taken Madeira and the Azores islands in the Atlantic . They also had taken the Portuguese islands of the same name .
 Their goal was to break Muslim and Venetian control of European access to Asian spices and silk . Their aim was to stop European control of Asian trade and silk trade .
 Christopher Columbus sought financial backing for a voyage to reach the Indies . King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain initially rejected the request of the Genoese cartographer .
 In 1492, the royal couple consented to support the expedition, fearing that Portuguese vessels might be the first to reach the wealth of Asia by sea . The expedition took place in 1492 .
 He believed the earth was a perfect sphere, and since Africa stood in the way of a voyage sailing to the east, he thought it could be possible to reach the Orient by sailing west across the Atlantic Ocean .
 After more than nine weeks on the open seas, the small fleet reaches the small Caribbean island of San Salvador in the Americas . The small fleet reached not Asia but rather the small, Caribbean island .
 He probably believed that he would find gold, and asked the Indians he encountered on the shore in sign 36 Ch. 36 . But he also probably believed he'd find gold .
 Columbus was impressed with the beauty of Hispaniola and the ‘docility” of the indigenous people . He remained convinced that he had discovered islands near India .
 In the absence of gold, the Spanish crown could make Hispaniola profitable by selling its people as slaves, a looming tragedy . The Spanish crown may have been able to sell its slaves as slaves .
 Columbus made three subsequent voyages of discovery, the last beginning in 1502, after which he gave up his search for a passage to Asia . Columbus, whose greatest contribution was to find a way across the sea using the trade winds, made three voyages .
 Portugal struggled to defend its trade routes against Spanish encroachments . Portugal, a much poorer state than Spain, struggled to protect trade routes . Spain is now a much richer state than Portugal .
 Bartholomew Dias (c. 1450-1500) rounded the Cape of Good Hope, the southern tip of Africa, reaching the Indian Ocean, and then Calcutta on the southwest coast of India . In 1487 Dias first rounded the . Cape of . Good Hope
 The cargo of spices Vasco da Gama brought back to Lisbon from India in 1498 paid for his costly expedition sixty times over . The Portuguese explorer brought back the spices he brought back from India .
 The Portuguese established fortified bases along the Indian Ocean, including at Goa, in the 16th century .
 The maritime route across the Indian Ocean to the South China Sea could now compete with the overland spice and silk routes that had long linked Europe to the markets of the East .
 Portuguese, wearing Western attire, met robed Japanese upon disembarking in 1542 . Portuguese found that a thriving maritime trade network was thriving .
 Transforming Discoveries 37 already existed between China, Japan, Southeast Asia, India, India and the Persian Gulf, and East Africa . The region was already known as the Middle East region .
 His proclamation seemed to justify conquests, as well as the conversion of indigenous peoples . His proclamation seems to have justified conquests and conversions of indigenous .
 The pope awarded Portugal all of sub-Saharan Africa and Asia . Spain, the pope’s ally, received most of the Americas .
 Portugal claimed Brazil, which became the largest colony in the Americas, established in the second half of the sixteenth century . Portugal claimed the country's largest colony of the Americas .
 Vasco Nunez de Balboa established Spanish sovereignty over what is now Panama . He established Spanish control of the country's territory .
 Cuba, in turn, fell, and then served as a staging point for the conquest of Mexico by Hernando Cortes . Cuba, then, served as the staging point to the conquest .
 Cortes, who first crossed the Atlantic in 1506 to Hispaniola, landed on the coast of Mexico in 1519 . Cortes first landed in Mexico in 15019 .
 Aztec capital Tenochtitlan was then larger than any other European city except Constantinople . The Aztec city was larger than all other European cities except Constantinople, including Constantinople .
 Montezuma sent him away, although he later sent him gifts of gold and silver . Montezum sent away, but later sent gifts of silver and gold and gold .
 The interests of the Spanish crown would remain paramount in Spain’s overseas empire . Despite the fact that he had been ordered to limit his expedition to Mexico, Cortes was determined to conquer Mexico .
 Cortes formed alliances with Montezuma’s non-Aztec peoples, who naively hoped that Cortes might help them achieve independence . Cortes was not the only person to help the non-aztec peoples achieve independence.
 The Spanish adventurer conquered Mexico with no more than sixteen horses and six hundred soldiers . He then conquered Mexico, with the help of his Native American allies .
 Francisco Pizarro led his men in the conquest of the Inca Empire in Peru . He led them to victory in the Peruvian Empire .
 Incas had never seen iron or steel weapons before, nor did they have draft animals . Incas were a people rich in precious metals and culture, but had never had iron weapons before .
 When Pizarro’s horses lost their shoes in Peru, there was no iron available to replace them, he had them shod in silver . When there were no iron, he shodged them in silver instead .
 In the 1540s more silver was discovered in Mexico, and also in the Andes Mountains, completely transforming the economy of Spanish conquest . The discovery of silver in Mexico transformed the Spanish conquest economy .
 Imported silver enhanced the integration of the Spanish Empire into the expanding trade of Europe . The Spanish Empire was founded in 1881 .
 The victory of the conquistadors was the victory of steelbladed swords over stone-bladed weapons .
 The surprise element of cannon contributed to the Spanish victory in the Americas and of the Portuguese in Southeast Asia . Moreover, the surprise element added to the victory of the Spanish .
 Pope Alexander VI divided the non-Christian world into zones for Spanish and Portuguese exploration and exploitation . The Spanish-Portuguese conquest of the world took place in the early 1500s .
 Portuguese, Spanish, French, and English explorers set out to find new routes to Asia, the New World, and around the world .
 Steeped in tales of crusading chivalry and conquest, the conquerors set out looking for adventure and wealth . The film is set to be released in September 2015 .
 Cortes was a veteran of another imperial conquest, the Reconquista, which had expelled the Moors from the Iberian Peninsula . Cortes, for example, was of a modest Castilian noble family; his father had fought against the Spanish Moors .
 Most died young, far from home, their dreams of wealth shattered by the harsh realities of life in what seemed to them to them .
 Ferdinand Magellan, the Portuguese-born explorer, was killed by angry islanders on a Pacific beach . Magellan was killed on a beach in the Philippines .
 His crew circumnavigated the globe, having proven that a southwest passage to India did exist . He returned to Spain in 1522, returning to Spain .
 Many of the conquistadors, and many of the later settlers who were attracted by tales of gold and silver, died in the New World . During the first ten years of Spanish settlement of Hispaniola, as much as 40 Ch. Ch. died .
 Many times more of the native people they encountered perished as a result of contact with the newcomers . However, many times more than the natives perished .
 Smallpox wiped out people who had no immunity to diseases brought from Europe . Smallpox the Spanish brought with them wiped out those with no immunity from smallpox .
 The native population of Peru fell from about 7 million in 1500 to half a million in 1600 . Peru's native population fell from 7 million to half million in 15th century .
 Other European diseases, including measles, typhus, and bubonic plague, decimated the native population .
 "Half of the people fled to the fields. After our fathers and grandfathers succumbed, half of our people fled," she said . "After our fathers, grandfathers ... we were forced to work in fields," she added .
 In turn, the Indians gave the Spanish syphilis, which then spread in Europe . The Indians also gave the Spaniard syphilis to the Spanish .
 The exchange of diseases was a tragic consequence of the meeting between the Old and New Worlds . But there were beneficial exchanges as well as beneficial exchanges, says author .
 Before the arrival of Europeans, there were no domesticated animals larger than llama and alpaca in the Americas, and little animal protein in the Indian diet . There were also little animal proteins in the diet of the Indians .
 They provided manure for farming but ate their way through forest land and eroded the indigenous agricultural terrace system . They eroded the ecological balance of conquered lands, upsetting ecological balance .
 Every year the Spanish galleons returned with tobacco, potatoes, beans, cacao, chili peppers, and tomatoes . Every year they returned with new varieties of beans and beans .
 The Spaniards planted wheat, barley, rice, and oats in their colonies . In turn, the Spaniards also planted wheat and barley, barley .
 In 1565, a Spanish galleon completed a voyage of global trade by sailing across the Pacific Ocean from Manila to unload cinnamon on the coast of Mexico . The Spanish ship completed the voyage by unloading cinnamon in Mexico .
 Spanish ships returned with silver, which could purchase silks, porcelain, spices, jade, and mother-of-pearl brought by Chinese junks to the Philippines . The silver was used to buy silks and other items brought by Spanish ships .
 Shipping routes led from Seville to the Caribbean and to the ports of Veracruz in Mexico and Cartagena in Colombia .
 They returned with Mexican and Peruvian silver that replenished the coffers of European princes and merchants .
 All five continents --Europe, Asia, Africa, North America, and South America -- moved closer together in reciprocal economic relationships . This represented the beginnings of a globalization of trade .
 Spanish legal documents affecting the new colonies declared that Indians would keep all lands they already held, but all other territories belonged to the crowns of Spain or were to be divided up among the conquerors as booty .
 The Spanish proclaimed the requerimimimTransforming Discoveries 41 ientOy which required that Indians accept both Spanish rule and Christianity . Indians were required to accept the Spanish government and Christianity.
 conquistadors built new towns, placing the church, town hall, and prison around a central marketplace . Towns developed on a rectangular grid plan, as towns developed on rectangular grid .
 In return for the pope’s blessing of the colonial enterprise, missionaries began to arrive in the Americas, hoping to convert the Indians to Christianity . The pope gave the permission to send missionaries to the Americas .
 The harsh reality of the colonial experience for the natives was largely untempered by the good intentions of some, but not all, of the missionaries .
 Spaniards, Portuguese, and other Europeans sought to impose their culture on the peoples they conquered . Christian teaching made only limited headway in India and virtually none in China .
 Unlike its view of Muslims, the Church did not consider Indians infidels, but rather as innocents who could be taught Christian beliefs . The Church considered Indians as innocent children who could learn Christian beliefs.
 The Spaniards already had experience in dealing with the diversity of language and culture on the Iberian Peninsula, although nothing like what they found .
 In Latin America, Christian belief sometimes merged with local religious deities, customs, and shrines to create a distinctive form of Christianity . Christian beliefs sometimes merged into local religious customs, customs and customs .
 Obligatory labor service, brutally enforced, first formed the relationship between rulers and the ruled . Obligacy labor service was brutally enforced by rulers .
 The crown of Castile established a system of encomienda, by which Spanish settlers would hold Indians “in trust,” but not their lands . Spanish settlers held Indians ‘in trust’ but not lands .
 The system gradually ended and a wage system, not much better, came into place . The system eventually ended and the wage system—not much better—came to place .
 Repartimiento allowed royal officials to force Indians to work for specific periods . Moreover, repartimieno allowed officials to make Indians work for certain periods .
 In Central America, Spanish colonists invoked the medieval Christian concept of a “just war” against “heathens” as a justification for enslavement . The Spanish colonists used the medieval concept of "just war" as justification .
 The Church and the crown periodically tried to protect the Indians against the harsh treatment accorded them by many of their Spanish countrymen in the name of profit . Many of the Indians died in the 17th century .
 Bishop Bartolome de Las Casas was a conquistador before becoming a priest . His father had accompanied Columbus on his second voyage to the Americas .
 He saluted the “marvelous government, laws, and good customs” of the Mayas of Central America, whom 42 Ch. A. C. Ch. President Obama saluted .
 Charles V ordered a pause in Spanish conquests until such moral issues could be considered . But the Spanish destruction of what they considered pagan temples and idols continued .
 As the Indian population was depleted through disease, overwork, and brutality, the Spanish looked for new sources of labor . The Spanish looked to find a new source of labor in the area .
 Domestic slavery still existed in Italy, Spain, and Muscovy in the sixteenth century . Some Indians in the New World also had slaves . Domestic slavery also existed in the Arab world .
 By the fifteenth century, Portuguese traders along the coast of West Africa had begun to make profits selling Africans as servants in Lisbon or as workers in the Portuguese Atlantic islands .
 Portugal soon dominated the African network of slave-trading . The network depended on chieftains and traders in African kingdoms, merchants in Seville and Lisbon . It also depended on settlers in Mexico and Peru and Brazilian sugar growers .
 Spaniards believed that Africans could best survive the brutally difficult work and hot climate of America . The Spaniards thought that Africans would best survive America .
 Between 1595 and 1640 about 300,000 slaves were transported to the Spanish colonies in the Americas . Five times that many slaves would be shipped during the next century .
 Small traders, shoemakers, blacksmiths, masons, and masons were Spanish settlers . Gradually more Spanish settlers arrived to populate the American colonies .
 By the mid-sixteenth century about 150,000 Spaniards had crossed to America, and by the end of the century about 240,000 had emigrated there . About 240,00 Spaniards emigrated to America .
 Economic and political structures of early modern Europe drew on the dynamism of the medieval period . Conclusion: The economic and political structure of early . modern . Europe's early modern . period drew on a dynamism .
 Demographic vitality finally overcame the catastrophic losses brought by the Black Death . Demographic Vitality finally overcame catastrophic losses from Black Death in Europe .
 France, England, and Spain had consolidated their authority, and sovereign monarchical states began to emerge . And although much of Central Europe and the Italian peninsula remained a hodgepodge of small states, rulers in the region had consolidated authority .
 Three salient movements of change brought the Middle Ages to an end . Above all, three salient movements brought change to the end .
 The commercial prosperity of Florence, above all, but also of Venice and other independent city-states made possible this period of extraordinary accomplishment .
 The invention of printing began to transform one culture after another . Print printing revolutionized the world of print technology .
 Between 1500 and the late eighteenth century, more than 1. million Europeans crossed the ocean to live in the New World . Colonization brought the establishment of European empires abroad .
 The Reformation challenged the unity of the Roman Catholic Church and its dominance in much of Europe . Third, the Reformation began in the second decade of the sixteenth century .
 He commissioned the artist to paint frescoes on the ceiling of the new Sistine Chapel . The chapel is a ceremonial chapel next to the papal residence in the Vatican . The artist was commissioned by the Pope to paint the ceiling .
 He signed a contract that stipulated a payment of 3,000 ducats and began work that very day in May .
 Michelangelo often lay on his back, staring at the ceiling, before climbing up the scaffolding to work . During the long, difficult years of intense creativity, Michelangelo's masterpiece was still the best position from which to study it .
 His frescoes, depicting Creation, Original Sin, the Flood, and the ancestors of Christ, are a triumph of religious painting . He is known for his paintings of Creation and Original Sin .
 Pope Julius 11, offended by the nude figures in the Last Judgment frescoes, ordered painters to cover the nudes with fig leaves . However, Pope Julius Julius 11 was offended by nudes in Last Judgment .
 He left behind what is arguably the most beautiful pictorial ensemble in Western painting .
 Michelangelos work represents the epitome of art during the Renaissance, a time of cultural rebirth . Michelangelo's work is considered to be one of the most important pieces of art in art history .
 From about 1330 to 1530, the city-states of the Italian peninsula emerged as the intellectual and artistic centers of Europe . The city-state cities of Italy emerged as an intellectual, artistic center of Europe in the 13th century .
 It was a period during which classical texts were rediscovered, thereby reviving the ideas, architecture, arts, and values of ancient Greece and Rome . It was also a period when classical literature was rediscovered .
 Renaissance artists and scholars helped shape the intellectual and cultural history of the modern world . By celebrating the beauty of nature and the dignity of mankind, Renaissance artists helped shape history .
 Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and many other Renaissance painters were influenced by wealthy families during the 15th century . Michelangelo's work is one of the most famous examples of Renaissance art .
 From about 1490 to 1530, Rome, too, was the center of a final period of artistic innovation, the High Renaissance . The popes, including Julius II, commissioned paintings, sculptures, and churches, during the period .
 The Italian city-states were ravaged by foreign invaders beginning in 1494 . Yet, weakened by internal political turmoil, they were weakened .
 The City-States of the Italian Peninsula were no longer able to support artistic glories . The Renaissance ended in a mood of discouragement, in striking contrast to the contagious optimism that had characterized its greatest moments . After 1530 the city-states were no .
 The city-states of Renaissance Italy were the most urbanized part of the Western world . Renaissance Italy was one of the most densely populated parts of the world .
 The Loggia dei Lanzi is the principal gathering place in Florence . It is the main gathering place for people in the city .
 In the foreground, one can see priests and nuns praying while Florentine citizens go on about their day . The picture was taken in the foreground of the scene in Florence, Italy .
 The city-states were the fundamental political unit of the Italian peninsula, the most urbanized part of the Western world . The majority of the population of Italian peninsula still lived in the countryside . The City-States were the most important political unit in Italy .
 In 1200, there were several hundred independent city-states on the Italian peninsula . However, gradually, that number was reduced as many were absorbed as subject territories by more powerful cities .
 At least 23 cities in the northern and central parts of the peninsula had populations of more than 20,000 . A century later, at least twenty-three cities were in the region with populations of 20,500 .
 It was within these city-states that the achievements of the Renaissance took place . The achievements of these cities were achieved in the Renaissance .
 City-states had become independent and prosperous because of the expansion of commerce during the eleventh and twelfth centuries . The city-states became independent because they had become prosperous .
 Italian peninsula formed a natural point of exchange between East and West . The Italian peninsula is now a point of trade between the two continents .
 Roman law provided a framework for order and the development of political life within the Italian city-states . Intensively studied in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, Roman law .
 Roman Empire depended on a network of largely autonomous cities and towns, particularly in the plains of the northern part of the peninsula . The Roman Empire had depended on largely autonomous towns and cities, particularly on the plains .
 These had been linked by a system of roads, unrivaled in Europe, all of which, as the saying goes, eventually led to Rome . These had to be linked by roads, which led to the city of Rome, Rome .
 Economic recession in Tuscany led to declines in manufacturing and population in the central Italian region . Northern part of the Italian peninsula still prospered, but the northern part prospred .
 Florence’s textile industry employed about 30,000 workers . Drawing wool from England and Spain, the city's wool industry was a major source of income .
 Florentine cloth and woolen goods were then traded throughout the Mediterranean, and to Burgundy, Flanders, England, and as far as Asia . The finished cloths and woolens were traded throughout Europe and beyond .
 Agriculture thrived in the broad river valleys of Tuscany and Lombardy . Agriculture flourished in the regions of Lombardy and Tuscana .
 The production of grains, vegetables, and wine was aided by the drainage of swamps and marshes and by irrigation . It fed the urban population and provided an agricultural surplus that could be invested in commerce and manufacturing .
 The proximity of Mediterranean trade routes bolstered international trade and small-scale manufacturing . The proximity to the region brought prosperity to ambitious Italian merchants .
 The development of banking during the early fourteenth century helped finance internal trade and international commerce . Banking helped finance international commerce and internal trade .
 By the beginning of the fifteenth century, the Church’s condemnation of usury no longer was taken to apply to banking, as long as the rates of interest were not considered excessive . The Church no longer condemned usury as excessive, but rates were not excessive .
 Florence's gold florin became a standard currency in European trading centers . Florence’s gold florsin became the standard currency .
 The bankers of that city, with agents in Avignon, were central to European commerce and monarchical and papal finances . The bankers had agents in many other cities throughout its trading network .
 Florentine merchants had broad experience with bills of exchange and deposit, which provided credit to purchasers . Unlike traders elsewhere in Europe, Florentines merchants had extensive experience of bills and deposit .
 In the fifteenth century, the king of England forced Florentine merchants to loan him money, or face expulsion from the realm and losing all their assets there .
 He defaulted on the loans after his invasion of France failed during the Hundred Years’ War, and several major Florentine merchant companies went into bankruptcy . But he defaulted after he failed to repay the debts .
 Venice and Genoa were also major trading and banking cities, as well as centers of shipbuilding and insurance . Venice was also a center of trade and banking . Genoa and Venice were also centers of shipping and insurance and shipbuilding .
 This miniature depicts the Piazzetta of the Republic of Venice, with all the activity of a major Adriatic port . Each city had long traded with the The City-States of the Italian Peninsula .
 Venice was a major center of trade and transcultural exchange between the Christian West and Muslim East since the eighth century . Venice, in particular, had been a major trade center between the Muslim East and Christian West . Venice was also a center of transcultural exchange between Christians and Muslims .
 Venice linked sea routes with the long overland routes to Constantinople through the desolate mountains of the Balkans . Venice linked the sea routes to the overland route to Constantinople . Venice was one of the world's most important cities .
 Merchants hedged bets on whether their shipments would fall victim to the sudden Mediterranean storms, to roving pirates or to some other mishap on the overland route through Central Asia .
 The merchants carried fine woolens and linen from the Italian peninsula and northern Europe, as well as metals, to the East .
 Spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg, ginger, and sugar, arrived via Alexandria or Constantinople from the East Indies . They returned with cotton, silk, and, above all, spices, including pepper and cinnamon, which arrived via Constantinople .
 Merchant capitalism eroded the power of the nobility by expanding the ranks and influence of townsmen . Merchant capitalism was a form of social conservatism in the 19th century .
 The wealth and status of urban merchants allowed them to trade . Map 2.2.2: The wealth of urban merchant merchants allowed the city to become rich and powerful .
 Major trade routes, both by land and sea, led from the Italian city-states of Venice, Genoa, and Florence, as well as from northern Europe and the Baltic regions .
 Italian city-states formed a natural point of exchange between East and West . City-states were natural point-of-exchange between East-West trade routes .
 Social Structure of Italian city-states resembled that of other urban centers of trade and manufacturing in England, France, Flanders, and Holland . Social structure of Italian cities resembles that of English, French and Flanders .
 In the city-states, the pdpolo grasso y or “fat people” were the elite, including nobles, wealthy merchants, and manufacturers . The ppolo grassolo grassy y or "fat people" are the elite .
 The medidcri were the middling sort of merchants, including smaller merchants and master artisans . They were also known as the meddcri .
 The pdpolo minuto y or “little people,” made up the bulk of the urban population . The pDPolo minut y or "little people” are made up of the majority of the population in Mexico .
 In cities, artisans and laborers are burdened by high taxes on consumption . Artisans in cities, laborers in cities burdened with high taxes, high prices .
 Urban elites owned much of the richest land of the hinterland, which was worked by tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and agricultural laborers, as well as by peasant landowners . Urban elites were able to control the land, but the land was also worked by peasants .
 In the northern and central part of the Italian peninsula, most peasants were free to be miserably poor, while in the southern part many still owed obligations to their lords . The southern part of Italy still owes obligations to its lords .
 The “fat people” of the city-states comprised no more than 5 percent of the population . The ‘fat people, of the cities-states, comprised no less than 5 per cent of their population .
 The great patricians assumed the status of princes of their cities, whether as dukes, cardinals, or, in the case of Rome, as the pope himself . They assumed the title of the pope, or as the king of Rome .
 Commercial wealth made possible some degree of social mobility, above all in Florence . Florence is the wealthiest city in Italy, the most populous city .
 New families, enriched by commerce, rose into the ruling elite . Opportunities to do so declined noticeably by the end of the fifteenth century .
 An elaborate and highly ritualized etiquette based upon mutual flattery maintained social distance .
 The wealthiest families became even richer despite the recession that extended throughout much of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries . Their prosperity made them even more eager not to take for anyone of more modest station .
 The duke of Ferrara affirmed his power by going door to door once a year to “beg” on behalf of the poor, an inversion of reality that served to define his authority and the subordination of everyone else .
 Princes and patriarchs ruled through intimidation, occasionally eliminating enemies with astonishing cruelty . But they also ruled with cruelty, sometimes eliminating enemies .
 The organization of some of the city-states into constitutional republics was closely linked to the cultural achievements of the Renaissance . Some of the country's city-state republics were closely linked with cultural achievements .
 City-states of Renaissance Italy had a history of uprisings of artisans and shopkeepers that occurred in Siena and other towns during the fourteenth century .
 Fourteenthand fifteenth-century republics were constitutional oligarchies dominated by the most powerful families . Families filled the executive bodies, legislative or advisory councils, and special commissions that governed each city state .
 The percentage of male citizens enjoying the right to vote ranged from about 2 percent in fifteenth-century Venice to 12 percent in Bologna . The former percentage seems most representative of the restricted nature of political rights in Renaissance Italy .
 Some of the other city-states became outright hereditary despotisms (signori) run by a single family . The city-state was one of the most important cities in the world .
 Milan, a despotism under the control of the Visconti family, had grown prosperous from metallurgy and textile manufacturing . Milan was once a thriving city of commerce and manufacturing .
 Francesco Sforza, a condottieri (mercenary of common origins) helped overthrow the republic less than three years later . Francesco had married the illegitimate daughter of the last Visconti duke in 1447 .
 The Sforza family skillfully played off rivalries between other powerful families, sometimes implementing their will with sheer force .
 Princely families, such as the Este family of Ferrara and the Gonzaga family of Mantua, ran the smaller city-states .
 Venice was an energetic, prosperous Adriatic port city of lagoons and canals built on a number of small islands . Venice remained in principle a republic, but remained a republic in principle .
 The Great Council, consisting of about 2,500 enfranchised patricians, elected the Senate, which represented the nobility . An increasing number of merchants were ennobled merchants living in elegantly decorated houses facing the canals .
 The city-state was the fundamental political unit of the Italian peninsula . The number of city-states was reduced as many of them were absorbed by the more powerful . City-states in Renaissance Italy improved the effectiveness of state administration .
 Florence and Venice had special committees responsible for foreign affairs and commerce . Venice and Florence had committees in charge of foreign affairs, commerce .
 Many offices were sold or filled by members of the leading families linked by marriages . Many of the top offices were filled by family members linked by marriage .
 Personal relations between powerful families, such as the Medicis and the Sforza, facilitated diplomacy . Personal relations with powerful families helped facilitate diplomacy .
 Medici engaged financial specialists for the management of the fiscal policies of their city and their family, although the latter was to the detriment of Florence, almost 52 Ch. Ch. Medici . Florence, Italy, is the birthplace of Florence .
 The condottieri were central to the political and military situation in Italy . Condottieri are central to Italy's political, military and political situation .
 A young prince learned military exercises, including jousting (horseback combat with long lances) He began to hunt, sometimes using falcons, sometimes with falcons .
 Some dukes hired themselves and their private armies out to the highest bidders, such as powerful Italian princes, the king of France, or the Holy Roman emperor . Others hired themselves out to a powerful Italian prince or the pope .
 Renaissance princes and oligarchs surrounded themselves with an imposing retinue of attendants . Renaissance princes were surrounded by an imposing attraction of attendants .
 Florence, Milan, Venice, Naples, and the Papal States were as aggressive as France and the other monarchies beyond the Alps . Florence and Milan were aggressive as well as France .
 They dominated weaker neighbors through force, intimidation, and alliances, picking them off one by one, as in chess . They dominated their weaker neighbors by force and alliances .
 Florence and Venice combined to limit Milanese control to Lombardy, while establishing their own authority over their respective regions . When they were not battling each other, the two cities were able to limit their control of Lombardy .
 Genoa struggled to maintain its autonomy because it lay physically exposed to more powerful Milan, as well as to the kingdom of France . Genoa was bitterly divided between merchant factions and nobles .
 Papal States, which bordered Tuscany east of the Apennines, functioned like any other city-state . Papal states were ruled by the Vatican in the early 1960s .
 He was elected for life by cardinals, the highest bishops of the Church, who were, in turn, appointed by the pope . The pope appointed him for life .
 Like monarchs and urban oligarchs, popes had to contend with the ambitious nobles of the Papal States . The papal States were the most powerful and most powerful of the medieval states .
 They conspired with and sought alliances against other city-states . They, too, conspired to and seek alliances against each other .
 The eternal city was only the peninsula’s eighth largest city in the late fourteenth century . It was ruled by a beleaguered Portrait of Francesco Sforza, one of the elite povolo grasso .
 The City-States of the Italian Peninsula are the birthplace of the papacy . The papacy of the Roman Catholic Church was founded in Rome in the 14th century .
 The city-states were increasingly freed from the authority and interference of the papacy . City-states became independent of papacy's authority .
 The declining role of the papacy in temporal Italian affairs further aided the rise of Florence, Milan, and Venice . The decline in papacy's role in temporal affairs helped the rise in Italian cities .
 Florence was the cradle of the Italian Renaissance, fulfilling the prediction of the Tuscan poet Dante Alighieri that a new civilization would arise on the Italian peninsula . The city was the birthplace of the Renaissance .
 Early in the Renaissance, Tuscan emerged as the “courtly language” used by an increasing number of educated Italians beyond Tuscany .
 The walled city dominated its rich hinterland of gentle hills and prosperous plains . It was also known as the Roman Catholic city of Romica .
 The Arno River, which flows through Florence, was navigable from the Mediterranean port of Pisa except during the summer months . Pisa was the only port to be navigated from the Arno in the summer .
 Florence conquered Pisa in 1406, a center of textile production . Pisa was once a worthy challenger of Genoa for maritime trade but now divided into factions . Florence conquered the city of Pisa, once a rival to Genoa .
 Florentine had a window on the sea which enabled the city to become a maritime power . The city's window to the sea allowed it to become an important trade hub in Italy .
 Florence was the center of the revival of classical learning in Florence . Several other factors contributed to Florence’s rise in classical learning .
 Roman law and Latin had long been the foundation of training of Florentine ecclesiastics, lawyers, and notaries . Roman law, Latin, was the basis of training for many Florentines, including notaries, notaries and ecclesiasts .
 Medici rulers encouraged a cultural movement that had strong secular elements . Although the influence of the Church remained strong, the Medici ruler encouraged a strong secularism .
 Both Christian and secular traditions, then, infused Florentine civic life . The Florentian city was founded in 17th century .
 Florence has a dynamic craft tradition and an economy tied to the production of luxury goods . The combination of art and craft made Florence receptive to artistic innovation . The city has a long tradition of producing luxury goods and art .
 The city honored the accomplishments of its citizens, including cultural achievements . The city also honored its residents' cultural achievements.
 Florence’s reputation as a relatively educated city helped attract talented newcomers from rural Tuscany and other regions . Florence's reputation as an educated city attracted talented newcomers .
 It had many schools, including a university, and boasted a rate of literacy unmatched in Europe . It boasted a literacy rate of nearly 100 per cent .
 In the fifteenth century, at least 8,000 children in a population of 100,000 attended church and civic schools, as well as private academies . In the 15th century, there were at least eight,000 schoolchildren in the city .
 Palazzo Vecchio was a center of international banking, commerce, and the manufacture of cloth, woolens, silk, and jewelry . The building was completed early in the fourteenth century and is now a government building .
 By the middle of the fourteenth century, Florence had become the fifth largest city in Europe . By the mid-14th century, the city had become fifth largest in Europe, with Florence now the fifth .
 After falling by half, Florence’s population revived during the next half-century, equaling that of London and 54 Ch. Ch. Florence . Florence's population now equates to the population of London . Florence is one of the world's largest cities .
 Seville, but not Venice and Naples, each of which then had at least 100,000 inhabitants . Seville was the only city to have 100,00 inhabitants . Venice, Naples and Seville were the only major cities in the world to have more than 1,500 inhabitants .
 Wealthy merchants, the grandi , governed Florence with the support of merchants, lawyers, and craftsmen of more modest means . Wealthy businessmen governed Florence in the 18th century .
 The cloth merchants kept the fourteen lesser guilds (whose members included artisans and shopkeepers) in a subordinate position . Organized into seven major guilds, the merchants and manufacturers, particularly the cloth merchants, kept the smaller guilds in subordinate positions .
 The guilds elected nine members of government, the Signoria, which administered the city . The Signoria was the city's government, and the city was administered by guilds .
 Its members led the processions through the narrow streets during the various religious holidays .
 Two assemblies, the Council of the People and the Commune, served as a legislature . Two assemblies were created in the early 1900s .
 During the fifteenth century, the business of government went on in the palaces of the wealthiest citizens of Florence .
 The elite feared that the poor would revolt as they had in 1378 in the uprising known as the Ciompi, or “the wooden shoes,” so named because many of the laborers could only afford such footwear . The elite wanted to prevent the poor from revolting as
 The cloth workers had risen up in a bloody insurrection in the hope of expanding the guild system in power . Suffering from economic hardship and aided by disgruntled members of the lower guilds, the cloth workers rose up .
 The possibility of another uprising of the poor thereafter remained in the memory of the ‘fat people,” causing them to keep the workers in a position of resentful subservience . The "fat people’s memory" kept them in a place of resentment .
 The renewal of Florentine elite with new families provided change within continuity, despite no small degree of political turbulence in the fifteenth century . The renewal, then, of the Florentian elite, provided change in continuity .
 The crowning cultural achievements of the Renaissance were not only rooted in Florence's prosperity but also in the relative social and political stability within that innovative city-state . Florence's cultural achievements were also rooted in its relative social, political stability .
 Cosimo de' Medici and his family seized control of Florentine political life in 1434 . In 1434, the Medici family took control of the city of Florence .
 The family drew its great wealth from banking and the manufacture of textiles . The family is famous for its work in textiles and banking .
 Cosimo banished prominent members of the most powerful rival clans . Cosimo was supported by a few patrician families, supported by patricious families .
 The Clintons manipulated the electoral process masterfully, using their wealth to curry support . They manipulated the elections masterfully and used their money to gain support . The Clintons used the power to manipulate the electoral system masterfully .
 Florentine nobles generally accepted Medici rule because stability contributed to prosperity . Medici ruled the Florentines during the 13th century .
 Wealthy families continued to conspire against each other, even as Florence warred against Venice . The powerful families remained staunchly patriotic, devoted to their city .
 Lorenzo the Magnificent survived an assassination attempt during Mass in 1479 . Cosimo s grandson, Lorenzo, survived a Pazzi conspiracy attempt . Lorenzo survived a 1479 assassination attempt .
 Four of the enemies of the Medici were hanging upside down from a government building, including the archbishop of Pisa . Several hours later, four of them were hanging from the government building in Pisa, Italy . The Medici was killed in the fall .
 Lorenzo composed verses to be placed under their heads and commissioned Sandro Botticelli to paint them as they swung . Lorenzo composed the verses for the swingers and placed them under his head .
 Renaissance culture and the often violent political world of the city-states here converged . Renaissance culture converged in Renaissance era .
 The establishment of the Council of Seventy helped the Medici tighten their grip on the reins of the Florentine republic . The Council was elected committees assigned responsibility for domestic and foreign affairs .
 Lorenzo extended the family's banking interests and influence with the pope in Rome . Lorenzo extended his family's interests and its influence in the banking industry .
 Florence emerged as the center of the Renaissance . Economically and intellectually dynamic, Florence emerged in the Renaissance era .
 Florence's people rediscovered and celebrated classical learning . Florence solidified its leading position on the Italian peninsula in the 1920s .
 Renaissance poetry, prose, and painting emphasized the dignity of the individual, made in the image of God . Renaissance poets, prose and poetry emphasized the individual's dignity . Renaissance poetry and prose emphasized individual dignity .
 It gradually moved concepts like beauty and virtue away from theological constraints . Beauty and virtue was a key part of the design of the Bible .
 Petrarch learned Latin from a monk who inspired the boy to pursue his fascination with classical world . Petrarch came to view the classical world as a lost age, which he came to call lost age . He was the son of a Florentine notary .
 Petrarch lived in Avignon during the ‘Avignon Papacy’ when the popes were subject to the influence of the kings of France . Petrarch was among an international community of lawyers and churchmen at the papal court .
 Petrarch and his friends searched far and wide for more classical manuscripts . Petrarch's friends searched for manuscripts in search of classical texts .
 They uncovered the Letters to Athens of the Roman orator and moralist Marcus Tullius Cicero . Among other texts, they found in the cathedral of Verona .
 The study of Cicero led Petrarch to see in classical philosophy as a guide to life based on experience . Petrarch: "The study of the Cicero had a profound effect on life"
 Classical literary commentaries provided humanists with a body of information about the authors in whom they were interested . Among them were classical commentaries, which provided information on the authors .
 Scholars brought works of classical Greek authors, including the playwright Sophocles, from Constantinople and from the libraries of Mount Athos, an important center of learning in the Eastern Orthodox Church . The works were brought to the University of St. Louis in Paris, where it is now a
 Knowledge of Greek texts (as well as certain Arabic and Hebrew texts) spread slowly through Italy after the arrival of Greek teachers from Constantinople . Greek teachers arrived in Italy from Constantinople in 17th century .
 The development of printing permitted the diffusion of a variety of histories, treatises, biographies, autobiographies, and poems .
 Printing spread knowledge of classical texts and the development of textual criticism itself . Printing spreads knowledge of texts and helped develop textual criticism .
 Libraries were established in many of the Italian city-states, including Florence, Naples, and Venice, and provided scholars with common texts for study . Libraries were set up in many Italian cities, such as Florence and Naples .
 The Romans used the concept of humanitas to describe the combination of wisdom and virtue that they revered . The Romans had used the term humanitas as a way of combining wisdom with virtue . From Scholasticism to Humanism, the Romans were fascinated by the concept .
 Medieval scholasticism was a system of thought in which clerics applied reason to philosophical and theological questions . Cleric used to apply reason to theological questions during the medieval period .
 They considered the study of the "humanities" to be essential for educating a good citizen . Study of the ‘humanities’ is essential for education, they said .
 Renaissance humanists believed that they were reviving the glory of the classical age . Renaissance humanist thought that they would be reviving glory of classical era .
 The Italian peninsula is divided by political units, dialects and by the Apennine Mountains . They also believed the Italian peninsula shared a common, distinct culture .
 Humanists turned their backs on medieval scholasticism, which they believed was composed of irrelevant theological debates and encouraged ascetic withdrawal from the world . Venerating classical civilization, the humanists turned back on medieval Scholastics .
 Scholastics celebrated the authority of Church texts and revered the saint, the monk, and the knight . The monks and the monks revered the saints, the monks, the knights and the knights .
 Petrarch rejected idle philosophic speculation or even knowledge that seemed irrelevant to mankind . Petrarch rejects idle philosophical speculation or knowledge that seems irrelevant to humanity .
 The humanists proclaimed the writers of antiquity to be heroes worthy of emulation . The writers of ancient antiquity were considered worthy of being empathetic .
 Humanism stood as an alternative approach to knowledge and culture . Although virtually all humanists accepted Christianity, clerical religious culture persisted intact . Humanism was an alternative to Christianity .
 Petrarch insisted that the study of classical poetry and rhetoric could infuse daily life with ethical values . Petrarch: Study of classical literature and rhetoric can help daily life .
 Humanists believed that it was not enough to withdraw into philosophy . Unlike the scholastics, humanists were not willing to withdraw from philosophy .
 Cicero had written that what made an individual great was not the gifts of good fortune, but the use to which he put them . Cicero: "What made a person great is the use he puts them. It is not the gift of fortune but how he uses it."
 The active life, including participation in public affairs, had formed part of his definition of true wisdom, he said . He said .
 Humanists looked for guides to public life in their own city-states . From the literature of the Greek and Roman past, humanists looked at public life . Humanists look at the history of the Roman and Greek cities .
 The first half of the fifteenth century is often referred to as the period of ‘civic humanism’ because of the influence of humanists and artists on the city-states themselves . The period of civic humanism is often called ‘the period of Civic Humanism
 Renaissance writers were concerned with wisdom, virtue, and morality within the context of the political community . Like the classic writers of ancient Rome, they were concerned about wisdom and virtue in context of a political community.
 Humanists wrote boastful histories of the city-states, philosophical essays, stirring orations, and flattering biographies . They eagerly imitated classical styles, eagerly imitating classical styles .
 The Renaissance remained closely linked to religion . While rediscovering classic texts and motifs, the Renaissance remained close to religion.
 Dante's Divine Comedy provides the quintessential expression of medieval thought by its demonstration of the extraordinary power that both Latin classical learning and Christian theology exerted on educated thought and literature . The Divine Comedy is an allegorical poem that provides an example of the power of Christian theology .
 Dante encounters historical figures suffering terrible agonies for their sins, waiting expectantly for admission into Heaven, or already reaping the benefits of having lived a good life . In his voyage through Hell, Purgatory, and Heaven, Dante encounters figures suffering from sin .
 Renaissance humanists could reject medieval scholasticism without turning their backs on the Church . Renaissance humanist could reject scholastics without turning back to the Church. Renaissance humanism is a form of humanism that is not a rejection of the Church's teachings .
 They claimed they were searching for the origins of Christianity in the classical world from which it had emerged . They claimed that they were looking for the origin of Christianity .
 Humanists took classic texts, which were pagan, and ascribed to them meanings prophetic of Christianity . Although not the first to do so, humanists took pagan texts to be Christian .
 Aeneidy the long epic written by Virgil was commissioned by the Roman emperor Augustus in the hope that it would offer the most favorable image of himself and of the empire, that is, of Rome bringing peace and civilization to the world .
 The hero of the Aeneidy Aeneas personifies the ideal qualities of a Roman citizen, wanting to fulfill his patriotic duties, seeking glory for the empire but never for himself . The hero's ideal qualities are that of the Roman citizen .
 The humanists transformed Aeneas’s journey into an allegory for the itinerary of the Christian soul . They appropriated antiquity into theology by viewing it as a foreshadowing of the true religion .
 The place of the Church in Italian life remained strong during the Renaissance, the relative decline in the papacy’s temporal power notwithstanding .
 There was considerable continuity between the medieval period and the Renaissance in matters of religion . There was also considerable continuity .
 In 1427, Florence had more than 1,400 clerics out of a population of 38,000 living in ecclesiastical institutions . A Dynamic Culture 59 institutions . Florence had over 1.400 clerics .
 Venetian water processions still bear witness to the playful but intense festivity of the Renaissance citystates . Water processions of elaborately decorated gondolas, jousting, boat races, and annual horse race sponsored by rival neighborhoods in Siena .
 Renaissance literature and poetry, preoccupied with nature, beauty, and reason, placed the individual at the forefront of attention . The Renaissance Man and Woman is the subject of this week's episode .
 Renaissance writers praised mankind as “heroic” and “divine,” rational and prudent, rather than intrinsically unworthy by virtue of being stained by original sin, as Church theologians held . Renaissance writers praise mankind as rational, prudent, not stained by sin .
 This, too, represented a revival of the classic vision of the moral greatness of the individual and his or her ability to discover truth and wisdom . It also represented the vision of an individual's moral greatness, the author writes .
 By this view, the lay person could interpret morality through the ancient texts themselves, without the assistance of the clergy . The lay person can interpret morality by reading ancient texts without assistance of clergy .
 Once someone had learned to read Latin and Greek, neither ecclesiastical guidance nor formalized school settings were necessary for the accumulation of wisdom . Neither ecclesiastical or formalized schools were necessary to develop wisdom .
 Universities of Florence, Bologna, and Padua gradually added humanist subjects to their curricula . Universities in general remained under the influence of the theological debates of scholasticism .
 Few humanists emerged from the universities, which remained training grounds for jurists, doctors, and clerics . Relatively few humanists emerge from universities, such as law, medicine and law .
 The political theorist Niccolo Machiavelli found personal fulfillment in the study of the classics . Niccolo found personal satisfaction in the work of studying classics . The study of classics is a form of art .
 He had been employed in the Florentine chancery, serving as a diplomat . He was killed in the Battle of the Medonte in Florence .
 Purged when the Medici overthrew the republic in 1512, he took up residence in the countryside . Purged from the republic when it was overthrown, he lived in Italy .
 Machiavelli complained that his days consisted of mundane exchanges with rustics . He complained that he had no time to talk to rustics, but he had plenty of time to do so .
 On the threshold 1 strip off my muddy, sweaty, workday clothes, and put on the robes of court and palace . In this graver dress 1 enter the antique courts of the ancients and am welcomed by them . There again I taste the food that alone is mine, and
 Machiavelli evoked the exhilaration of the individual discovering the joys of antiquity . The author's work was published in the 18th century .
 The development of the autobiography in literature reflected the celebration of the individual, however much the genre was limited to public people and the image that they sought to present of themselves .
 Self-portraits are a popular genre of painting in the early 15th century . The portrait and self-portrait have been popular subjects of art since the 1500s .
 A growing sense of what it meant to be ‘civilized’ arose in the Italian city-states . The individual in society highlighted the place of the individual in the society .
 The Italian patrician may have been cleaner and more perfumed than people elsewhere in Europe . He may be cleaner than people in other parts of Europe .
 The writer Baldassare Castiglione urged the person of taste to show that “whatever is said or done has been done without pains and virtually without thought” as if correct behavior had become part of his or her very being .
 Castiglione's The Courtier described the ideal courtier as someone who could paint, sing, write poetry, advise and console his prince, as well as run, jump, swim, and wrestle . The ideal attendant at a court was someone who had mastered the classics and several languages
 This idea of a “universal person, or “Renaissance man,” had existed for some time . Not everyone had the leisure or resources to study so many subjects, not everyone could do so .
 Leonardo da Vinci (14521519) was not a humanist and could not read Latin . He became the epitome of the “illusaissance man’s” art .
 The illegitimate son of a notary from a Tuscan vilof human anatomy. lage, he was apprenticed to a FloA Dynamic Culture 61 rentine painter at the age of twelve .
 Following acceptance into the masters guild in Florence, he remained in the workshop of his master until moving in 1482 to Milan . He enjoyed the patronage of the Sforza family .
 Leonardo taught students in his workshop and undertook scientific studies of human and animal anatomy . Leonardo took the title “Painter and Engineer of the Duke of Milan,” Leonardo .
 Leonardo began compiling his prodigious notebooks, which he jotted down his ideas, perceptions, and experiences . Leonardo's notebooks were compiled in his notebooks . Leonardo died in 17th century at the hands of a young boy in Florence, Italy .
 He also sculpted an equestrian monument, designed costumes for theatrical performances, worked as a military engineer, and decorated palaces .
 Leonardo returned to Florence in 1500, then went back to Milan six years later . Leonardo was beckoned by the governor of Francis 1, king of France, in 1500 .
 When the Milanese freed themselves from French hegemony, he went south to Rome, where Pope Leo X (pope 1513-1521) provided him with a salary .
 Leonardo sketched court festivals at Amboise chateau on the Loire River . Leonardo served as something of a Renaissance jack-of-all-trades before his death in 1519 .
 The Renaissance is often said to have ‘discovered’ mankind in general, this meant, for the most part, men . The Renaissance was often thought to have "discovered" mankind, but it did not .
 Legally, women remained subordinate to men; they could own property and make wills, but they could not sell property without their husbands' permission . Women were able to make wills and own property, but were not allowed to sell without husbands' approval .
 Both rich and poor families continued to value boys more than girls . Poor families were far more likely to abandon female babies or place them in the care of a distant wet nurse .
 Many families viewed girls as a liability because of the necessity of providing a dowry, however large or small, for their marriage . The dowry is required for a girl's marriage, and girls were often considered a liability .
 Because of the strict gender division within the Church, women there could aspire not only to holiness and sainthood, but also to leadership in a world of women . The Church's gender division means that women could aspire to a higher level of leadership .
 Some patricians educated their girls as well as their boys in the humanities . The girls were educated as much as their brothers .
 A small number of women went on to write because they could not enter learned professions . Women were not allowed to write for fear of entering learned professions.
 Several nuns set the type for works by Petrarch . Several women managed to become publishers, booksellers and printers .
 The achievement of such status required literacy and family connections to the trade . For example, being a widow or daughter of a printer required family links to a guild .
 It was rare for a female printer to sign her name to her work, and her status was viewed as provisional . Her status was seen as provisional until a male heir came of age, until she was older .
 In Italian city-states, women had less of a role in public life than they had enjoyed in the courts of medieval Europe . Women had a less prominent role than they did in medieval Europe in medieval courts .
 They presided over social gatherings, but for the most part in a ritualized, decorative role . "They presided over ... social gatherings ... but ... not social gatherings," historian says .
 Renaissance authors idealized love and women . Role of women continued to be to serve their fathers, husbands, or lovers .
 When education of young women clashed with a father s plans for his daughter to marry, marriage won out without discussion . A father decided to marry his daughter without discussion.
 Mens feelings were the focus of considerable attention by Renaissance writers . Mens feelings and opinions usually were assumed to be unimportant . Women's feelings were thought to be an important part of Renaissance writing .
 To be sure, women in large, powerful families like the Sforza, Este, and Gonzaga exerted influence and were patrons to artists .
 The subjects they commissioned artists and sculptors to portray were essentially the same as those of their male counterparts . In patriarchal households, their husbands made the decisions .
 The prestige and support given to the Renaissance artist created a nurturing environment for remarkable artistic accomplishments that characterize that special period of history .
 Great works of Renaissance architecture, painting, and sculpture are still studied by specialists and appreciated by millions of people each year . Renaissance architecture and art is still studied in Europe and America .
 Florence, Siena, Perugia, and other Italian cities retained their medieval cores . The medieval cores contained their markets and public buildings, such as the town hall .
 During the fifteenth century, the narrow streets and alleys of many Italian cities became interspersed with splendid buildings and dotted with works of art commissioned by wealthy families . The narrow streets of Italian cities were filled with artworks commissioned by rich families .
 Construction of elegant residences stimulated the economy, providing employment to day laborers, skilled artisans . Day laborers, masons, carpenters, cabinetmakers, joiners, and joiners . decorative artists, including goldsmiths, sculptors, and painters .
 Renaissance archiRenaissance Art 63 tecture emphasized elegant simplicity, an expansion of the simple rustic fronts that had characterized medieval building . Renaissance architecture was inspired by the simplicity of Renaissance architecture .
 Renaissance architects combined plain white walls with colorful arches, doors, and window frames . Renaissance architects used colorful, intricate arches to create colorful designs . Renaissance architecture was inspired by Renaissance architecture .
 In the fifteenth century, expensive palaces of monumental proportions with columns, arches, and magnificent stairways were considered sensible investments because they could later be sold at a profit . In the 15th century, palaces with columns and arches were considered a sensible investments .
 Renaissance architects looked to antiquity for models . Renaissance architects often looked to ancient architecture for inspiration . Renaissance architecture was inspired by ancient art .
 Filippo Brunelleschi first applied theories of classical architecture to the Foundling Hospital in Florence, the earliest building constructed in Renaissance style . Brunellschi applied theories to the hospital, which was the earliest of its Renaissance style buildings .
 Fourteenth-century architects planned churches in the form of a circle, the shape they thought was in the image of God, with no beginning and no end . The shape was thought to be in the shape of God .
 They may also have drawn on Rome's Pantheon, a round classical temple . But they may also drawn on the round Roman temple .
 The magnificent structure was completed in 1413 after work lasting more than a century . It reflects the architect’s rejection of the northern Gothic architectural style, with pointed arches, vaulting, and flying buttresses .
 Inspired by excavations of classical ruins and the rebuilding of Rome in the late fifteenth century, architects began to copy classical styles closely, adding ornate Corinthian columns and great sweeping arches .
 Renaissance art could not have flourished without the patronage of wealthy, powerful families, though commissions by guilds and religious confraternities were not uncommon . Renaissance art was not uncommon, with commissions by religious groups and guilds also uncommon .
 Artists, as well as poets and musicians, were eager, like Leonardo, to be invited into a patrician’s household . There were few or no expenses, and time to work .
 Lesser artists painted coats of arms, tapestries, and even portraits of the prince’s pets .
 Humanists not fortunate enough to be given the run of a powerful patrician’s place found posts as state secretaries, because they could draft impressive official correspondence . Some humanists were given posts because they were able to draft impressive correspondence .
 They tutored the children of patrician families, and a few worked as papal courtiers . A few tutored children of papal families, they also worked for papal courts .
 Humanists penned orations, scrupulously imitating Cicero, for formal state receptions, clamorous festivals, and funerals . Such humanists wrote orations for state receptions and clamor festivals . Cicero's orations were scrupulous imitations .
 Pope Leo X brought to his court a number of distinguished artists, musicians, and humanists . He employed humanists as officials and envoys, including Leonardo da Vinci, and musicians .
 The genres of wit and satire developed and became part of the ribald and “sharp-tongued” life of the political and social world of the city-state . At the same time, the genres of satire and wit developed .
 Isabella dressed one of her dwarfs as a bishop to greet a visiting dignitary . Her well-heeled friends winked and joined in the laughter .
 The biting satires and lampoons of Pietro Aretino, who enjoyed in succession 64 Ch. episodes, were published in 1964 . He enjoyed a succession of 64 episodes of his 64-hour series .
 Aretino attacked social climbers and the venality of offices in the city-states with particular venom .
 Humanist families of means believed that they should demonstrate wisdom by making good use of their riches . Classical texts suggested that the active life included playing a salutary role in ones community .
 Commissioning works of art seemed to confirm moral leadership, and therefore the right to govern . Commissioning public art was seen as a sign of moral leadership in the U.S.
 Wealthy families used art to reflect the image that they wished to give of themselves, for example, commissioning portraits to impress the family of a prospective spouse . Wealthy families also commissioned portraits of themselves to impress prospective spouses .
 Medici of Florence commissioned buildings, paid for the elaborate decoration of chapels and altarpieces, and restored monasteries . Medici was the greatest of the secular patrons of the arts .
 Cosimo de’ Medici collected manuscripts and even read some of them . Wags suggested that he may have been more interested in the bindings of the books than the contents .
 The wealthy banker oversaw the construction of fine palaces and churches . He oversaw construction of many of the world's most famous buildings .
 Michelangelo designed the Medici tomb in the church of Saint Lorenzo in Florence . Michelangelo was one of the sculptors who enjoyed the favor of the Medic family .
 The long economic recession of the fifteenth century may have actually contributed to the arts . The long recession may have contributed to a long-lasting recession .
 patrician families spent considerable sums on paintings and sculpture . Found insufficient profits in commerce and manufacturing for their money, patricians spent large sums .
 This may have accentuated the recession by turning productive capital away from economic investments . This may, in turn, have turned productive capital from economic investment .
 At the same time, so the argument goes, the recession offered families of means more time to devote to culture . The recession also offered families more time, but also more time for culture .
 Patrons of the arts often specified not only the subject of the work they were commissioning but certain details as well, requiring, for example, that specific saints be depicted . Patrons often specified specific details, such as that the work should depict saints .
 The size of the work of art and its price were also specified, including the cost of blue pigment or gold for paintings and bronze or marble for sculptures .
 One of the dukes of Ferrara paid for his paintings by their size . Increasingly patrons paid the artist for his time and skill, as well as for materials he used .
 The contract for a work of art might specify whether it was to be completed by the artist himself, or if assistants from the master’s workshop could be employed .
 The Adoration of the Magi by Tommaso di Giovanni Masaccio includes portraits of the notary who commissioned the painting and his son . Patrons sometimes appeared on the canvas, as in the case of the painting, as well .
 Patricians occasionally commissioned artists to humiliate their enemies . A painter in Verona was paid to sneak up to the walls of a rival palace and paint obscene pictures .
 Painting was considered a “mechanical” art in the medieval world . Renaissance Artists were considered to be Renaissance Artists .
 This made the status of the artist ambiguous, because he sold his own works and lacked the humanist’s education . This made him an artist, but he was not a humanist, and his status was ambiguous . He sold his work and lacked education .
 Michelangelo’s father tried to discourage his son from becoming a sculptor . Michelangelo identified stone cutting with stone cutting as an art that he identified with .
 Michelangelo sometimes signed his paintings “Michelangelo, sculptor,” as if to differentiate himself from a mere painter . Michelangelo himself sometimes signed himself as a sculptor rather than a painter .
 Of the artists whose social origins are knowm, the majority had fathers who w ; ere urban shopkeepers or artisans, most often in the luxury trades . Most of the artists' fathers were shopkeepers, often in luxury trades.
 Children of merchants and educated professionals such as notaries, lawyers, and officials . Then came the children of merchants, lawyers and officials, and children of educated professionals .
 The contemporary association between craftsmen and painters was appropriate, because, like the former, artists entered a period of apprenticeship . The association was appropriate because of the fact that artists entered an apprenticeship.
 The painters' guild of Venice required five years of apprenticeship, followed by two years of journeyman status . It was similar to those by which silversmiths, shoemakers, cabinetmakers, and other craftsmen were trained .
 There were no prominent female Renaissance artists until well into the sixteenth century . Because women could neither become apprentices nor attend universities, there were no .
 Artists claimed that they deserved more esteem than craftsmen . Indeed, artists claimed to be more respected than craftsman .
 The status of the artist rose during the Renaissance . Not all painters ascended to such heights, of course, but in general .
 Michelangelo, Leonardo, Raphael, and Titian (Tiziano Vecellio, 1490—1576) lived as gentlemen, the last knighted by Holy Roman Emperor Charles V . Some artists and writers were crowned with laurels by their adoring city-states .
 The rediscovery of antiquity, nature, and mankind transformed European painting . Painting and Sculpture is a formative form of art .
 In the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, neo-Platonists appropriated Plato's belief that eternal ideas, such as beauty, truth, and goodness, existed beyond the realm of everyday life . The neo-platonists were inspired by Plato's view of eternal ideas .
 Humanists believed that the mind could transcend human nature and come to understand these eternal ideas . Humanists believe that the humanist could transcend the mind .
 The artist could reproduce the beauty of the soul through imagination and, in doing so, reach out to God, says the author . He says the artist can reproduce the beautiful soul .
 Artists sought to achieve the representation of beauty in a realistic way by using the proportions created by God in the universe . Artists used the proportions of God's proportions to achieve beauty .
 Giotti's Peruzzi Chapel in the Basilica of Santa Croce in Florence is a fresco by Giotti .
 Painters now faithfully depicted the beauty of mountains, rocks, and gardens for their own sake . Painters painted mountains, flowers, gardens for the first time .
 Objects of everyday life increasingly appeared in paintings, reflecting a greater preoccupation with realistic depiction of life in modern art .
 The frescoes of Giotto di Bondone in the chapels of Holy Cross Church in Florence, particularly their facial expressions, reflect humanity, deeply personal emotion, and naturalism, unseen since the classical age .
 Giotto is considered the first great painter of the Renaissance, and his style greatly influenced his successors . The fame of Giotto spread rapidly throughout much of Italy and Italy .
 Titian was influenced by neo-Platonist influence in his paintings early in the sixteenth century . Titian sought to bring viewers of his paintings closer to the idea of the eternal form of female beauty that he sought to represent with his depictions .
 The Greeks and Romans believed that the painter and sculptor understood and portrayed the soul when they reproduced the human face . They believed that they did so to depict the soul .
 Leonardos famous Mona Lisa is a compelling illustration of this undertaking . Leonardos' MonaLisa is one of the world's most famous works of art .
 The artist had to be able to reveal the emotions and passions of the figures he depicted . He had to show the emotion and passion of the subjects .
 Renaissance artists used a large repertoire of stylized portrayals of emotion, which were immediately recognized by virtually all viewers of their paintings . Renaissance paintings were created by Renaissance artists in Renaissance era .
 Masaccio intended his extraordinary fresco The Expulsion of Adam and Eve from Eden to represent the tortured souls, as well as bodies, of those biblical figures . The Florentine painter intended his work to represent those tortured souls as well than bodies .
 Masaccio’s Adam covers his eyes with his fingers in anguish in this gripping depiction of Adam and Eve's crushing grief as they leave the Garden of Eden . The film is based on the novel's adaptation of the Bible by LZ Granderson .
 Renaissance artists generally avoided many of the routine associations of the medieval period . Certain colors were used for symbolic purposes in Renaissance art .
 Violet was often a color of reverence, white that of charity, red of fire, and red of earth . Violet was also a color that was often the color of charity .
 Clear colors, intense light, and ideal proportions combined in representations of Christ . Clear colors and intense light were combined in Christ representations .
 Deep coloring, more subtle and natural than the blues and golds of medieval painting, enriched the canvas . Deep coloring was more subtle than the . blues and . golds . of medieval paintings .
 Medieval and Byzantine artists typically painted rigid images on a flat space . Their work often appeared two-dimensional and lifeless . linear forms were arranged in order of importance, accompanied by symbols easily identifiable .
 Renaissance development of perspective theory facilitated presentation of figures and movement . Perspective theory was developed by Renaissance artists in Renaissance .
 Renaissance artists believed that naturalism could only be achieved through the use of perspective . Renaissance artists used perspective to achieve naturalism in Renaissance art .
 Masaccio first applied the mathematical laws of perspective to painting in his revolutionary Trinity . The Trinity makes a two-dimensional surface seem to be three-dimensional . Masacio's Trinity is a work of art .
 Andrea Mantegna's The Dead Christ is an example of Renaissance treatment of perspective . Artists proportionally contracted depth so as to give the viewer illusion of projection or extension into space .
 In his realistic The Dead Christ, Andrea Mantegna utilized this technique, which had been pioneered by Masaccio . In his 'The Dead Christ' he used this technique to depict Christ Christ .
 This shortcut allowed the artist to create the visual impression of a three-dimensional body on a flat surface . The artist created the illusion using a shortcut to create a 3-dimensional image .
 Florentine artists used perspective to develop high relief and silhouette, presenting rounded figures on the canvas surface by effective use of tones and shades .
 Renaissance painters chose difficult themes and treated them with a more complex realism . Masaccio and Donatello masterminded the art of perspective by the naturalist painter .
 Donatello utilized perspective to achieve dramatic action through gradations of relief . Donatella used perspective to create dramatic action in the series .
 In The Feast of Herod, Donatello captures the shocked reaction of the king and guests as John the Baptist's head is presented to Herod . In bronze for the stone basin in the Siena Baptistery, sculpted in bronze .
 Leonardo’s painting The Last Supper depicts Christ's disciples around the table . Leonardo's painting The Supper is one of his most famous works of artworks .
 The viewer’s eye is drawn along the lines of perspective of the ceiling to the central figure of Christ, whose image stands out because it is framed by a large window .
 Leonardo identifies Judas as the betrayer of Christ, not by leaving him without a halo nor by placing him alone on the other side of the table from Christ, but by painting him as the only figure in shadow . Leonardo identified Judas not by . leaving him alone, nor
 The work of Michelangelo reflects a mastery of mathematics, anatomy, and optics . Michelangelo's work reflects his mastery of math, anatomy and optics, he says .
 Animals, birds, and inanimate objects also took on a lifelike quality based upon artists’ discovery of proper proportions . Animals and birds were also taken on life-like quality by artists .
 The quest for the natural representation of beauty led some artists to depict the human body in nude form . Some took the nude form to be a more natural and expressive form borrowed from classical paganism .
 Michelangelo believed that the depiction of the human body in sculpture was the ultimate expression of mankind as a divine creation, made in God s image . Michelangelo's sculpture is one of the world's most famous works .
 In his sculptures and paintings of the nude figure, the muscles and sinews of the body are infused with the emotions and passions of humanity . In his paintings and sculptures of nude figures, he says .
 People of Renaissance Italy sought religious meanings in everything they saw . Religious, public, and private life overlapped in Italy .
 Art with religious subjects also served a teaching function for the Church . Art was also used as a teaching tool for the church .
 In patrician houses, religious images could be found in every room . In many patricians houses, a religious image was found in all rooms .
 Devotional images, known as ex votos, were erected in public spaces to fulfill a vow made to a saint in times of danger or illness . Devotes were often erected to fulfill vows made to saints .
 Patricians commissioned paintings with religious themes to realize similar vows . Patrician paintings were commissioned by wealthy to realize religious themes .
 The splendid tombs sculpted for patricians and popes may have reflected a preoccupation with glorifying the individual, but they nonetheless also emphasized eternal salvation . Moreover, the tombs were sculpted in the style of a patrician or popes .
 The visualization of certain episodes in the life of Christ or of the martyrdom of Saint Sebastian were intended to stimulate piety and encourage morality . The visualization was intended to encourage piety .
 Artists took on a role similar to preachers, whose orations evoked a powerful emotional response . Artists' orations were similar to those of preachers .
 Classical symbolism abounded in Renaissance painting and influenced the depiction of religious themes . Renaissance paintings incorporated images drawn from pagan Rome . Renaissance art incorporated images of pagan Rome in Renaissance paintings .
 Artists used history or mythology that patrons insisted grace their canvases . Artists used details of history and mythology to create artworks .
 Some of the classical gods stood as Renaissance symbols of moral or physical qualities . They were used as symbols for moral, physical qualities of the Renaissance .
 Michelangelo modeled his Christ in The Last Judgment on a classical portrayal of the god Apollo . Michelangelo's Christ was modeled on a classic portrayal of Apollo .
 Paintings with secular themes increased in number, notably portraits of famous men or of wealthy patricians, but also of more ordinary people as well .
 A section of Michelangelo's fresco, The Creation of Man, is on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, the Vatican . It shows God banishing Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden .
 During the period of the High Renaissance, the city-states of Italy lost much of their economic and political vitality, confronting French invasion and then Spanish domination . High Renaissance Style is the style of Italian art .
 In the midst of economic decline as well as internecine political warfare, artists no longer enjoyed the lavish patronage of wealthy patrician families . Artists were no longer able to enjoy lavish patronage from wealthy families .
 Papal commissions in Rome were one attempt to recover public confidence and made possible the artistic achievements of the High Renaissance . The papal commissions were an attempt to restore public confidence in Rome .
 Raphael oversaw the reconstruction of Rome and personally supervised excavations of the Roman Forum . Raphael oversaw excavations in the 1470s that heightened interest in the ancient Roman Empire .
 The canvases of the painters of the High Renaissance became even larger as they became less concerned with rational order and more with achieving a powerful visual response .
 Humanists began to claim that the papacy was heir to the glories of classical Rome . Some humanists now began to . claim that . some humanists . now began . to claim . that papacy . was the heir to . classical Rome. Rome .
 Wide boulevards and spaces were forged to accommodate waves of pilgrims descending upon the city . The city was built to accommodate pilgrims .
 Leonardo's The Last Supper is perhaps the first example of the style of the High Renaissance, or what is sometimes called the Grand Manner . Leonardo's painting is perhaps one of the first examples of what is known as the Grand Style of the Renaissance .
 Mannerism is marked by heightened scale, exaggerated drama, and submersion of detail to a total emotional effect . Manneism was particularly characterized the 1520s, particularly characterized by heightened realism .
 St. Peters Basilica in Rome was built in the “grand manner' of the High Renaissance, designed its grand Byzantine dome, which was completed by Michelangelo and a successor .
 Painters of the High Renaissance increasingly presented large, ambitious, complex, and sometimes even bizarre canvases . Painters often presented large and complex canvases of their artworks .
 Mannerism's imaginative distortions and sense of restlessness offered an unsettling vision in tune with new uncertainties .
 Mannerism marked something of a reaction against the Renaissance ideal of attaining classical perfection . The Renaissance ideal was to achieve classical perfection, but it was to be achieved .
 Some painters ignored the rules of perspective; emotionalism, as well as mysticism and illusionism, won out over classicism .
 Michelangelo's work reflected this influence . Toward the end of his career, Michelangelo was influenced by his influence .
 His majestic marble marble Moses was sculpted for the tomb of Pope Julius II . Moses has an immensely prominent head, with an exaggerated facial expression .
 Michelangelo’s tragic vision of human limitations, including his own, reflects Michelangelo's tragic vision . The artist's work reflects his tragic vision, including that of his own .
 Raphael and Titian presented human figures who seem almost empowered by divine attributes but who nonetheless retain their humanity . Raphael presented these human figures as almost empowered figures who seemed almost empowered with divine attributes . Titian and Raphael created human figures with human attributes .
 Late in the fifteenth century, the Italian city-states entered a period of economic and political decline, making the peninsula more vulnerable to foreign invasion . The End of the Renaissance is published by The Museums of Italy .
 Some of the battles between Spain and France, Europe's two dominant powers, were fought on the Italian peninsula . Subsequently, some of these battles were fought in the area .
 The economic decline of northern Italian city-states during the second half of the fifteenth century undermined the material base of Renaissance prosperity, indeed the economic primacy of the region .
 The Turks conquered Genoese trading posts in the Black Sea, the traditional merchant route to Asia, and in the Aegean Sea . The Turks took over the trading posts on the traditional trade routes to Asia and Asia .
 Turkish domination reduced Genoa's once mighty commercial network to trade centered on the Aegean island of Chios . Genoa was reduced to a once mighty network of commerce centered around the island .
 After the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in 1453, merchants in Venice concluded a deal with the Turks by which they received a monopoly on trade with the East . Venice left the other city-states without access to their traditional Asian markets .
 Venice’s economy soon diversified with small-scale manufacturing . Venetian galleys no longer could venture into the Black Sea . Venice's economy diversified as Turkish threat to its interests mounted .
 Genoese established a trading post in the Muslim city of Malaga on the southern coast of Spain . This made them dependent on local Muslim middlemen in the city, which was Muslim .
 Portuguese fleets monopolized the spice trade with India and beyond . Portuguese fleets began to monopolize the trade in 16th century .
 Florentine silk and woolen industries, long prosperous, faced stiff competition from French and Dutch producers and merchants .
 The rapid growth of Portuguese and Spanish trade accentuated the rise of the Atlantic economy .
 Competition from the larger sailing ships of England, Holland, and Portugal overwhelmed Florence and Genoa and then Venice . Venice was the first city to become a major city in Europe .
 Citystates, divided by economic interests and with a long tradition of quarreling among themselves, became increasingly vulnerable to the expansion of French interests . But the citystates became more vulnerable to French interests, becoming increasingly vulnerable .
 France had adhered to an alliance of Milan and Florence against Venice, signed in 1451 . The alliance was based on a 1451 agreement signed by Milan, Florence and Venice .
 Three city-states recognized the threat the aggressive French monarchy posed to the peninsula . But the three city-state cities were wary of the threat .
 Turkish ships now appeared more frequently in the Adriatic Sea . Following the capture of Constantinople in 1453, Turkish ships were more frequent in the sea .
 The Peace of Lodi was signed by Florence, Milan, and Venice . It established a new political order in Lodi .
 The treaty brought four decades of relative peace, which saw some of the crowning artistic glories of the Renaissance . Helping discourage Turkish or French aggrandizement, the treaty brought peace .
 The establishment of this Italian League formalized this balance of power between the strongest city-states . The establishment was already called that -- it was already .
 Whenever one or two of the states became aggressive, the others joined together to restore the status quo . Venice and the Papal States attacked Ferrara in 16th century . Venice was one of Italy's most powerful cities .
 Such wars were fought for the most part by mercenaries, imported and organized by condottieri . Condottieri paid for the task .
 For the moment, Milan's strong army served as a barricade against French invasion . Milan's army served for the moment as a strong barricade for the French invasion of Italy .
 Perhaps accentuated by the ebbing of prosperity, political life within the city-states deteriorated . Political life in the city states deteriorated .
 In the 1480s, Perugia had become a warring camp, torn between two rival families . In the 15th century, the city was torn between the two families of the same name . The city had been torn between rival families, with the death toll rising .
 In repentance, oligarchs erected thirty-five altars on that same square, and ordered priests to say Mass for three days in atonement . Then, in repentance, the oligarchs built thirty-35 altars . priests say Mass in the same square for the three days, in
 In a number of city-states, some patrician families tried to outdo each other in their violence, crushing their opponents with brutality, then praying over the bodies .
 Leading Florentine families faithfully attended church, even as they undertook murders of vengeance in defense of family honor . The leading Florentines families regularly attended church .
 Considerable tension remained between two codes of conduct, one religious, the other defined by family loyalties . Considerable tensions remained between the two codes, one of religious codes, and the other of family loyalty .
 The Italian peninsula then became a battleground for the French kings and the Holy Roman emperors . The French and Holy Roman rulers could mobilize considerably larger armies than those of the city-states .
 The absorption of the wealthy and strategically important duchy of Burgundy into the Holy Roman Empire accentuated the struggle between the Habsburg dynasty and Charles VI11 of The End of the Renaissance .
 The latter decided to press his dubious claim to the throne of Naples . He was encouraged by the Sforza family of Milan, the enemy of Naples, who supported his claim .
 Naples allied with Florence and Pope Alexander VI (pope 14921503), himself a Florentine member of the Borgia family, against Milan . In response to the Milanese attack, Naples allied to Florence . Florence allied with Alexander VI against Milan, who was himself a member of
 Charles VIII invaded the Italian peninsula with an army of 30,000 men in 1494 . Charles VIII's invasion of Italy was the first invasion of the Italian Peninsula .
 French cavalry, Swiss mercenary infantry, and Scottish bowmen tore through northern Italy . His French cavalry and Swiss mercenary . infantry, French . cavalry, and Swiss mercenaries, . mercenary infantry .
 In Florence, the Medici ruler handed over Pisa to France in exchange for leaving . Pisa was given to France by Florence's ruler in return for Pisa .
 Florentine government contributed to the city's artistic splendors by commissioning works of art . Works of art symbolized republican independence and ideals . Artworks were commissioned by Florentines' new government .
 Leonardo and Michelangelo painted scenes of Florentine military victories for the meeting hall of the Great Council . Michelangelo and Leonardo painted scenes for the council meeting hall .
 Seven years later, the city government commissioned Michelangelos great statue David . David . Seven years after the statue was unveiled, David. David.
 Michelangelo's imitation of a Donatello bust from early in the fifteenth century referred back to the republics successful resistance to challenges at that time . Michelangelo’s conscious imitation of the bust of the same name refers back to a republic's successful resistance .
 Charles VIII's army of Charles VIII moved toward Naples, devastating everything in its path . In the meantime, the army was moving toward Naples .
 It marched into the city to cheers from Neapolitans who opposed the harsh taxes that had been levied by their rulers . The march was the first of its kind to arrive in the city in 1877 .
 An anti-French coalition that included King Ferdinand of Aragon, and the Holy Roman emperor rallied to defeat the French forces .
 Although the French army left the Italian peninsula, the city-states' troubles had only just begun . The city-state's troubles were only just beginning .
 In Florence, Girolamo Savonarola opposed both the Medici in Florence and the papacy on the grounds that both were worldly and corrupt . The Dominican monk had predicted the French invasion .
 He had welcomed Charles VIII of France as “an instrument in the hands of the Lord who has sent you to cure the ills of Italy,"" including the sinfulness of the Florentines .
 With the Medici driven from power, Savonarola took virtual control of the Florentine republic . Savarola was born in Florence, Italy, in 16th century . Savonaro took control of Florence in 17th Century .
 Savonarola also incurred the enmity of patrician families by appealing for support to all ranks of Florentine society . Savarola was a Florentian aristocrat who appealed for support of all Florentians . He was assassinated in 16th century .
 With the pope's blessing, Savonarola’s enemies first hanged and then burned him in 1498 . The penalty for heresy was the death penalty for his crimes . Savarola's enemies hanged him and burned him . The pope's approval of the execution was granted by
 The next year, Louis XII , the new king of France, invaded the Italian peninsula, intent on making good his claim on the duchy of Milan . Louis XII was the first French king to invade the Italian Peninsula .
 Pope Alexander VI wanted French assistance as he tried to solidify papal territorial claims, as well as to look after the extended interests of his children . He did so with the support of the corrupt pope Alexander VI .
 The pope annulled Louis’s marriage, so that he could marry his 76 Ch. Ch. Philippe II, the king of France .
 Julius II, who had been a bitter enemy of Alexander VI, became pope in 1503 . He drove the powerful Borgia family from Rome . Julius II had been bitter enemies to Alexander VI and Alexander VI .
 The last pope to lead his troops into the field of battle led to the defeat of the Venetians . He was trying to restore territorial holdings taken from the Papal States by Venice and its allies .
 That year the Spanish army defeated the French army and the Habsburgs absorbed the kingdom of Naples . That year, the Spanish and French armies defeated each other in Naples .
 Milan remained a fief of Louis XI1 until French forces were driven from the city in 1512, the same year that a Spanish army defeated the Florentines and the Medici overthrew the republic . The city was a French fief until 1512 .
 French troops overwhelmed Swiss mercenaries and recaptured Milan . Three years later, French troops regained Milan .
 After the intervention of Emperor Charles V in 1522 and French defeats, Lombardy became a Spanish possession in 1535 . The Lombardy city was a French possession of the city in 1536 .
 A mood of vulnerability and insecurity spread through the Italian peninsula as the city-states battled each other . Machiavellt was a period of instability in Italy .
 Peasants crushed by taxes and hunger, ever more deeply resented the rich . Peasant, crushed by crushing poverty, resents the rich, says the author .
 In turn, wealthy people were increasingly suspicious of the poor, viewing them as dangerous monsters . The End of the Renaissance 77: Niccolo Machiavelli. capable of threatening social order .
 Niccolo Machiavelli was among those seeking to understand why the once proud and independent city-states of Italy seemed virtually helpless before the invasion of foreign powers . The devoted Florentine was one of those who sought to understand the situation in Italy .
 Machiavellis view of politics reflects his experience living in Florence during these tumultuous decades . Machiavelli's views on politics reflect his life in Florence .
 The turmoil in Florence led him to write his Histories in 1494, which described the decline of the city-states . His Histories was published by the Italian city-state of Florence .
 Machiavelli had served as a diplomat at the court of the king of France and in Rome . He believed himself to be a realist, following his experience in government .
 He believed that the absence of ‘civic virtue’ accounted for the factionalism within and rivalries between the city-states . The absence of civic virtue accounted for factionalistism within .
 By civic virtue, Machiavelli meant the effective use of military force . He meant the use of force by civic virtue . Machiavlli meant using military force, not by virtue of virtue .
 In 1512, the Medici overthrew the Florentine Republic, returning to power with the help of the papal army and that of Spain . The Medici returned to power in 1512 with help of papal armies and Spain .
 Machiavelli was forced into exile on his country estate outside of the city . Following the discovery of a plot, of which he was innocent, against the Medici patriarchs, he was forced to live in exile . He was found guilty of an alleged plot against him against the
 In it he reflected on the recent history of the Italian peninsula and offered a pessimistic assessment of human nature . He believed that a strong leader, the prince, could arise out of strife .
 By making his subjects afraid of him, the prince could end political instability and bring about a moral regeneration that Machiavelli believed had characterized antiquity . By making people afraid, he could end instability, he would bring about moral regeneration, he says .
 Drawing on Cicero, he studied the cities of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire . He also studied cities of Rome and Rome's Roman cities .
 Machiavelli can be considered the first political scientist, because his works reflect a systematic attempt to draw general, realistic conclusions from his understanding of the recent history of the Italian city-states .
 This preoccupation with the past in itself reveals the influence of the Renaissance, says the author of the book .
 He believed that the goal of government should be to bring stability to the city . Regardless of whether the form of government was monarchical or republican, he believed that it would bring stability .
 Machiavelli’s The Art of War expressed hope that brutish mercenaries who had devastated the Italian peninsula would give way to soldier-citizens who would restore virtue . Machiavellani's The Art .
 In Italy foreign armies fought against each other and against alliances formed by the citystates . The Decline of the City-States led to the decline of the city-states .
 The army of France in Italy reached 32,000 men by 1525, that of Spain 100,000 soldiers . France's army of Italy in Italy was 32,500 men by the end of the 15th century .
 In 1521, the first war broke out between Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and King Francis 1 of France . Charles V became the first Western ruler to ally with the Ottoman Turkish sultan .
 Charles V’s armies decimated the French at Pavia, Italy, in 1525, carting the French king off to Madrid, where he remained until his family paid a ransom . Charles V remained in Madrid, Spain, until he was captured by his family .
 Charles V’s mercenary army, angry over lack of pay, sacked Rome in 1527 . In 1527, Charles V's mercenary army sacked Rome . The city was sacked by the mercenary army in a bid to escape Charles V .
 With the exception of Venice, the Italian city-states were dependent upon Charles V, the Holy Roman emperor, as the Spanish army repulsed new French invasions .
 In Rome, where Spanish merchants already had a significant presence, the pope depended on the Holy Roman emperor for defense against the Turks . Charles added to his resources by taxing ecclesiastical revenues .
 The long wars drained the city-states of financial resources and men, devastating some of the countryside . The long conflicts drained the cities of cities and towns, leaving the countryside devastated .
 Nobles, whose political power had been diminished by the wealthy merchants of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, took advantage of the chaos to return to prominence in some cities . Nobles had been reduced to political power by the wealth of wealthy merchants .
 Patrician families struggled to maintain authority against newcomers, including wealthy merchants . Wealthy merchants who had married into poorer noble lines began to ape the styles of nobles .
 Medici reconquered their city in 1530 after a siege of ten months . The Medici, after having once again been expelled by republicans, were expelled by the republicans .
 Artistic styles had already begun to reflect the loss of Renaissance selfconfidence that accompanied the devastating impact of the French invasion . The loss of selfconfidence led to a loss of artistic confidence in the Renaissance .
 Botticelli seemed to abandon the serenity and cheerful optimism that characterized the Renaissance . The artist's work is thought to be the work of the Italian artist .
 Botticelli thereafter became preoccupied with suffering and the Passion of Christ, reflecting the fact that the High Renaissance was more closely tied to ecclesiastical influence . Botticelli's work was first published in 18th century and 17th century .
 The deteriorating political situation, combined with the expansion of Spanish influence after 1530, made it more difficult for artists to find patronage in the Italian citystates .
 Only Venice, the city of Titian, remained a center of artistic life in Italy . Venice was the only city in Italy to remain a center for artistic life .
 Machiavelli sensed that the humiliation of the Italian city-states by foreign armies brought to a close a truly unique period in the history of Italy and Western civilization . Charles V's troops pillaged Rome in 1527, the year Charles V’s troops attacked Rome . Mach
 Of the great figures of the High Renaissance, only Michelangelo and Titian lived past 1530 . Only Michelangelo, Titian and Michelangelo survived the 1530s .
 The cultural glories of the Renaissance ebbed even as different kinds of discoveries by Europeans opened up new possibilities for mankind . Renaissance was a period of cultural upheaval in Europe, but it was also a time of innovation .
 Columbus s transatlantic voyages were signs that the economic and cultural vitality of Europe was shifting away from the Mediterranean to Spain and, to a lesser extent, England . Spain and England were among the countries that Columbus sailed from .
 The economic interests of these states would increasingly be across the Atlantic Ocean . It would be increasingly important to the U.S. states in the region .
 The mood of optimism associated with the Renaissance seemed to have moved to central and northern Europe . Italy lapsed into a considerably less happy period in the Renaissance period .
 Humanists and artists began to emigrate north of the Alps to lands considered by most cultured Italians to have been barbarian only a century earlier . Many humanists, artists and intellectuals emigrated north of Italy to the Alps .
 Under canon law, the twenty-three-year-old Albert would have been ineligible due to his age (archbishops were supposed to be at least thirty years old) and because he already drew income from two other ecclesiastical posts . Otherwise, under Canon law, under canon law
 As part of his payment to the pope and in order to repay the large sum of money loaned to him by the Fugger banking family, the new archbishop authorized the sale of the St. Louis Cathedral . The sale was part of the payment of the money owed to the Fug
 St. Peters indulgence is an indulgence, which would release a sinner from punishment for his sins . The indulgence would be a release of punishment for sins .
 Dominican friar Johann Tetzel was commissioned to preach the indulgence . He was in charge of the sale of papal indulgences in the archbishopric of Mainz .
 Half of proceeds were to go to the papacy, and half to Albert and the Fuggers . Half of the proceeds were given to Albert, Albert and his family . Half went to Albert's family and half went to the church .
 The sale of indulgences had drawn increasing criticism in some of the German states . Some of the commercial use to allow clergymen to obtain multiple posts had drawn criticism .
 No other ecclesiastical financial abuse drew as much passionate opposition as did indulgences . The indulges were the subject of much of the world's most intense opposition .
 The Roman papacy itself faced considerable opposition in the German states, as the pope had appointed foreigners to many key ecclesiastical posts . More than this, the pope tried to force German states to provide him with money for a war against Turks .
 Martin Luther was among those denouncing Tetzel, the sale of indulgences, and the role of the Roman papacy in the German states . Luther was a German monk who denounced Tetzel and the Roman Papacy .
 This opposition to the papacy created a schism that would tear Christendom apart beginning in the second decade of the sixteenth century . The opposition was created by opposition to Pope John VII VII VII .
 The young Martin Luther by Lucas Cranach. Origi80 The Two Reformations . The two Reformations. 81 The Young Martin Luther . The young Luther .
 A movement for religious reform began to spread across much of Europe in part reflecting the influence of Renaissance humanism in northern Europe . The pope was selling indulgences in Germany and Switzerland .
 Reformers rejected the pope s authority and some Church doctrine itself . Reformers reject some of the Church's authority and rejected some of its doctrine .
 It led to the establishment of many Protestant denominations within Christianity . It was the first Protestant denomination to be established .
 Followers of the German priest Martin Luther became Lutherans . Those of the Frenchman Jean Calvin in Switzerland became known as Calvinists .
 The CounterReformation sought to reform some aspects of ecclesiastic life, while reaffirming the basic tenets of Catholic theology and belief in the authority of the pope . Under attack from many sides, the Roman Catholic Church undertook a Counter-Reformation, or Catholic Reformation .
 By 1600, the pattern of Christian religious adherence had largely been established in Europe . The pattern of religious adherence in Europe was largely established .
 Catholicism remained the religion of the vast majority of people living in Spain, France, Austria, Poland, Italy, the Italian states, Bavaria, and other parts of the southern German states . Catholicism remained a major factor in Catholicism in Spain and France .
 Protestants dominated England and much of Switzerland, the Dutch Netherlands, Scandinavia, and the northern German states . Protestants dominated the Netherlands, the Netherlands and Scandinavia .
 Religious divisions shaped the next century of European history, with religious divisions affecting the lives of millions of people . These conflicts shaped the . century of Europe's history .
 Northern Europe enjoyed very little of the economic and cultural vitality of the Italian city-states . Wealthy merchant and banking families patronized humanists and artists .
 The future Pope Pius 11 claimed in the mid-fifteenth century that “literature flourishes in Italy and princes there are not ashamed to listen to, and themselves to know, poetry’s poetry.”
 Renaissance humanism began to influence scholars in northern Europe in about 1460 . Renaissance humanists were influenced by the Renaissance in the 1460s .
 As in Italy, humanism changed the way many people thought about the world . Humanism changed many people's view of the world, as in Italy . In Italy, it led to the rise of humanism .
 Humanists were interested in morality and ethics, as well as in subjecting texts to critical scrutiny . Humanists believed that texts should be subjected to criticism .
 Debate over religion, and the Bible itself, attracted their attention . Therefore, debates over religion and religion were important .
 Humanists began to criticize Church venality and corruption, and the seeming idleness of monastic life . Humanists criticized the Church's lack of spiritual life .
 They also called into question scholasticism and its influence on religious theology . They also criticized parts of religious practice that they considered illogical and therefore superstitious .
 The spread of humanism in northern Europe was gradual, first influencing isolated scholars . Humanism was first influenced by isolated scholars in the Middle Ages .
 In the beginning, it posed no immediate threat to the Church, but humanists could not imagine organized religion beyond Roman Catholicism .
 The Northern Renaissance, and humanism, helped engender a critical spirit that by the first decades of the sixteenth century directly challenged Church practices and then doctrine .
 The Northern Renaissance that began in the late fifteenth century reflected considerable Italian influence . Northern Art and Humanism reflects the Italian influence of the Renaissance .
 Italian ambassadors, envoys, and humanists brought Renaissance art and humanistic thought to northern Europe . Italian ambassadors brought art and culture to the continent .
 Many of the Italian envoys to northern Europe had studied the classics . Many of them had studied classics .
 They carried on diplomacy with oratorical and writing skills learned by reading Cicero and other Roman authors . The Romanians were known for their oratoric oratory skills .
 Much of the artistic creativity in northern Europe, particularly Flanders, emerged independent of Italian influence . Yet, much of northern Europe's artistic creativity came from within Italy .
 Like the Italian city-states, in the Dutch Netherlands, wealthy urban families patronized the arts . The Dutch Netherlands had a well-developed network of trading towns, which had a thriving network of towns .
 They emphasized decorative detail, such as that found in illuminated manuscripts, more than spatial harmonies of Italian art . The paintings emphasize decorative detail such as decorative detail .
 Dutch and Flemish painters favored realism in their portrayal of the human body . Northern Renaissance was more realistic than Italian Renaissance idealism in their depiction of the body .
 They broke away from religious subject matter and Gothic use of dark, gloomy colors and tones .
 In contrast to Italian painting, intense religiosity remained an important element in Flemish and German painting . It was relatively rare to see a depiction of nudes .
 Albrecht Diirer’s visits to Italy reflect the dissemination and influence of the Italian Renaissance beyond the Alps . The Italian Renaissance was the birth of the Renaissance in Italy .
 Diirer was apprenticed to a book engraver in Nuremberg . He was the son of a goldsmith and worked for a book publisher . Diiresr was the grandson of a famous goldsmith .
 As a young man, he seemed irresistibly drawn to Italy as he wrestled with how to depict the human form .
 During two visits to Venice, 1494 and 1505-1506, he sought out Italian painters . He studied their use of mathematics in determining and representing proportion . He sought out painters in Venice .
 Literary societies, academies, and universities contributed to the diffusion of Renaissance ideals in northern Europe . Renaissance ideals were spread across northern Europe in Renaissance era .
 Francis I established the College de France in 1530 in Paris . It soon had chairs in Greek, Hebrew, and classical Latin .
 Northern universities took over role royal and noble households had played in the diffusion of education . Northern universities became centers of humanistic study .
 Some nobles now sent their children to humanist schools or employed humanists as tutors, as did a number of wealthy urban bourgeois . Others employed humanist tutors as teachers or tutors .
 Leonardo da Vinci, Renaissance artist and scientist, was employed by King Francis I of France . Da Vinci was employed as a scientist and artist in the Renaissance .
 Kings and princes also hired humanists to serve as secretaries and diplomats . Humanists were also employed as secretaries, diplomats .
 German, French, Spanish, and English historians borrowed from the style of the Roman historians to celebrate their own medieval past .
 Unlike Italian historians, they viewed the medieval period not as a sad interlude between two glorious epochs but as a time when their own political institutions and customs had been established . The medieval period was a period when they had established their political institutions .
 When continental scholars traveled to England, they could discuss common texts with their English counterparts . This is when they were able to use common texts .
 Sir Thomas More reflected the influence of Renaissance humanism, writing poetry in Latin . He was an English lawyer and statesman, and a poet .
 More asked readers to consider their own values in the context of their expanding knowledge of other societies, including those of the New World . In his Utopia, More asks readers to think about their values in context of other cultures .
 Renaissance humanism helped prepare the way for the Reformation . The spread of cultural values across the Alps into the German states and northern Europe helped prepare way for Reformation.
 Like the Renaissance, the Reformation was in some ways the work of humanists moving beyond what they considered to be the constraints of Church theology . The Reformation is a humanist movement that humanists considered challenging Church doctrine .
 Humanists attacked some of the Church's teachings, especially its claim to be immune to criticism . Humanists had always been concerned with ethics .
 Northern Renaissance humanists were sworn enemies of scholasticism, the medieval system of ecclesiastical inquiry in which Church scholars used reason to prove the tenets of Christian doctrine within the context of assumptions .
 By suggesting that individuals who were not priests could interpret the Bible for themselves, they threatened the monopoly of Church theologians over biblical interpretation, they said .
 Erasmus's Humanistic Critique of the Church is published in Rome . He contributed more than any other person to the growth th of Renaissance humanism in northern Europe . The Dutch cleric was a key figure in the development of the Renaissance .
 Desiderius Erasmus spent seven years in a monastery in Rotterdam . He was born to unmarried parents and orphaned in the Netherlands . He spent the last seven years of his life in the monastery .
 Ordained a priest in 1492, he taught at the universities of Cambridge and Louvain . Then worked as a tutor in Paris and in Italy .
 As a young man, Erasmus may have suffered some sort of trauma . Perhaps a romantic attachment that was either unreciprocated or inopportunely discovered . Erasius may have been traumatized .
 He was determined to infuse the Church with a new moral purity influenced by the Renaissance . Thereafter compulsively obsessed with cleanliness, he was obsessed with cleaning .
 Erasmus applied the scholarly techniques of humanism to biblical study . The patronage of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and several other statesmen permitted Erasius to apply the techniques . Erasus was the patron saint of the Holy Roman Empire .
 Erasmus’s In Praise of Folly was a clear call for a pure Christian morality shorn of the corruption he beheld in the monastic system . The book was published by the Roman Catholic Church in Rome, Italy .
 Scholastics of the Middle Ages overwhelmed the Church with empty, lifeless theology . He believed that the scholastics had, like the barbarians, overwhelmed the church .
 Erasmus attacked those who believed in the curing power of relics . His attacks reflected his Renaissance sense of the dignity of the individual . The Roots of the Reformation is published by The New York-based Renaissance Foundation .
 His Handbook of the Christian Soldier called for a theology that de-emphasized the sacraments . He provided a guide to living a moral life . The Handbook was published by the Catholic Church in 1945 .
 The little book went through twenty Latin editions and was translated into ten other languages . It was published in 20 Latin editions, and has been translated into 10 other languages.
 Erasmus wrote at length on how a prince should be educated and how children should be raised . He also wrote on how to raise a prince and how to be a child .
 Erasmus was the most well-known intellectual figure of his time in Europe . He greatly expanded the knowledge and appreciation of the classics in northern Europe . The most well known intellectual figure in Europe was Erasius of the 16th century .
 Northern Renaissance figures forged a Christian humanism focused on the early Christian past . He and other major Northern Renaissance leaders forged Christian humanistism .
 Northern humanists edited texts in Greek and Latin to large body of early Christian writings . Following his lead, northern humanists turned their skills in editing texts into early Christian texts .
 The Roots of the Reformation: In principle, the pope governed the Church in all of Western Christendom . The Reformation was a major event in the history of the Protestant Reformation .
 The emergence of the monarchical states of France, England, and the kingdoms of Spain in the late Middle Ages had eroded papal authority . But in reality, the emergence of France and England, in the 17th century, eroded Papal authority.
 Gradually these rulers assumed more prerogatives over the Church in their states . Gradually they assumed more control of the church in their own states .
 monarchs bargained for authority over religious appointments and worked to bring ecclesiastical property under their fiscal control by imposing taxation . This expansion of monarchical authority itself provided the impetus toward the development of churches .
 Many smaller, independent states ruled by princes, urban oligarchs, or even bishops survived . The complexity of territorial political arrangements served to limit the direct authority of the pope .
 The ability of the pope and his appointees to manage their own affairs depended on the cooperation of lay rulers . For in these smaller states, too, the ability of these lay rulers depended on their cooperation . The pope's ability to manage his own affairs depends on his ability to do so
 That the papacy itself appeared to condone or even encourage corruption added to the calls for reform . The papacy has been accused of encouraging or encouraging corruption .
 Erasmus and other northern humanists, while sharply criticizing the Church, were unwilling to challenge papal authority . Erasmu and other humanists would not challenge the Church .
 The monarchs of France, Spain, and England repudiated the interference of the pope in temporal affairs . They created what were, for all intents and purposes, national churches .
 First, religious movements deemed heretical by the Church rejected papal authority . Second, religious groups deemed to be heretical reject papal's authority . Third, the papal ruled out religious movements considered heretical .
 Others based their idea of religion on personal study of the Bible . Others turned away from papal authority and the formal hierarchy of the Church .
 Within the Church, a reform movement known as conciliarism sought to subject the authority of the popes to councils of cardinals and other Church leaders . Third, within the church, the pope's authority should be subject to councils, such as cardinals .
 The Church seemed determined to protect its authority, to critics it also seemed more venal, even corrupt, than ever before . Critics say the Church seemed to be more corrupt, even venal .
 By questioning fundamental Church doctrine and the nature of religious faith, the resulting reform movement, culminating in the Reformation, shattered the unity of Western Christendom . The Reformation was the result of a reform movement that questioned fundamental Church doctrines .
 In the fourteenth century, the struggle between the king of France and the pope put the authority of the papacy in jeopardy . The Great Schism was the greatest schism in the world .
 French and English kings had imposed taxes on ecclesiastical property . The French and . English kings imposed taxes .
 King Philip IV of France ordered Boniface's arrest, and the pope died a year later, shortly after his release from captivity . The pope died shortly after he was released from captivity, a year after his arrest .
 In 1309, he installed him in the papal enclave of Avignon, a town on the Rhone River . The papal installed him there in 1309 . He was the first papal to hold a papal seat .
 During the “Avignon Papacy” , the popes remained under the direct influence of the kings of France . During the "Avignan Papacy" the pope was under direct influence from the king .
 The popes continued to build up their bureaucracies and extract ever greater revenues from the faithful . At the same time, the popes built up their bureaucracy and, like the monarchs whose authority they sometimes contested, they often contested .
 Pope Gregory XI returned to Rome in 1377, in the hope that his presence might calm the political situation in the Italian states . In 1377 he returned to the city to calm the situation in Italy .
 When Gregory XI died a year later, a group of cardinals in Rome elected Pope Urban VI . Urban VI was popularly believed to be faithful to the Avignon Papacy .
 A smaller group of 13 cardinals was vexed by the new The Roots of the Reformation 87 pope’s denunciation of their wealth and privileges . Upon their return several months later, the cardinals were vexed with the new book .
 They now view him as temperamentally unstable, unfit to be pope . Furthermore, they now viewed him . Furthermore they now . view him . unfit to become pope .
 Clement VI1 claimed to have been pope between 1378 and 1394 . Clement VI 1 claimed to be pope between the 1378-1394 period of Pope Benedict XVI . Clement V1 claimed he was pope in 1378 to 1394, but was later elected pope again .
 He returned to set up shop in Avignon, leaving his rival, Urban VI, in Rome . Urban VI left his rival in Rome, but returned to the city .
 The Great Schism began with two men now claiming authority over the Church . Two men now claim authority over Church .
 The two popes and their successors thereafter sought to win the allegiance of rulers . They sought to gain the loyalty of rulers, and sought to do so .
 Avignon popes, like their pre-Schism predecessors, were under the close scrutiny of the king of France . The Roman pope was caught up in the morass of Italian and Roman politics, and the Roman pope is caught up .
 Most of the Italian states, Portugal, the Holy Roman Empire, and England obeyed the Roman popes . France, Castile, Navarre, and Scotland supported the Avignon popes; most of the . Italy, Portugal and the Holy. Roman Empire .
 In 1409, Church dignitaries gathered at the Council of Pisa to resolve the conflict, and they elected a third pope . The third pope was elected in 1409 after the conflict .
 secular rulers forced the popes to make agreements that increased the authority of the former over the Church in their states . And, in the meantime, they also increased the power of the secular rulers .
 The Great Schism enabled lay rulers to construct virtual national churches at the expense of papal power . Lay rulers were able to build a virtual national church .
 The chaos of two and then three popes claiming authority over the Church, along with the ruthlessness and greed of the claimants, greatly increased dissatisfaction with the organization of the Church . Heretical and Spiritual Movements .
 From time to time, heresies (movements based on beliefs contrary to the teaching of the Church) had denied the authority of the papacy and demanded reform . Heresies were movements that denied papal authority .
 Waldensians defied the papacy by withdrawing into strictly organized communities that recognized neither Church doctrine nor authority . Unlike monasteries and convents, these communities recognized neither church doctrine or authority .
 An undercurrent of mysticism persisted in Europe, based on a belief in the supremacy of individual piety in the quest for knowledge of God .
 William of Occam rejected scholastic rationalism . William was an English monk and another critic of the papacy .
 Scholasticism had become increasingly linked to the theology of Thomas Aquinas . Aquinas deduced the existence of God from what he considered rational proofs that moved from one premise to the next .
 Occam, in contrast, posited that the gulf between God and man was so great that scholastic proofs of God’s existence, such as those of Aquinas, were pointless because mankind could not understand God through reason . Occam: In contrast, Occam pos
 Nominalists rejected papal authority and the hierarchical structure of the Church . Nominalistists rejected the papal power of the Vatican .
 More clergy and laymen are turning toward the Scriptures as a guide for the individual’s relationship with God . Their views reflected and accentuated the turn .
 The Great Schism may have increased the yearning for spirituality as well as reform of the Church . It may also have increased yearnings for spirituality and for institutional reform .
 The English cleric and scholar John Wyclif also questioned the pope’s authority and claimed that an unworthy pope did not have to be obeyed, views that drew papal censorship . The views were also censored by the papal .
 For Wyclif, the Church consisted of the body of those God had chosen to be saved, and no more . Wycliffif: The church consisted of those who God chose to save, and not more .
 Stressing the role of faith in reaching eternal salvation, he insisted that reading the Scriptures formed the basis of faith and the individual’s relationship with God .
 Wyclif’s de-emphasis of rituals and his advocacy of a religion based on faith suggested the significantly reduced importance of the Church as intermediary between man and God . Wycliffif: ‘The Church is an intermediary between God and man .
 Wyclif, who had powerful English noble and clerical protectors, called for Church reform . He called for reform of the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages .
 Peasants’ Revolt of 1381 in England gave even churchmen pause by raising the specter of future social unrest . Wyclif’s powerful protectors gave them pause by making them targets of popular wrath .
 An English Church synod condemned Wyclif, but he was allowed to live out his remaining years in a monastery . An English church synod later condemned him, but allowed him to spend the rest of his life .
 Some of Wyclif’s English followers carried on his work after his death . Some of his English followers, poor folk known as the Lollards, carried on the work .
 They criticized the Church’s landed wealth and espoused a simpler religion . They were critical of the church's landed wealth .
 In Bohemia in Central Europe, a theologian had learned of Wyclif’s teaching . Led by gentry known as “Lollard knights,” the Lollards rose up in rebellion in 1414, but were brutally crushed by King Henry V .
 He too criticized the worldliness of some clerics, and called for a return to a more unadorned religion . He too, too, loudly criticized some clerics .
 Hus held that ordinary people could reform the Church . Rejects the authority of the papacy and denouncing popes as “antiChrists” Hus .
 The Challenge of Conciliarism to Papal Authority . The doctrine of conciliarism arose not only in response to the Great Schism but also to growing demands for reform .
 The Council of Constance was called to resolve the Great Schism and to undertake a reform of the Church . The Council was called in order to resolve it and reform the church .
 Many of the ecclesiastical dignitaries who attended also wanted to limit and define the authority of the papacy . The papacy is the subject of a series of papal investigations .
 The Roots of the Reformation 89 The Council of Constance first turned its attention to Jan Hus . Jan Hus first turned his attention to the Jan Hus in the 15th century . The Reformation was the first of its kind .
 Hus travelled to the Council of Constance in 1414 but was arrested and put on trial for heresy . Hus travelled with a safe-conduct pass given to him by the king of Bohemia . Hus was arrested for heresy and tried to convert to Christianity .
 Hus refused to recant Wyclif’s views, defending his own belief that the faithful, like the priest saying Mass, ought to be able to receive communion, in the two forms of bread and wine . Hus said he believes the faithful should receive communion in both bread and
 The council condemned Hus, turning him over to the Holy Roman emperor, who ordered him burned at the stake as a heretic . Hus was found guilty of heresy and burned at stake in Rome .
 Hussites, the only major fifteenthcentury dissidents within the Church, fought off several papal armies . The Hussites were only major dissidents in the 15th century .
 They finally won special papal dispensation for the faithful to take communion in both bread and wine . Their “Utraquist’s church lasted until 1620; their ‘Utraquist’ church .
 The Council of Constance resolved the ongoing conflicting claims to papal authority by deposing two of the claimants and accepting the resignation of the third claimant .
 The Great Schism, with its multiple papal claimants, by delaying any serious attempts at reform, had reinforced the insistence of some prelates that councils of Church bishops ought to have more authority than the pope .
 Convoked by the pope, at least in principle, councils brought together ecclesiastical dignitaries from throughout Europe . Councils were convoked by Pope Francis .
 These councils deliberated on matters of faith, as well as on the organization of the Church . These councils were deliberated by the Church's bishops .
 Some councils began to come together in defiance of papal authority . But some councils also began to cooperate with the papal .
 Those holding a “conciliar"" view of the Church conceived of it as Jan Hus being burned at the stake as a heretic . Jan Hus was killed by the Catholic Church .
 William of Occam argued that when confronted by a heretical pope, a general council of the Church could stand as the repository of truth and authority . William had argued a century earlier that, when confronted with a heretic pope, the general council could stand .
 At the Council of Basel, exponents of unlimited papal authority and their counterparts favoring conciliarist positions both presented their views . The Council began in 1431 and lasted until 1431 .
 In 1437, the pope ordered the council moved to Ferrara, and then the next year to Florence . The council was first moved to the city of Ferrara in 1437 .
 Some participants, mostly conciliarists, continued to meet in Basel until 1445, although the pope declared that council schismatic . Some participants continued to continue to meet there until the end of the council .
 Pope Pius II (pope 1458-1464) declared conciliar movement to be a heresy . Fifteen years later, Pope declared it a heresy and declared it to be an anti-conciliar movement .
 The assertion by some churchmen that councils had authority over the papacy merged easily with those who called for the reform of blatant abuses within the Church . Clerical Abuses and Indulgences are the subject of this article .
 Some monasteries mocked as hypocritical institutions no more saintly than the supposedly profane world monks and nuns sought to leave behind . Monasteries were mocked as hypocrites, no more saintsly than those who sought to be .
 Several new religious orders had been founded out of impatience with ecclesiastical worldliness . Several new orders were founded at least partially out of disgust with ecclesiastic worldliness.
 Critics of the papacy attacked with particular energy ecclesiastical financial and moral abuses . The papacy has been accused of abuses in the past, including financial abuses .
 They claimed that the papacy had become an investment trust run by priests . They claimed the pope had become a 'investment trust' by priests who administered temporal affairs .
 No clerical financial abuse was more attacked than indulgences, which were based on the idea of transferable merit . The abuse was attacked as a result of the idea that merit was transferable .
 Through granting indulgences, the Church supposedly reduced the time a soul would have to suffer punishment in Purgatory (that halfway house between Hell and Heaven) for sins committed on earth . The Church believed that Purgatory was a punishment for a soul committed to sin .
 The practice of selling indulgences began during the Crusades as a means of raising revenue for churches and hospitals . The practice was used to raise revenue for hospitals and churches .
 Those seeking the salvation of their souls did not purchase God's forgiveness but rather cancelled or reduced the temporal punishment required to atone for their sins . Those seeking to save their souls were not given the opportunity to undertake pilgrimages or say so many prayers .
 In 1457, the pope had announced that indulgences could be applied to the souls of family members or friends suffering in Purgatory . The pope had also announced that family members could be granted indulgence .
 Some people had the impression that purchasing indulgences rather than offering real repentance brought immediate entry to Heaven for oneself or ones relatives . Some people thought buying indulgence rather than repentance brought instant entry into Heaven .
 The implication was that wealthy families had a greater chance of opening the doors of Heaven for their loved ones than poor people . Wealthy families have a better chance of reaching Heaven for loved ones, the study found .
 Another clerical practice that was much criticized was that of the sale of Church offices, known as simony . The Roots of the Reformation 91: The Reformation .
 More than ever before, those who participated in—and benefited from—this practice were Italian clerics . Italian clerics participated in the practice .
 Most popes appointed Italians as cardinals, many of whom lived in Rome while accumulating great wealth from ecclesiastical sees . They rarely if if ever visited, they rarely if never visited . Many of the cardinals were Italian .
 Some prominent families looked to the Church to provide lucrative sinecures for their children . Offices that generated income but required little or no work were offered to them .
 Reformers decried the appointment of unqualified bishops who had purchased their offices . Reformers said bishops were appointed by unqualified people .
 Clerical clerics were immune from civil justice and paid no taxes . Resentment also mounted, particularly in the German states, because clerics were not subject to civil justice . Clericism mounted, especially in Germany, as clerics paid no tax .
 Indulgences and pardons, swapped for gold or services, had since 1300 become a papal monopoly .
 Commenting on Leo’s death in 1521, one wag remarked, “His last moments come, he couldn’t even have the Sacrament.” One wag said, ‘His last moment come. He couldn't even have a Sacrament. He
 In the diocese of Trent in the early sixteenth century, about a fifth of all priests kept concubines . In the mid-1600s, about one fifth of the priests kept a female concubine .
 Nepotism, the awarding of posts to relatives or friends, seemed to reign supreme in the U.S.
 In the fifteenth century, Pope Paul II was mocked as the “happy father,” not revered as the Holy Father . In the 15th century, the Pope was mocked for being a ‘happy father’ not revered .
 Alexander VI (pope 14921503) looked after his own children with the care of any other father . Alexander VI looked like a normal father to his children . Alexander looked after them with the same care as any other dad .
 Paul III made two of his grandsons cardinals, their expensive hats far bigger than the young heads upon which they rested . Paul III also made two granddaughters a cardinals .
 The sacrament of penance also generated popular resentment against the clergy . It also generated resentment against clergymen .
 Since 1215, the faithful were required to confess their sins at least once a year to a priest . The faithful are required to do so at least one year to confess to their sins .
 This sacrament originated in the context of instruction to encourage good behavior . This sacrament was originally used to encourage children to behave well .
 For many people, penance had become the priest’s interrogation of the faithful in the confessional, during which the confessor sought out details of misdeeds in order to determine one of the sixteen degrees of transgression . The confessional was often a form of interrogation of
 The Church’s call for sinners to repent seemed ironic in view of popularly perceived ecclesiastical abuses . The Church's call for repent seemed particularly ironic in light of popular views of ecclesiastical abuse .
 Given a boost by the conciliar movement, calls for reform echoed louder and louder . Calls for reform are echoed louder than ever before .
 The representatives of the clergy who had gathered at the Estates-General of France in 1484 criticized the sale of Church offices . They had gathered in France to discuss the sale .
 In 1510, the Augsburg Diet refused to grant money to the pope for war against the Turks unless he first ordered an end to financial abuses . In 1511, the Diet, an imperial institution of the Holy Roman Empire, refused money to grant to the Pope for war .
 The imperial representative Assembly had increasingly served as a forum for denunciations against the papacy . The papacy's papacy has been criticised for its papal excesses .
 In 1511, King Louis XI1 of France called a council with the goal of reasserting the conciliar doctrine and ordered reforms in the monastic houses of his realm . The council was meant to reassert the doctrine .
 The Fifth Lateran Council, which met from 1512 to 1517, urged more education for clergy . It sought to end some monastic financial abuses, and insisted that occupants of religious buildings be educated .
 The council suggested missions to carry the Church's influence into the Americas . The council also suggested missions .
 Pope Leo X emphatically insisted that he alone could convoke Church councils . The Fifth Lateran Council itself forbade sermons denouncing the moral state of the Church .
 Martin Luther was born in the small town of Eisleben in central Germany . Luther was the son of Martin Luther and Martin Luther, who died at the age of 95 .
 His peasant background could be seen in the coarseness of his language, song, and humor, he says .
 Luther was engulfed in a violent storm as he returned to Erfurt after a visit home in July 1505 . Luther died in a storm that engulfed him in 1505 in the city of Erfurt, Germany .
 He entered the monastery of Augustinian monks, which he entered against his father's wishes . They escorted him to the nearby monastery of the Augustinian monastery .
 In 1507, he was ordained a priest and soon became a doctor of theology, administrator of eleven Augustinian monasteries, and dean of the theological seminary in the town of Wittenberg .
 Luther had, for some time, been wracked with gnawing doubt concerning his personal unworthiness . Luther was wracked by gnaw-wavering doubt concerning himself . Luther had some time been wracking with doubt about his own unworthness .
 He later recalled, “1 tried hard ... to be contrite, and make a list of my sins.” He said he tried hard .
 Luther’s lonely study of theology in the tower library of the monastery did not resolve his doubts . Luther's lonely study in the library did not resolved his doubts, he says .
 Like other Augustinians, he had been influenced by the nominalism of William of Occam, which emphasized individual piety . He was influenced by William's nominalism, which emphasizes individual piety.
 Luther argued that faith, not good works, was the key to salvation . This led him to his contention that faith was not a means of salvation . Luther's view of faith was that faith is the only thing that saved him .
 Saint Augustine himself suggested to him that each person could be saved by faith alone through the grace of God . The teachings of Saint Augustine also suggested to Saint Augustine that each of his followers could be saved by faith alone .
 The conclusion broke with the accepted teachings of the Church as defined by medieval scholasticism . It is not the first time a conclusion has been made by a medieval scholar .
 He was especially troubled by the abuse of the ecclesiastical sale of indulgences . He was also especially concerned about the abuse .
 He denounced the theoretical underpinnings of the papal granting of indulgences out of the “treasury of merits” accumulated by Christ and the saints .
 He then had his theses printed and distributed in the region and invited those who might want to dispute him to debate with him . As was the custom, he had printed theses and distributed them in his region .
 Pope Leo X demanded that Luther's monastic superior order him to cease his small crusade . In February 1518, 1518 he was forced to stop his crusade .
 Luther refused, citing his right as a professor of theology to dispute formally the charges now leveled against him . Luther refused to comment on the charges against him, citing right to dispute them .
 Frederick III, elector of Saxony, was a religious ruler who turned to the Bible as he mulled over matters of state . He found a protector in the Bible, Frederick III .
 In April, as denunciations against Luther poured into Rome, he successfully defended his theses before his Augustinian superiors . Luther's theses were defended before his superiors in April .
 Martin Luther used an enormous quill to tack his Ninety-Five Theses to the door of the castle church at Wittenberg . Pope Leo was an allegorical painting of the dream of Frederick the Wise .
 Instead of immediately summoning Luther to Rome, he proposed that a papal legate travel to Augsburg to hear Luther out . Pope proposed that the legate should travel to the city to hear out Luther .
 The legate warned Luther to desist or face the consequences of his actions . Luther is the son of a German aristocratic aristocrat .
 Luther's friends, suspecting that the pope had ordered his arrest, whisked him away to safety . Luther’s friends believed that he had been arrested . Luther was taken to safety by his friends, who were able to find him .
 He agreed to write a treatise calling on the German people to honor the Church . He promised neither to preach nor publish anything else if his opponents also keep silent .
 Luther did not seek to create a new church, but merely to reform the old one . At this point Luther was not seeking to create an entirely new church .
 A papal representative sent to meet with Luther in Leipzig in June 1519 accused him of being a Hussite, that is, of denying the popes authority . Luther was accused of being the Hussite by the papal in 1519 .
 Luther crossed his Rubicon, but unlike Caesar moved not toward Rome but away from it . Luther crossed the Rubicon but not Rome, but toward Rome itself . Luther moved not to Rome but toward it .
 Luther's treatises published in 1520 marked his final break with Rome . Luther’s treatises marked his last break with the city of Rome .
 Luther developed his theology of reform, one that went far beyond the prohibition of indulgences and the sale of ecclesiastical offices . Luther's theology was developed in his home church in the Middle Ages .
 He argued that faith alone could bring salvation, that good works follow faith but do not in themselves save the soul . He argued good works followed faith, but not good works .
 He argued that the absence of good works does not condemn man to eternal damnation . Nor, he argued, does the absence  good works condemn him to eternal hell .
 Luther’s immediate goal was to free German communities from religious beliefs and institutions that seemed increasingly foreign to their faith . Luther developed the theological concept of ‘freedom of a Christian’ in Germany .
 He called on the princes of the German states to reform the Church in their states .
 In doing so, he argued that the Scriptures declared the Church itself to be a priestly body that was not subject to the pope’s interpretation . He argued in doing so that the Bible declared the church itself as a priest .
 After first retaining penance, he dropped it, arguing that faith was sufficient to bring about a sinner’s reconciliation with God . He then argued that faith alone was sufficient for reconciliation .
 Luther believed the monastic life no longer seemed to provide any advantage in the quest for salvation . If this was true, Luther believed that he had no chance to become a monk .
 He rejected what he called the ‘unnatural’ demands of poverty, chastity, and obedience . And he rejected poverty and chastity . He rejected the "unnatural" demands of obedience and poverty .
 On June 15,1520, Pope Leo X excommunicated Luther from the Church, accusing him of forty-one heresies . Luther was accused by the Pope of fifty-one acts of heresy . Luther died in his family's home in Rome, Italy, in August 15
 Charles V was elected Holy Roman emperor following his father’s death in 1519 . Charles V had been elected Holy . Roman emperor after his father's death . The Reformation in the German States began in 1515 .
 He promised before his election that no one would be excommunicated within the empire without a proper hearing . He had promised before he was elected that he would not excommunicate anyone .
 Luther was asked if he had written the imposing number of treatises and books placed on the table at the Diet . Luther was later asked to explain why he had the imposing amount of books he had placed there .
 Luther was escorted to safety by men loyal to Frederick III, Luther’s protector, Frederick III . Luther was taken to safety . Frederick III was the son of Luther and his wife .
 The Edict of Worms made religious reform an issue of state in Holy Roman Empire . Luther was declared an outlaw and banned changes in religion in the Holy Roman .
 Luther could not have survived the ban of the empire if his influence had not already spread . But Luther's influence had already spread, convincing many that through Luther they had now discovered the true Gospel .
 Social Background of the Reformation in the German States . Challenging the ways people in Central Europe had thought about religion for centuries . Reformation spread by preachers .
 During the early 1520s, Martin Luther’s reform convinced many clergy and lay people to reconsider their religious beliefs and restructure their communities .
 Social unrest began to stir in the central and southern German states as peasants rose up against their lords . Social and political unrest was perhaps encouraged by the quest for religious reform .
 Luther was roundly condemned by Luther, but left no doubt that the Reformation would shake the foundations of the German states . This uprising, although roundly condemned by Luther, was the largest uprising in history .
 At first the Reformation was overwhelmingly an urban phenomenon in the German states and then Switzerland . Urban centers of Reform were first established in Switzerland and Germany .
 The decentralized political structure of the Holy Roman Empire and traditions of popular participation in urban government aided the movement for reform . Free cities in the northern German states like the powerful Baltic trading city of Liibeck, leader of the Hanseatic League, and self-governing towns in the
 Members of some towns had endowed posts for preachers in order to attract vigorous, effective priests . Many of them now followed Luther .
 German towns had a particularly well-developed sense of civic solidarity that included a belief that all citizens of the town shared a common fate in the material world . German towns also had a strong sense of social solidarity .
 Luther sought to spark a more personal religion that would make people not only better Christians, but better citizens of their communities as well . Luther was inspired by his desire to be better Christians and citizens of his community .
 In many towns, urban leaders and ordinary people may have accepted reform because it appeared more promising than unreformed Catholicism for the maintenance of local order . In many cities, reform may have been accepted because it seemed more promising .
 No simple formula could predict how the Reformation would fare in German towns . Yet no simple formula would predict how it would fare . The Reformation began in the 16th century in Germany .
 In southern German states, urban nobles, merchants, and bankers remained staunchly Catholic . In southern Germany, urban nobility, merchants and bankers were staunch Catholics .
 The role of personality and the configuration of local social and political life came into play . So did pure chance, including whether preachers and reform literature arrived, how both were received .
 Social and political factors helped shape religious outcomes . The process of reform was the result of a process of religious reform .
 The embrace of the Reformation did not constitute a social revolution . Many clergy supporting religious reform were drawn from the middle and lower middle classes .
 This process might be marked by spontaneous singing of Lutheran hymns by those sitting in Mass, or by some other signs of a turn to reform .
 While archbishops and bishops in general opposed Luther, the lower clergy, particularly those of recent ordination, became influential converts in their towns .
 Communities accepted reformers by consensus, as local governments began to bow to the wishes of townspeople . Communities accepted reforms by consensus .
 A priest carried the Bible instead of the communion host during the feast of Corpus Christi . A crowd cheered in Basel when a priest used the Bible to carry the host instead .
 Some reformed priests began to give the faithful both bread and wine during communion . Some priests began giving the faithful bread and water during communion.
 Luther remained in most ways a very conservative man . Luther's actions bewildered Luther, who remained very conservative .
 Luther and his followers denied the special status of the clergy as a group marked off from the rest of the population . The Reformation in the German States was founded in the 16th century . Luther's followers denied that the clergy had a special status .
 In the early days of the Reformation, some reformers undertook expeditions to ‘rescue’ nuns from convents . Some reformers were forced to rescue nuns .
 A number of former priests began to take wives, which at first shocked Luther, since this represented the end of clerical celibacy, which the Church had proclaimed in the eleventh century . Luther: "A number of ex-priests took wives"
 The marriage of clerics broke down the barrier between the priest and the people, symbolizing the ‘priesthood of all believers” by eliminating the clerical distinction of celibacy . Marriage of clerics symbolized the “Priesthood’s “priest
 Luther limited the task of interpreting the Scriptures to professors of theology . Nonetheless, Luther limited his task to interpreting the Bible to a professor of theology.
 In southern German states, some burghers worried that law and order would collapse, and that the poor might rise up . The Peasants' Revolt was a German uprising in the 1930s and '90s .
 Some lords and burghers expressed concern that the villagers might “turn Swiss,” referring to the Swiss towns that lived without lords and were self-governing and independent . The Swiss towns are self-governed and independent.
 They demanded the return of rights (such as to hunt freely and to pasture their animals on the common lands) that lords had usurped . They demanded that they return rights to hunting freely and grazing their animals .
 They also asked for the abolition of serfdom and the tithe, which they declared to be against God's will . They declared that they declared that the tithes were against the will of God .
 The peasants' revolt spread into Austria and Carinthia, and up into Thuringia and Saxony . The revolt was the result of a revolt by peasants in Austria and the surrounding states .
 Thomas Miinzer, a priest and theologian, merged religious reform with social revolution . He merged religion reform and social revolution with the social revolution.
 He preached against the Church and Luther with equal fury, for he believed that both the church and Luther had humbled themselves to lay authorities .
 Miinzer led a peasant army in Thuringia, where Luther s reform movement had made many converts . MiInzer led the peasants to the city of Wartheim .
 In the northwestern German states, also in 1525, some towns that had been won over to religious reform rose up against Catholic princes . In 1525 some towns in northwestern Germany rose up in revolt against the princes .
 Swabian peasants promulgated twelve articles against their lords, princes, and bishops . They demanded that communities have the right to choose their own pastors . The articles were published in Swabia .
 They asked for an end to double taxation by both lay and ecclesiastical lords and the ‘death tax’ by which heirs had to give up the deceased’s finest horse, cow, or garment . The ‘Death Tax’ was introduced in the 16th century
 They demanded the end of serfdom, the return of common lands to their use, and free access to forests and streams . They demanded a return to common lands and the return to forests .
 Some followers began to see in his teaching as a means of resistance against the powerful . Some of his followers saw in his teachings as resistance against powerful .
 Luther rejected the idea that his central theological idea of 98 Ch. Ch. was that he had a vision of the Bible . Luther rejected that idea .
 Sites of peasant uprisings in parts of central and southern German states . The Peasants' Revolt, 1525-1526, took place in Germany in 1525 .
 The revolt began in Waldshut and Sttihlingen in the southern German states . It spread east to the Tyrol and Salzburg in Austria, and north to Thuringia and Saxony .
 Luther asked lords to “act rationally” and “try kindness” when confronted by peasant demands . Luther wrote: “Act rationally, and try kindness’ When confronted by peasants, lords should act rationally .
 As nobles and churchmen began to accuse him of fomenting insurrection, he denounced the peasants in extravagant language . He denounced peasants in an extravagant language.
 Catliolic and reformed princes put aside their differences to crush the revolt . More than 100,000 peasants perished in the revolt, in which more than 10,000 died .
 The Spread of the Reformation was entangled in princely rivalries in the German states . Because of the intertwining of religion and politics, it became entangled in the movement .
 As the breach between Catholic and reformed princes widened, religion became a source of division rather than of unity . Religion became a cause of division instead of of unity, says the historian .
 Luther had never intended to bring about a permanent division within Christianity . His followers gradually created a new church in many of the German states . The spread of the Reformation in Germany was gradual .
 The Augsburg Confession became the doctrinal basis of the Lutheran Church . The Confession was a summary of beliefs presented by Luther's friends to the Diet that gathered in 1530 .
 It was implemented by princes and prelates in the reformed states and towns, and in some places by a council, known as a Consistory, of ministers .
 Some humanists influenced by the Renaissance were attracted by Luther s writing . Luther's work was published in 17th Century, Luther's first published book, The Holy Writ .
 In the tradition of their predecessors who had rediscovered the classics, they admired Luther’s return to the Scriptures as an original source of knowledge . Luther's return to Scriptures was seen as a source of original knowledge, they said .
 One of Luthers converts later wrote that his excitement at the new teaching was so great that he studied the Bible at night with sand in his mouth .
 Erasmus was caught in the middle of the divide between reformers and the Church . But as the gap grew larger, he was caught between reform and the church .
 His own criticism of ecclesiastical abuses did not go far enough for reformers, but it went too far for churchmen, he says . His criticism of churchmen's abuses was criticized by reformers but by churchmen .
 For the latter, humanistic knowledge was an end in The Augsburg Confession read before Charles V in 1530 . Charles V read the Confession to Charles V before Charles II in 1515 .
 Reformers were less committed than humanists to the belief that man is a rational and autonomous being . Many reformers believed that man was rational, autonomous being.
 Luther himself did not share the humanists’ Renaissance optimism about mankind about mankind . Luther was not a believer in the Renaissance, but he was optimistic about the future .
 He was not interested in rediscovering mankind but was instead preoccupied with an individual’s relationship to God . He was preoccupying with individuals’ relationship with God .
 Luther opposed attempts by philosophers to intrude in theological questions . Luther opposed philosophers to try to impose their views on theology . Luther was born in Germany in 17th century .
 A humanist curriculum continued to influence the training of reform ministers .
 Luther's followers gained their first martyrs in 1523, when two former monks were executed in Brussels for their beliefs . Luther’s followers were executed for their belief in the Bible .
 German princes requested from Holy Roman Emperor Charles V that a “free general council or at least a national council” consider the growing religious division within the Holy Roman Empire . The princes requested that a free general council .
 Some of them prepared a ‘protest’ against the policies of Charles V and the Catholic princes, who had declared themselves against Luther . Some of the princes prepared a 'protest' against Charles V .
 Luther’s writings, translated into Latin, then spread beyond the German states, following trade routes east and west . Luther's writings spread beyond Germany, following a trade route through trade routes . Luther was born in Germany in 17th century .
 The reformers easily revived the anti-papal Hussite traditions of Bohemia and Moravia and that of the Waldensians in the southwestern Alps . The Hussite Hussite tradition was revived by the reformers in the early 15th century .
 When Lutheranism was declared its official religion in 1 527, Sweden and its territory of Finland had the first national reformed church .
 Holy Roman Emperor Charles V was the pope’s most powerful potential advocate . He was a pious man who denounced Luther with passion .
 Habsburg imperial interests kept him fighting a war in Western Europe against King Francis I of France . But extensive imperial interests prevented him from acting against those who supported Luther .
 The French king, for his part, was pleased that religion was dividing the German princes, thereby weakening the imperial crown that he had coveted .
 Charles V was away from his German states between 1521 and 1530, for the most part in Italy, during which the Reformation spread within the Holy Roman Empire . Charles V spent the most of the time in Italy during those years .
 Protestant governments dissolved convents and monasteries, turning them to secular uses, such as hospices or schools, in the 1930s .
 The Christian crusade against the Turks in Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean preoccupied Charles and other Catholic princes as well . Charles and others were also involved in the crusade .
 Muslim Turks did not care about which version of Christianity their non-Muslim subjects practiced . This left Lutheran missionaries an open field there, which left them open .
 A subsequent Turkish advance forced Charles to offer concessions to Lutheran princes in exchange for assistance against the Turks . Charles offered Lutheran princes concessions to help in the fight against Turks .
 Not all political and religious leaders and followers were intolerant of other religions . To be sure, not all religious leaders had tolerance for other religions.
 Charles V held out hope for conciliation with the Protestants for a time . Charles V had hoped for a peace deal with the Catholic Church .
 In 1531, Hesse, Saxony, and other states and cities that had adopted religious reform formed the Schmalkaldic League . The league was formed by the princes of Hesse .
 The princes intended that the league would replace the Holy Roman Empire as the source of their political allegiance . Although first and foremost a defensive alliance, the alliance was intended to be a political alliance . The league was formed in order to protect the Roman Empire .
 Charles had accepted temporary truces, and thus toleration of Protestants . Charles had been tolerant of Protestants until the end of Charles' reign .
 He suspended the Edict of Worms until a general council of the Church could be held . The Edict was suspended by the Roman Catholic Church until the general council was held .
 When the pope announced that it would be held in the Alpine town of Trent, the stage was set for confrontation with the Protestants . The pope announced the event in Trent .
 Charles was still preoccupied by hostilities with Francis I of France, who shocked many Christians by allying with the Turks against the Habsburgs . Meanwhile, however, Charles still was preoccupied with hostilities with the French .
 Charles forced an end to the wars by launching an invasion of France from the Netherlands . He was finally ready to move against Protestants, routing the Schmalkaldic League in battle in 1547 .
 He then forced reconversion on the people in about thirty German cities . He forced reconversion on the people in about thirty cities .
 Protestantism had established itself definitively in much of Central Europe . By that time, Protestants had established themselves definitively in Central Europe. Protestantism was established in the region .
 Charles V tried to bring more of the German princes and their people back into the Catholic fold . The Peace of Augsburg was the result of the Peace of Augustsburg . Charles V now tried to convince the princes and people to return to the church .
 He tried without success to impose moderate Catholic reform in Central Europe to answer some of the criticism of the reformers .
 Several of the Catholic princes took up arms against him in a short war in 1551 . But several of them were Catholic princes . The war was short-lived and ended in 1549 .
 The political complexity of the myriad German states militates against a general settlement . Germany is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Emperor gave up the idea of restoring Catholicism in all of the German states . The Holy Roman emperor gave up on restoring Catholicism .
 Peace of Augsburg stipulated that the religion of the ruler of each of the Holy Roman Empire s states would be that of the state . Religion of the rulers of each state would be the religion the state had .
 The map indicates areas that were Roman Catholic, Anglican, Calvinist/Zwinglian, Lutheran, Eastern Orthodox, and Anabaptist . The map was created in 1881 .
 It was agreed upon by the imperial representative assembly after Charles refused to participate . Charles was worn down by the complexity of imperial politics, refusing to participate.
 Protestants living in states with a Catholic ruler were free to emigrate, as were Catholics in the same situation . Protestants in those states with Catholic rulers were also allowed to leave . Catholics in that state were able to leave the country .
 Peace of Augsburg recognized that the institutions of the Holy Roman Empire could not provide a solution to what now appeared to be permanent religious divisions in Central Europe . The Peace of Augustsburg thus recognized that it was not possible to solve the problem .
 It acknowledged that the Reformation in the German states was an accomplished fact . The Reformation was a fact of the Protestantism in Germany .
 What had begun as a “squabble among monks” shaped the territorial and political history of Germany .
 Peace of Augsburg reaffirmed German particularism, the existence of many independent German states . Through the compromise that allowed each prince to determine the religion of his state, the peace was made .
 The next stage of the Reformation occurred in Switzerland, land of rugged peasants, craftsmen, and mercenary soldiers . The Reformation in Switzerland and France was the first of its kind .
 The thirteen sparsely populated, independent, independent cantons of Switzerland were loosely joined in a federal Diet . The cantons were closer in organization and in spirit to the Italian city-states than to the German states . The Swiss cantons are now the most populous of Switzerland .
 Unlike the German states, there were no territorial rulers in Switzerland . The conversion of a powerful prince could sway an entire state .
 Swiss reformers would be even more closely tied to privileged residents of towns of relatively small size . Reformers would also be tied to those who live in relatively small Swiss towns .
 In Zurich, Huldrych Zwingli preached salvation through faith alone . He was then a town of about 6,000 in Zurich, then a small city .
 Several citizens of Zurich publicly munched sausages during Lent in defiance of the Lenten ban on eating meat . In 1522, several citizens of the Zurich public ate meat during Lent . The city was then banned from eating meat for Lent .
 Zwingli published two tracts on their behalf in which he insisted that the Scriptures alone should be the basis of religious practice . As there was nothing in the Bible about sausages, they could be eaten at any time, he said .
 Zwingli and his followers stripped images and altar decorations from churches because nothing about them could be found in the Bible . This scriptural test also led them to iconoclasm, the stripping of images and . altar decorations .
 It ordered the canton's priests to preach only from the Bible, and two years later it forbade the saying of Mass . The canton also forbade Mass to be said in public .
 Zwingli convinced the town's magistrates that tithes should be used to aid the poor . He believed the poor represented the real image of God . He convinced the magistrates to use tithes to help the poor, whom he believed represented God .
 Luther maintained communion represented the physical presence of Christ . Luther maintained that communion represented Christ's physical presence .
 In this he had not diverged far from the Catholic Church, which insisted that through the miracle of transubstantiation the priest transformed bread and wine into the actual body and blood of Christ, the sacrament of the Holy Eucharist .
 Luther, who condemned Catholic worship of the Eucharist, said the bodily presence of Christ was from the fact that Christ and God were universally present . Luther said that God and Christ were always present, but Luther said they were not . Luther: Christ was present in Eucharation
 Zwingli, by contrast, believed communion was only a symbol of Christ’s real presence in the Eucharist . He said that Luther's refusal to abandon this idea demonstrated that he still stood with one foot in Rome .
 The “Sacramentarian Controversy’s” emerged as the first major doctrinal dispute among Protestants . It emerged as a major dispute among Protestant Protestants . The ‘Sacramentarians’ dispute was first major theological dispute .
 The Augsburg Confession of 1530 sealed the rift by excluding reformers who rejected Lutheranism . Zwingli and his followers were among those who rejected the reformers . The Confession was written in 1530 .
 Between 1525 and 1530, some German-speaking parts of Switzerland and regions of the southern German states accepted Zwingli’s reforms . The reforms were made in 1525 to 1530 .
 In 1531, Catholic forces attacked Protestant cantons because Zwingli was actively espousing his version of reform there . Catholic forces launched the attack in 1531 because of the Zwinglian's role in reform .
 Zwingli, carrying a sword and a Bible, led Protestant forces into the Battle of Kappel . He was killed in the fighting in the early 1800s .
 Both Catholics and Lutherans claimed Zwingli’s death to be divine judgment against his religious positions . Both Catholic and Lutheran's death was seen as divine judgement against his views .
 The peace that followed, however, specified that each canton could choose its own religion . Each canton had to choose their own religion.
 Radical Religious Movements Areas in which there were Hussites, Utraquists, Anabaptists, and Mennonites . Areas were areas in which Hussites and Utraqists were found to be Hussites . There were also Mennonsons and Hussites
 The reforms of Zwingli were not the only kind spreading in southern Germany and Switzerland in the 1520s . Radical Reformers were also spreading in Switzerland and Germany .
 Some groups had even more radical ideas for changing religious morality and communal life . Some groups wanted to change religious morality .
 Radicals shared impatience with the plans of more moderate reformers . They sometimes had very different visions of what this would constitute .
 Some were Anti-Trinitarians who rejected the orthodox Christian teaching that God consisted of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit . Others rejected the idea that God consists of the father, the son and the spirit of the son .
 Some radical reformers who had broken with Zwingli in Zurich became known as Anabaptists . “anabaptism'' means rebaptism in Greek. “Rebaptism” means “revenge” in Greek .
 Luther and Zwingli sought to implement ‘godly’ living on the model of the New Testament . Luther believed that neither Luther nor Zwwingli had sufficiently transformed religious morality and community life .
 Because they could find no reference to infant baptism in the Bible, they began baptizing adults in 1525 against Zwingli s advice . They began baptisming adults because they couldn't find reference to the Bible .
 They believed that only adults could manifest true faith and therefore be worthy of baptism . Only adults could be considered worthy to be baptized .
 Anabaptist groups sprung up in areas influenced by Protestant reform, such as Zurich, the Netherlands, parts of Italy, and Poland .
 Many Anabaptists advocated a congregational form of organization, because for them membership was through free will or voluntary self-selection, rather than through territorial organization of churches as was true for Catholics, Lutherans, and Zwinglians .
 Some Anabaptists in Switzerland and southern Germany formed communities of believers seeking isolation . They sought isolation from the struggles of the sinful secular world .
 These Anabaptists refused to accept temporal government and refused to take civil oaths, pay taxes, hold public office, or serve in armies .
 Other Anabaptists did seek alliances with local rulers and sought to be loyal subjects . However, they sought to avoid alliances with the local rulers .
 Catholic and Protestant states moved to crush these communities of radicals, seeing them as seditious rebels against God-given authority in church and state . Catholics and Protestants saw them as rebels against authority in state and church .
 Some radical reformers sought refuge in the mountains of the Tyrol and Moravia, and in the Netherlands . Others accepted a martyr's death or spoke out against authorities who persecuted them .
 In 1534, a radical group of Anabaptists led by a local preacher took over the town government of Munster by election . Munster was ruled out of town by an election in 1534 . The town was taken over by a group led by local preacher .
 Those not sympathetic to Anabaptism left town willingly or were expelled from town . Those who were not sympathetic were expelled or left .
 Several thousand Anabaptists from as far away as the Netherlands arrived in Munster . They believed it to be the “New Jerusalem,” where God's chosen people would be protected .
 The Anabaptists established a council of twelve that expropriated Catholic Church property, abolished private property, banned the use of money, and established communally held property and a system of barter . The council was established in 17th century .
 John of Leiden, a Dutchman, gained influence as a leader and prophet in Munster . He is believed to have been a prophet of the past .
 He convinced the ministers and elders of Munster to abolish private property . They justified their decision on biblical grounds, saying that Christ would not need possessions . The abolition of private property was justified by biblical grounds .
 Sharing possessions helped them ration goods during the siege . Moreover, sharing possessions allowed them to survive the siege.
 John of Leiden, who became king of Munster, led the way by taking 16 wives . He became the first king to take the title of king Munster .
 Forces sent by Lutheran and Catholic princes stormed the town in June 1535 and tortured to death John of Leiden and other lesser leaders . The mutilated corpses still hang in a church steeple in Munster, where they were tortured .
 After the fall of Munster, Dutch Anabaptists led by a former Catholic priest named Menno Simons tried to save adult baptism by preaching disciplined, godly living and Christian pacifism . The Anabattists were led by former Catholic priests .
 Some of the Mennonites left for the Americas more than a century later in search of religious toleration . They became known as Mennonsites, and some of them moved to the Americas in search for religious tolerance .
 The adult-baptizing Hutterites of Moravia were the forebears of a group who settled in the American Midwest and the Canadian prairies . Other descendants of such radical reformers include the adult-aptesting Hutterite of Moravia .
 The Unitarian religion has roots in this period, deriving from the Anti-Trinitarian views of God as being one, not the trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit . Likewise, the Unitarian Religion has roots .
 Jean Calvin and Reform France, too, provided fertile ground for reform . Jean Calvin was a French reformer . Reform France was inspired by Calvinism and the French Revolution .
 French monarchy had traditionally maintained a stubborn independence from Rome . The French monarchy has traditionally maintained its independence .
 Pope Leo X had signed the Concordat of Bologna with King Francis I, giving the king the right to appoint bishops and abbots in France . King Francis had the power of appointing bishops, abbots and bishops .
 Initially the Valois ruler was far more preoccupied with his wars against Charles V and the Habsburgs than with the stormy tracts of an obscure German monk . The monk's writings were found in 17th century France .
 The threat of heresy, however, convinced him in 1521 to order Luthers writings confiscated and burned . In 1521 he ordered his writings confiscated .
 In 1534, reformers affixed placards in Paris denouncing the Mass and on the king's bedroom door in his chateau at Amboise .
 The “affair of the placards"" convinced the king to combat reform in earnest . The ‘affair’ of placards’ convinced him to fight for reform . The placards were the first placards to be taken to the streets .
 He was born in the small town of Noyon in northern France, where his father worked as a secretary to the local bishop . His father worked for the bishop in the town, where he was a secretary .
 Calvin s mother died when he was about five years old, and his father sent him to Paris to be trained as a priest . Calvin was sent to France to be a priest after his mother's death .
 He decided that his son should become a lawyer, because he might earn more money . He then decided that he should be a lawyer because he could earn more .
 Late-Renaissance humanism and particularly the teachings of Erasmus helped stimulate in the pious young Calvin an interest in religious reform during his legal studies .
 In 1534, the Catholic hierarchy and the king himself moved to crush this movement . The Catholic hierarchy tried to crush the movement in 1534 .
 Calvin probably still considered himself a follower of Erasmus within the Catholic Church . Calvin found exile in the Swiss town of Basel, Switzerland . Calvin was probably still thought of himself as a follower .
 In Basel, he penned tracts denouncing the papacy and calling on the king of France to end religious persecution . He also wrote tracts denouncing papacy .
 Luther was terror-struck by the power of nature and, in particular, by storms as manifestations of God s power . Luther was also terror struck by storms, rather like Luther, who believed in the Bible .
 Humanity seemed to be poised before an abyss, a metaphor he frequently used . Calvin used it as a metaphor for humanity . Calvin believed humanity was poised before the abyss .
 Calvin thought that sense of religious community that ought to bind people together was dissolving . Calvin believed it was a sign of the end of the religious community .
 Calvin argued that the Catholic Church had made the faithful anxious by emphasizing the necessity of good works in achieving salvation . Calvin said that good works were necessary to achieve salvation . The Catholic Church was made anxious by stressing the importance of good work .
 The anxiety of never knowing how many good works were enough had turned Catholics to seek the intercession of saints, Calvin insisted . Calvin insisted that Catholics should seek intercession from saints .
 Calvin rejected the increasingly human-like images given God and Christ over the previous century . Calvin also rejected the image of Christ and God as God and Jesus . Calvin rejected these images over the years .
 Calvin emphasized not reconciliation with God through faith through faith, but obedience to his will . Unlike Luther, Calvin emphasized obedience to God's will, rather than reconciliation .
 He sought to provide a doctrine that would reassure the faithful of God s grace and of their own salvation . The doctrine was sought to reassure them of God's grace .
 There was hope in Calvin s thought, faith that the labyrinth -- another of his frequent images -- could be successfully navigated .
 The belief in predestination called into question the efficacy of good works . The belief was questioned by some as to whether it was necessary to work in the world .
 Calvin believed that good works were signs of having been chosen by God for eternal salvation, though they did not in themselves guarantee Heaven . Good works did not guarantee Heaven, but they were good works .
 Calvin, unlike Luther, distinguished between usury and productive loans that would raise capital and increase the well-being of the entire community .
 Calvin preached collective, communal discipline in the pursuit of holiness . Replacing penance as a means of imposing individual discipline, Calvin preached communal discipline .
 Calvinists view prosperity as a sign of election by God . Later Calvinists came to view prosperity, along with ‘sober living,” as a result of God’
 Calvin visited Geneva, a town of about 13,000 people, in 1536 . Calvin visited the Swiss lakeside city of Geneva . Calvin was the first to visit Geneva .
 Geneva broke away from the domination of the Catholic House of Savoy . With the first successes of the Reformation, word of which had originally been carried there by German merchants .
 Earlier that year, troops of the Swiss canton of Bern, which had embraced Zwinglian reform, occupied the city .
 Bern established a protectorate, with Geneva retaining its nominal independence . Geneva retained nominal independence, with Bern maintaining a nominal protectorate .
 Citizens elect magistrates and members of two representative councils . Citizens elected magistrates, representatives of two representatives councils .
 Residency in Geneva would be contingent on formal adherence to the document . Residency would be dependent on formal compliance with the Geneva Declaration .
 The Mass was banned, and priests were informed that they had to convert to reformed religion or leave the city . The priest was told that he must convert to a reformed religion .
 Calvin hoped to impose Christian discipline and asceticism on the city in order to construct a righteous society . Calvin wanted to impose discipline and discipline on the citizens of the city . Calvin believed the city should be a Christian society .
 His ‘Ecclesiastical Ordinances’ would provide for the organization of religious life in reformed Geneva . But they threatened the powers of the councils, threatening the power of the council .
 Calvin insisted that the Consistory, the judiciary of the reformed church made up of lay elders, would have the right to discipline all citizens and to dispense harsh penalties against those who transgressed Geneva's religious laws .
 The penalties would include excommunication from the church, exile, imprisonment, and even execution . These penalties would be excommunication or imprisonment .
 Calvin wanted municipal supervisors to monitoi the religious behavior of the people . The councils hesitated to surrendei their authority to Calvin, who was French .
 The two councils invited Calvin to return to oversee reform in Geneva, and they adopted his Ecclesiastical Ordinances . Calvin was invited back to oversee reforms in Geneva .
 Many citizens of Geneva resisted the close scrutiny of the Consistory . But many citizens of Switzerland resisted the scrutiny .
 Calvin forced another man who had publicly criticized him to wear a hair shirt (a shirt made of coarse animal hair) and walk slowly through town, stopping at street corners to pray and acknowledge Calvin's authority . Calvin forced the man to wear the hair shirt .
 Calvin took it upon himself to decide whether future bridegrooms were free from venereal disease and could marry in Geneva . Calvin decided to decide if future brides were free to marry in the city .
 Drinking establishments were permitted if no lewd songs were sung or cards played, a Bible was always available, and grace said before meals .
 Consistory imposed penalties for laughing during a sermon, having a fortune told, or praising the pope .
 Calvin’s death in 1564 was brought on by a variety of illnesses that were probably compounded by his chronic state of exhaustion and his fretful anxiety about the possibility of reforming a fallen and sinful world . Calvin's death was likely compounded by a number of illnesses .
 Calvinism proved the most aggressive version of the reformed religions . Found converts in places as diverse as France, the Netherlands, Germany, Hungary, Transylvania, Poland and Scotland . Scottish Parliament accepted Calvinism in 1560 as national religion .
 Calvinism made some inroads among all social classes during the 1530s, following the flow of reform literature coming from Switzerland and the German states . In France, Calvinism led to the rise of Calvinism among the social classes .
 People who could not read could nonetheless listen to the Bible being read aloud . People who couldn't read could still listen to Bible reading aloud .
 Fires were being kindled everywhere . . The stubborn resolution of those who were carried off to the gallows . . . stupefied many people .
 The judicial system could not keep up with the rapid pace of conversion, including the conversion of many nobles . Many nobles were converted to Christianity .
 By 1560, there were more than 2,000 Protestant congregations in France . Huguenot congregations were so named after a leading French reformer in Geneva .
 The English Reformation began with a struggle between the king and the Church . Unlike continental reform, it began with an attempt to reform the English church .
 This dispute must also be placed in the context of discontentment with ecclesiastical venality, and the distant rule of Rome . But this dispute also must be seen as a reflection of discontent with the Church's authority .
 Lollard influence persisted among the middle and lower classes, which resented the wealth of the high clergy and papal authority . The Lollard was the first Lollard to resist the papal rule .
 Merchants and travelers returned to England from the continent with Lutheran tracts . Lutheran tracts were sent to the continent from Europe in the 1800s .
 The Catholic Church in England already enjoyed considerable autonomy, granted by the pope in the fourteenth century . The king could appoint bishops, and the king could also appoint bishops .
 Henry's wife, Catherine of Aragon, had given birth five times, but only a frail girl, Mary Tudor, survived . Henry's daughter, Mary, was the only child to survive .
 Henry had obtained a special papal dispensation to marry Catherine, who was his brother s widow, and now sought the annulment of this same marriage . Henry obtained the special dispensation from the papal for the marriage to Catherine .
 An annulment was not uncommon in sixteenth-century Europe, providing an escape clause for those of great wealth . Obtaining a divorce was common in the early 16th century, but it was also common in Europe .
 Henry justified his efforts by invoking an Old Testament passage that placed the curse of childlessness on any man who married his brother’s widow . Henry said the curse was placed on anyone who married the widow of his brother's widow .
 He claimed that English ecclesiastical authorities, not the pope, had the authority to grant an annulment . He also claimed that  English ecclesiastical authorities not the pope had the power to grant a divorce .
 Pope Clement VII (pope 1523-1534) was at this time a prisoner of Charles V, the Holy Roman emperor, whose armies had occupied Rome, and happened to be Catherine of Aragon's nephew .
 The pope opposed the annulment as a matter of conscience . In addition to these political circumstances, the pope opposed it as a conscience, he said . The pope's decision to annul the marriage was made in light of political circumstances .
 At Henry’s insistence, Lord Chancellor Thomas Wolsey opened a formal church proceeding in London in 1529 to hear the king's case . Lord Chancellor Wolsey, in his capacity as cardinal-legate, opened the proceedings in 1530 .
 Pope Clement ordered the case transferred to Rome, where the English king had no chance of winning . The case was moved to Rome where it was decided by the Pope Clement .
 Wolsey died a shattered man in 1530 on the way to his trial for treason and certain execution . Stripped of his post, Wolsey was forced to leave his post .
 More, a lawyer and a humanist, was a vigorous opponent of the reform movement . But More was an opponent of reform . More was a fierce opponent to reform .
 Each Friday More whipped himself in memory of Christ’s suffering . Although a layman, each Friday More would whip himself to remember Christ .
 More balked at Henry’s plan to have his marriage to Catherine of Aragon annulled . Henry was married to Catherine in 16th century . Henry's plan to annul marriage was rejected .
 Parliament passed a series of acts that cut ties between the English church and Rome . He then convoked Parliament, which dutifully passed the acts . Parliament convoked .
 Archbishop of Canshowed himself a loyal servant of the throne by simply declaring Henry’s marriage to Catherine, who was sent to a convent, annulled .
 Act of Succession in 1534 required all of the king’s subjects to take an oath of loyalty to the king as head of the Church of England . Act of 1534 was required by the king's subjects to swear their loyalty to him . Act also required the king to
 Parliament limited fees that clergy could assess for burials and forbade bishops of the Church of England from living away from their sees . Parliament also restricted fees that the clergy could pay to bury .
 The lack of resistance to Henry's usurpation of ecclesiastical authority reflected the pope’s unpopularity, as well as the growing strength of the English monarchy . Henry's refusal to challenge the pope reflected the growing popularity of the king .
 After the Break with Rome Henry VIlI’s nascent Church of England remained doctrinally conservative in contrast to some of the continental reform churches . After the break with Rome, Henry VI.I.’�s fledgling church remained conservative .
 Several dozen people were burned at the stake for heresy in the 1 530s after Henry broke Sir Thomas More . The scene was painted by Hans Holbein the Younger in the same style of painting .
 More, who was later executed for his beliefs, was later hanged . More was lord chancellor of the Roman Catholic state .
 Six more articles promulgated two years later reaffirmed some aspects of orthodox Catholic doctrine, including transubstantiation and clerical celibacy . However, six more articles were promulgated in the 1950s .
 Two-thirds of the monasteries were sold within ten years, the largest transfer of land in England since the Norman Conquest of 1066 . The largest transfer in England in 1066 was the largest land transfer in the country since Norman Conquest .
 The appropriation of Church lands doubled royal revenue, allowing forts along the troublesome border with Scotland and on the Channel coast, and financing the purchase of new ships .
 Nobles, particularly those living in the more prosperous south, were the chief purchasers of monastic lands . Monastic lands were purchased by wealthy people in the south of England .
 Many turned their acquisitions into pastureland for sheep, or undertook more intensive agricultural production . Many turned some of the land into pasture land for sheep or more intensive farming .
 Anne Boleyn gave birth to a daughter, Elizabeth, a future queen of England . A few months after she married Henry, she gave birth . The future queen was born in 17th century .
 Henry had Anne tried on charges of adultery with one of his courtiers, claiming that she had coyly dropped her handkerchief in order to attract him . But Henry then had her tried again, and she was found guilty of adultery .
 Jane Seymour died shortly after giving birth to a son . Next the king married Jane Seymour, who died shortly afterwards . The king married the queen of England .
 Another Anne, this one from a small German state, was next in line, as Henry sought allies against Spain and the other Catholic powers . Another Anne was Anne of the same German state .
 Henry’s sixth wife, Catherine Parr, could have been excused for entering the marriage with considerable trepidation, but managed to outlive her husband . Henry's sixth wife was an older, pious older woman named Catherine . She died in 1777 .
 The Catholic Church responded to the schism within Christendom by reasserting the pope’s authority and strengthening its own organization . The Catholic Reformation was a major event in the history of the Catholic Church .
 The Catholic Reformation was both a defensive response by the Church to the success of Protestantism and an aggressive attempt to undertake reform within the limits determined by Catholic theology . It was a response to Protestantism's success and an attempt to reform within those limits .
 In 1536, Pope Paul III designated a commission to report on possible reforms in the Church . The Catholic Reformation 11 5 Retreat to Dogmatism. 11 5
 This commission documented the lack of education of many clergy . It documented the scandalous cases of bishops and priests earning benefices from sees and parishes they never visited . The commission also documented the .
 Paul III rejected a last-ditch attempt in 1541 by one of his cardinals and several German bishops to reach agreement on the thorny theological issue of salvation by faith alone alone .
 The pope ordered Cardinal Gian Pietro Carafa to establish an Inquisition in Rome to root out Protestantism in Italy . The next year, the pope ordered the pope to establish a new Inquisition .
 The new pope retreated into doctrinal orthodoxy and aggressive repression . Pope Francis is the first pope to be elected to the papacy .
 He formalized pre-publication censorship, establishing a list of forbidden books in 1 559 . The Index was established in the same year as the Index of banned books .
 Censors ordered other books altered, altered, and refused to authorize the printing of publications deemed controversial . The censors refused to print controversial publications .
 As part of the Catholic Reformation s efforts to combat, contain, and eliminate “error” in all forms, Paul IV invented the “ghetto” Order Jews living in the Papal States to reside in specific neighborhoods, which they could leave only at certain times
 In a 1555 bull, he stated that the Jews were guilty of killing Christ, and therefore ought to be slaves . In 1555, he said that Jews should be slaves because they killed Christ .
 In much of Catholic Europe, Jews had to wear yellow caps to identify themselves, could not own land, and were excluded from most professions . Jews were also excluded from owning land and owning land in Catholic Europe .
 Ignatius of Loyola was one of the leading figures of the Catholic Reformation . He was a dashing Basque noble who became a leading figure in the Reformation movement . He became one of its leading figures .
 While recovering from a grave injury suffered in battle, Loyola read an account of the life of Christ and a book on the lives of saints . She also read a biography of the saint and a biography on the saint .
 Loyola made a pilgrimage to a Spanish monastery, left his sword in a chapel, gave his rich robe to a poor man, put on a sackcloth, and traveled through Spain and Italy . He gave his sword to a chapel and left his robe in the chapel .
 The Inquisition came to suspect him because his claims to help people through “spiritual conversion” seemed dangerously close to heresy . He was accused of trying to convert people to Christianity by helping them through spiritual conversion .
 He defended himself ably, however, receiving only a short prison sentence . He was sentenced to two years in prison .
 Loyola wanted to establish a new order that could inculcate the same kind of intense religious experience that he had undergone while lying wounded . The new order was established in the 1930s .
 He traveled to Rome, offered his services to the pope, and organized the Society of Jesus . The Society was officially approved by the pope in 1540 . It is now officially approved .
 The Jesuit order provided a model for Church organization, orthodoxy, and discipline . The Jesuit Order provided an example of Church organization and orthodoxy, according to its founder .
 Jesuits underwent a program of rigorous training and took a special oath of allegiance to the pope . Jesuits were trained to become Jesuits and took an oath of oath of loyalty to the pontiff .
 The study combined the study of Thomas a Kempis’s mystical Imitation of Christ and Loyola's own devotional reflections . The study was based on Thomas Kempis's Imitations of Christ . The book was published by the University of Saint Louis Louis Louis XVI .
 The Jesuit religious order contributed greatly to the success of the Catholic Reformation in Austria, Bavaria, and the Rhineland . Counselors to kings and princes and educators of Catholic elite, the Jesuits contributed greatly .
 Jesuits also contributed to the Church’s reconquest of Poland, where religious toleration had been proclaimed in 1573 . Some landowners had converted to Calvinism and some landowners converted to the Calvinism .
 Jesuits began to travel to North America, Latin America, and Asia in the service of the Catholic Reformation . Jesuits established a presence in the court of the Chinese emperors, establishing a presence .
 They led “missions,” delivering fire-and-brimstone sermons, which were aimed at rekindling loyalty to the Church . They led "missions" to deliver "missions," which were intended to rekindle loyalty .
 In 1545, at the insistence of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, Pope Paul III convoked the Council of Trent to assess the condition of the Catholic Church and to define its doctrines .
 The papacy had long viewed conciliarism as a potential threat to its authority and invoked every possible reason for delay . While such an internal reckoning had seemed inevitable, it seemed inevitable for some time, the papacy said .
 Council of Trent, which met off and on for eighteen years, made the split within Western Christendom irreparable . Once convened, the council of Trent met off-and-on for 18 years, making the split irreparable.
 Most of the prelates who came to the Alpine town of Trent believed the central goal of the council was a blanket condemnation of what the Church viewed as heresy, as well as reaffirmation of theological doctrine . The council was held in Trent, Switzerland, in the 1930s .
 Italian delegates dominated the proceedings, coughing and sneezing during speeches with which they disagreed . Although the pope himself never went to Trent, the pope never attended the meetings .
 It reaffirmed the authority of the pope and of the bishops, the seven sacraments, and the presence of Christ in the Eucharist . The pope and the bishops reaffirmed their authority, the statement said .
 It also unequivocally opposed the marriage of clerics and reaffirmed belief in Purgatory and in the redeeming power of indulgences, although the practice of selling them was abolished .
 Pope Pius IV convoked the last session of the Council of Trent in 1562 . The Council's last session was held at Trent in Trent, Italy .
 The council ordained the creation of seminaries in each diocese to increase the number and quality of priests . The councils ordained seminaries to help the number of priests in the diocese .
 The infusion of better educated clergy in the southern German states and Austria aided the Churchs efforts to maintain its influence there .
 The papacy emerged from the Council of Trent much more centralized, better organized and administered, and more aggressive, like the most powerful European states themselves .
 A series of more able popes helped restore the prestige of the papacy within the Church . The papacy was restored to the Catholic Church by the end of the 1980s .
 Some leaders within the Catholic Church reasoned that the Church should put its own house in order and seek to reconvert people who had joined the reformed religions .
 St. Pius V sent some bishops living in Roman luxury packing to their sees, putting those who refused to leave in prison in prison . Those who did not leave were imprisoned .
 Reformers wanted to bring order and discipline to members of religious orders and the secular clergy . Reformers also wanted to make religious orders more discipline for secular clergymen .
 Some churchmen now rejected monastic life as irrelevant to missionary tasks of the Church . Another sign of the influence of Protestant reform, he says .
 New orders, such as the Capuchins and Ursulines, worked to bring faith to the poor and the sick . New orders were created to help the poor, sick .
 The missionary work of Vincent de Paul also helped restore faith among the poor . Vincent's missionary work was also credited with restoring faith in the world .
 The Catholic Church also produced catechisms that spread Church teachings, along with accounts of the lives of the saints . The Reformation preachers had mass-produced pamphlets .
 The Catholic Reformation encouraged other new devotional confraternities (religious brotherhoods of people who heard Mass together) Some new confrathions brought together laymen of various social classes .
 Protestant Reformation had emphasized the development of the individual's personal piety through Bible study and personal reflection .
 The Catholic Reformation, too, now encouraged individual forms of devotion and spirituality . The Reformation was a form of devotion that encouraged individual spirituality .
 The Reformation followed not only the discovery of the printing press but also the expansion of commerce, the arteries of which became the conduits of reform . The arteries of commerce were the arteries for reform .
 Both the Protestant and Catholic Reformations affected art, architecture, print culture, education, popular culture, and family life at a time when religious belief and practice had an enormous impact on daily life .
 The printing press did not cause the Reformation, but it certainly helped expand it . Print printing press helped expand the Protestant movement .
 A rapid expansion in the publication of pamphlets, books, and other printed material occurred at a time when reformers were challenging Church doctrine and papal authority .
 The printing of Luther’s works facilitated their rapid diffusion, with perhaps a million copies circulating through the German states by the mid-1520s . Luther's works were printed in Germany and circulated in Germany .
 Luther's Wartburg translation of the Bible went through fifty printings in two years . Luther’s Wartberg translation went through 50 printings . Luther's translation of The Bible was published by Luther in 17th century .
 Luther published a hymnal containing many hymns that are sung today . Luther also published a book containing many of the hymnies that are still sung today. Luther published many hymnals that are now used in the world . Luther's hymn book was published in
 He directed many of his dialogues, poems, and sermons to ordinary Germans, and even to children . He adopted popular religious themes and images to reflect popular themes .
 Since about 1480, the diffusion of printing had contributed to the expansion of lay culture in the German states . The diffusion of print had contributed .
 Much of what was printed was published in the vernacular, that is, German, as opposed to Latin . Much of it was printed in German, rather than Latin .
 Visual, often satirical images such as woodcut illustrations and broadsheets, directed at those who could not read, probably reached far more people than did printed tracts .
 Caricatures portrayed Luther as Hercules, Hercules, as a miracle worker, and in one legend, as the inventor of bratwurst sausage . In one popular legend, he was depicted as a new Moses, and as a Christian saint .
 The Reformation, drawing on printing, profited from increased educational opportunities for laypeople in Europe, which engendered a critical spirit among students and scholars . Lay Education and Reading is the Reformation's work .
 Number of universities rose steadily during the last half of the fifteenth century . The number of universities in England rose steadily in the 15th century .
 More people could read than ever before, but in most places no more than 5 to 10 percent of the population could read . More people were able to read in most of the U.S.
 Lutherans and Calvinists stressed importance of education as essential to individual and critical study of the Scriptures . Calvinists deemphasized clergy’s role in religious instruction .
 During the Reformation, princes and ecclesiastical leaders intensified their efforts to secure religious conformity by controlling what people read . The Reformation was an attempt to ensure religious conformity .
 The “blue library” helped diffuse pamphlets deemed acceptable and sold at a low price by itinerant peddlers . The ‘Blue library’ was so called because small books or pamphlets were wrapped in blue paper .
 Didactic stories were meant to instruct people about religious events, saints, and ideals approved by the Church, and to distance them from the “superstitions” of popular culture .
 Many people living in England probably still knew far more about Robin Hood than they did about the Bible . Yet many people still knew more about the Robin Hood story than the Bible.
 A chapbook (a small book of popular literature) published in Augsburg in 1621 told the story of Saint George slaying the dragon .
 The Catholic hierarchy removed the dragon from the story, while Protestants left out Saint George . The dragon was removed from the Catholic hierarchy .
 Protestant ministers, like their Catholic counterparts, tried to root out such rituals as baptizing a child by dunking her three times for good luck . Protestant ministers tried to remove such rituals from their churches .
 Songs rife with pagan imagery had survived virtually unchanged since medieval times . Songs rife in pagan imagery were largely unchanged since the medieval period .
 The Catholic Church had been unable to eradicate the difference in the popular mind between prayer and good luck charms, for example . Religion and magic remained closely intertwined .
 Many a village became the site of an elaborate tug-of-war between state and ecclesiastical authorities and ordinary people . The battle was fought between the church and the people of ordinary people in villages .
 The clergy, often previously active participants in festive occasions, were caught in the middle . The clergy moved away from what they considered ‘profane’ amusements .
 Note the contrast between the church on the left with the somewhat more pious-looking people near it, and the drinking place on the other side .
 Revelry seems to be winning out. others, returning them to the control of the clergy by imposing a religious purpose that seemed to have been lost in the fun .
 Ecclesiastical and lay hierarchies, Catholic and Protestant, came to view popular festivity as immoral . Popular festivity was viewed as immoral or licentious .
 A painting by Pieter Brueghel the Elder depicts Carnival as a fat man and Lent as a thin woman .
 Lent won. Under the twin assault of absolutism and ecclesiastic hierarchy, Lent won . Lent won, says Pope Francis .
 The clergy also began a long and often unsuccessful struggle for control over lay confraternities, which had their origins in religious devotion, but they now were fiercely independent and more like festive clubs .
 Carnival was largely eradicated in Protestant countries, but it survived in some Catholic ones, although often much transformed . Carnival was mostly eradicated by Protestants, but survived in Catholic ones .
 Social and political elites contrasted the ‘civility’ of their beliefs, conduct, and manners with the “barbarity” or “savagery” of popular beliefs and customs .
 The Church tried to impose strict sexual mores on ordinary people, while encouraging gestures of deference toward social superiors . The Church's sexual policies were meant to encourage deference to social superiors, rather than normal people .
 Convents and nunneries were almost always abolished in a Protestant state . Reformers encouraged women to take an active role in the religious process of being saved . Convents were abolished in Protestant states, but reformers still encouraged women .
 Protestant women, like men, were encouraged to read the Bible themselves, or, as most could not read, to have it read to them . Protestant women were encouraged not to have their own Bible read by their own .
 Most Anabaptist martyrs were female . Women appear to have made decisions about not baptizing their children . Most martyrs in the case were women .
 More women than men seem to have converted to Calvinism in France, perhaps attracted by special catechism classes, or by the fact that in Calvinist services, men and women sang psalms together .
 A few women published religious pamphlets in the early 1520s and others undertook devotional writing and publishing later . Women could not be ministers nor hold offices within the new churches .
 Calvin believed that the subjugation of women to their husbands was crucial for the maintenance of moral order . Calvin believed women should be subordinate to their husband .
 Protestant denominations provided a domestic vision of women, emphasizing their role in the Christian household . Protestant denominations emphasized the role of women in the household .
 The fact that a Protestant minister could now marry, however, reflected a more positive view not only of women but of the family as a foundation of organized religion . It reflected a positive view of women's role in the family, the author says .
 Protestants also reluctantly accepted divorce in limited cases . One pamphleteer admonished husbands that their wives were “no dish-clouts . . nor no drudges, but fellow-heirs with them of everlasting life,” .
 Luther viewed adultery, impotence, and abandonment as reasons for divorce, but he condemned Henry VII's effort to divorce Catherine of Aragon .
 Divorce remained quite rare and occurred only after a long, expensive legal process only the rich could afford . Divorce was extremely rare in the 1930s and '50s .
 In Catholic areas, women could still rise to positions of importance in convents, convents or in charitable religious orders . Women could still be important in the new religious orders in Catholic areas .
 Council of Trent reaffirmed the Catholic Church's ideal of female chastity, reinforced by the widespread cult of the Virgin Mary . But the council of Trent also reaffirmed its ideal of women's chastity .
 The chapbooks of the Catholic Reformation still taught that the female body was a source of sin, and therefore had to be controlled .
 Catholic and Protestant churchmen identified and persecuted witches as part of the campaign to acculturate the masses with “acceptable beliefs’s” beliefs .
 Theologians and judges sought to demonstrate that accused witches embodied the kingdom of the devil . Theologian and judges wanted to demonstrate the kingdom was the devil's kingdom .
 To some extent, the Catholic Reformation wanted to create the idea of a satanic realm of evil on earth with which to juxtapose orthodoxy . The Catholic Reformed wanted to make it more like a world of evil, he says .
 Some “witches” confessed under pain of torture, such as one woman who was “scorched like a pig” and cooked alive . Others have been accused of spreading an “evil powder” while committing crimes .
 Women stood out as targets because they were transmitters of the collective memory of popular culture . Women were targets because of their role in transmitting collective memory . They stood out because they transmitted the collective memories of pop culture .
 They were genealogists, storytellers, story-llers, and healers, but almost always without formal education . They were often genealogistists and story tellers .
 Women were guardians of tradition, although also regarded by the Catholic hierarchy as the source of sin . Women were in many ways the guardian of tradition .
 The social exclusion or even execution of women had a social value for those in power, affirming authorities’ position and role as interpreters of beliefs and customs deemed appropriate . Those in power were able to assert their position in the social exclusion .
 Some lay authorities then turned their attention to outcasts, the socially marginal . After the persecution of witches ebbed, some lay authorities began to focus on outcasts .
 In the Austrian Netherlands, a sign “useless to the world” was hung above the head of a beggar . The Austrian Netherlands is one of the most popular countries in the world .
 Monarchies increasingly demonstrated their authority in carrying out sentences of royal justice . Monarchies are increasingly demonstrating their authority . The justice of God is the justice of the monarch .
 Those found guilty of capital crimes were tortured and then executed in public . Their mutilated bodies were exhibited for all to see in public in the Netherlands .
 The monumentalism, flamboyance, and theatrical religiosity of the baroque style complemented the Catholic Reformation . The Baroque Style was created in the 17th century .
 Its goal was to impress—indeed, overwhelm— the emotions through aweinspiring dimensions, opulence, movement, and, in painting, lurid color, it says .
 Baroque palaces and churches featured exuberant curves and ornate decoration . Palaces were cluttered with lustrous marble altars, ornate statues, golden cherubs, and colorful murals and ceiling paintings .
 The Gesu Church of the Jesuits in Rome is a masterpiece of baroque style . It was built in the 1950s and 1960s in the Italian Gothic style .
 With its vast ceilings and enormous paintings of the ascension of Christ and the assumption of the Virgin Mary, it symbolizes the spirit of the Catholic Reformation . The vast ceilings are covered in paintings of Christ's ascension and assumption of Mary .
 The baroque style used optical illusions such as Gesu's false cupola to achieve the impression that the viewer is reaching for Heaven . Gesu used the illusion of reaching Heaven to achieve illusion .
 The monumental fountains in Rome of the Venetian sculptor Gianlorenzo Bernini best represent the period of high baroque of the Catholic Reformation . Bernini was the Italian sculptor of the 17th century .
 Bernini depicted the saint's convulsions of joy when an angel stabs her with a spear as beams of sunlight engulf the scene . In the altarpiece The Ecstasy of Saint Theresa the saint convulses in a moment of joy . Bernini also depicted the angel stab
 In his hands I saw a long golden spear and at the end of the iron tip I seemed to see a point of fire . In the hands of the soldier, he held an iron spear with his hands . At the end, the spear seemed to have a point .
 This highly sexual description stands in marked contrast with the puritanical impulse that had seen Renaissance popes order the painting of fig leaves on nudes . The highly sexual descriptions are a marked contrast to that of the Renaissance .
 The Dutch Netherlands, at war with its Spanish overlords, was largely Protestant as well as Protestant . The Dutch Dutch was Protestant as also .
 The Reformations in France, the Netherlands, and Scotland were to a great extent movements from below . Unlike the case of the German states, where the religion of the princes determined the state, the Reformations were movements from within .
 The Reformation generated a strong missionary impulse among Protestants and Catholics alike . Catholics and Protestants alike were inspired by the Reformation .
 Jesuits, particularly, ranged far and wide in Europe . Jesuits were important in the early 1800s and early 1500s .
 In the Spanish Empire, conquest and the quest for religious conversion, which was remarkably successful, went hand in hand . The conquest and conversion of the Spanish empire were remarkably successful .
 More than a few missionaries, however, found martyrdom, for example in Asia . More than one missionary has been killed in Asia.
 In Central Europe, the complexity of the state system facilitated reform . The complexity of Europe's state system enabled reform, says the author .
 The Peace of Augsburg of 1555 reinforced German particularism, the persistence of small, independent states . It reinforced German specialism .
 Spain and France most successfully resisted the reform movement, despite the wars of religion that lay ahead in the latter . The larger, centralized, and more powerful states like Spain, France most resisted reform movement .
 Both French and Spanish kings retain considerable authority over ecclesiastical appointments . Yet, in both states, the Catholic Church remained subordinate to monarchy .
 The political institutions of the Protestant states remained relatively secularized . Henceforth, the political institutions in Protestant states were relatively secular .
 Lutheranism was introduced as a state church in part because reformers needed protection of princes against Catholic rulers, notably Charles V, the Holy Roman emperor . In the German states and in Scandinavia, the state church was introduced in part to protect princes from Catholic rulers . Reformers originally needed
 Lutheran and Anglican reforms rigorously subordinated the church to the state, separating the spiritual and temporal realms . The state was the heart of the church, not the spiritual, but the spiritual realm .
 Zwingli had called for the complete fusion of church and state . Calvinism alone provided for the institutional separation of both . After Calvin s death the magistrates of Geneva restricted the churchs autonomy .
 Anabaptist sectarians wanted their communities to have nothing at all to do with the state . The state of the state was abolished in 1883 .
 Lutheran and Calvinist states were not necessarily any more tolerant of religious dissent than those that remained Catholic . Lutherans and Calvinists were more tolerant than those who remained Catholic states .
 Following the Peace of Augsburg, German princes used their control of the reformed churches to consolidate their political authority .
 Lutheranism remained wedded to a patriarchal structure of society, which appealed to property owners at all social levels . Lutheranism remains wedded .
 Sunday services did not guarantee what or even if they believed . Nonetheless, compelling people to attend Sunday services didn't guarantee what they believed.
 In some places, Protestants and Catholics coexisted and even shared churches . In some parts of the world, Catholics and Protestants co-existed, even though they were Protestant .
 In Saxony, Catholics heard Mass in the lavishly decorated front part of a church . Lutherans used the end of the nave, which had little adornment, for their own services .
 The division of the church was marked by a painting of the Last Supper, the importance of which both sides agreed upon . Both sides agreed on the painting, which was painted by the artist .
 In some towns in the Netherlands in the late sixteenth century, dissenters from the Dutch Reformed religion, including Catholics, could worship in churches that were deliberately hidden from public view .
 Ordinary people contributed to the religious peace that emerged in the immediate post-Reformation period, sometimes defying tyrannical rulers who insisted on religious orthodoxy . Ordinary citizens often contributed to religious peace .
 The Peace of Augsburg and the Council of Trent did not end the rivalry between Catholics and Protestants, nor, for that matter, the rivalry with different Protestant denominations . The peace and the council of Trent was not the end of the rivalry .
 Religious intolerance and conflict would, to a great extent, help define the first half of the seventeenth century, the age of the wars of religion . The wars of religious intolerance helped define the early half of that century .
 The crowd stormed into the council chamber, engaged Catholic officials in a heated debate, organized an impromptu trial, and hurled two royal delegates from the window . Two royal delegates were hurled out of the window by the crowd . Catholic officials were also hosed down .
 The crowd below roared its approval of this ""defenestration” (an elegant term for throwing someone out of a window), angered only that neither man was killed by the fall . Neither man was injured in the fall, but neither was killed .
 Catholic partisans construed their good fortune as a miracle, as the rumor spread that guardian angels had swooped down to pluck the falling dignitaries from the air . The incident occurred in the early 1950s .
 Protestants liked to claim that the men had been saved because they fell on large dung heaps in the moat below . Protestants believed the men were saved by falling on large heaps . Protestants also claimed they were saved because of falling on dung .
 The different reactions to the Defenestration of Prague illustrate how the Reformation left some of Europe, particularly the German states, a veritable patchwork of religious allegiances . The Reformation was a major Protestant state of the 16th century .
 Religious affiliation, like ethnicity, frequently did not correspond to the borders of states . Religious affiliation like ethnicity and religion, often didn't correspond to borders of state .
 Peace of Augsburg in 1555 ended the fighting between German Protestant and Catholic princes . Peace of Augustsburg ended fighting between Protestants and Catholics in Germany . The Peace of 1555 was the end of the conflict between the two sides .
 It stated that the religion of each state would henceforth be that of its ruler . Each state's religion of the ruler will now be that that of the state's ruler .
 Hundreds of thousands of families left home and crossed frontiers in order to relocate to a state where the prince was of their religious denomination . The prince was the prince of their religion .
 In France in 1 572, the Huguenots rebelled against Catholic domination, setting off a civil war . The Huguensots (the popular name for the French Protestants) rebelled . The German states entered a period of relative religious peace .
 Dutch Protestants led the revolt against Spanish Catholic authority in 1572, beginning a bitter struggle that lasted until the middle of the next century . After years of mounting religious and political tension, Dutch Protestants .
 In 1618, religious wars broke out again in the German states with unparalleled intensity . The religious wars in 1618 were the most intense religious wars .
 The Thirty Years’ War devastated Central Europe, bringing into one way or another, almost all of the powers of Europe into conflict .
 Armies reached unprecedented size, and fought with a cruelty that may also have been unprecedented . Armies may have fought with cruelty, but may also be unprecedented, say historians .
 In the Thirty Years’ War, the Bourbons of France and the Habsburgs of Austria dominated religious considerations . Both Catholic dynasts were Catholic dynasties .
 The wars of religion resulted in the strengthening of the monarchies of France, Austria, and the smaller German states as well .
 Kings extended their administrative, judicial, and fiscal reach over their subjects in the interest of maintaining control over their populations and waging war . Kings and princes further extended their . administrative, . judicial and fiscal . reach over . their subjects .
 In France, a stronger monarchy emerged out of the trauma of religious struggles and competing claimants to the throne . The French monarchy emerged from a series of religious and political struggles .
 Germany is divided into several strong states and many smaller ones . Germany, however, remained divided into many smaller states .
 Competing religious allegiances reinforced German particularism, that is, the multiplicity of independent German states . Competing religions reinforced the division of German states in Germany .
 Early in the sixteenth century, France was divided by law, customs, languages, and traditions . The Wars of Religion in Sixteenth-Century France was the result of a war of religion .
 Under King Francis I, the Valois monarchy effectively extended its authority . The Valois monarch extended his authority in France .
 The French monarch ruled with an authority unequaled in Europe, however much he was dependent on the good will of nobles .
 Religious division precipitated a crisis of the French state and brought civil war . At a time when nobles were resisting the expansion of the king’s judicial prerogatives and the proliferation of his officials .
 Francis I and his successors became more insistent on their authority to assess taxes on the towns of the kingdom . Many had held privileged exemptions granted in exchange for loyalty . Many of the towns were exempt from taxes .
 Raising an army or royal revenue depended on the willingness of the most powerful nobles to answer the king’s call . The king's army or revenue depended upon the willingness to raise an army, or revenue .
 The monarchs had justified such requests with an appeal to the common good in tactful language that also held out the possibility of the use of force . The monarch's request was justified with a plea to the public good .
 French king wished to tax towns even when there was no war . Now the French king wanted to tax the towns even though there were no war, he said .
 Many more royal officials now represented and enforced the royal will in the provinces than ever before . The royal will is now more likely to be enforced by the royal authorities than before .
 One sign of the growing power of the monarchy was that nobles lost some privileges of local jurisdiction to the royal law courts .
 Francis confirmed and enhanced Paris's identity as the seat and emerging symbol of royal power . Francis confirms and enhances Paris as a symbol of power .
 Sale of offices originated in the kings desire for the allegiance of nobles and for the revenue they could provide the monarchy . The sale of offices started in the king's desire to sell offices to the aristocracy .
 His successors would depend increasingly on the sale of offices and titles for raising revenue . The sale of titles and offices is key to raising revenue for publishers .
 The monarchy, in turn, put the squeeze on peasants, extracting more resources through taxation . Finding nobles unwilling to provide all the funds the king desired, the monarchy put the pressure on peasants .
 The political and religious crises in the middle decades of the sixteenth century threatened monarchical stability in France . The French monarch was ruled by the French monarchy in the 15th century .
 The four Valois kings who succeeded Francis I proved unable to rule effectively . They pushed the country into a period of chaos brought by the lengthy, savage war of religion .
 The end of a period of economic expansion provided a backdrop for the political and religious struggles of the French monarchy . France's economic crisis was the result of the end of an economic boom .
 The population of France had risen rapidly between the late fifteenth century and about 1570, reversing the decline in population resulting from plagues and natural disasters in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries .
 Land under cultivation increased, particularly near the Mediterranean, where olive trees were planted on hills and terraces . Landowners planted olive trees on hills, terraces and hills near Mediterranean .
 By 1570, the increase in cultivable land in France had slowed down in much of France . But by 1570 it had become easier to cultivate in France than ever before .
 Prices rose rapidly in France, as in most of Europe, pushed upward relentlessly by population increase . Prices rose in France as a result of population growth .
 Beginning in the late 1550s, King Francis 1 of France, looking very regal and proud of his increased authority, despite not being painted wearing his crown .
 As agricultural income fell, nobles demanded vexing services from peasants, such as repairing roads and paths on their estates . As agricultural incomes fell, peasants were asked to repair roads, paths on estates .
 Many wealthy nobles rented out land to tenant farmers, then took the proceeds back to their luxurious urban residences . Wealthy nobles rented land to tenants, then returned the proceeds to their luxury residences .
 Nobles of lesser means, however, did not do as well as the owners of great estates . The rents they drew from their land failed to keep pace with rising prices, says historian .
 As the price of profitable land soared, peasant families tried to protect their children by subdividing land among male offspring . Families subdivided land among males .
 Many peasants with small parcels of land became sharecroppers at highly disadvantageous terms . Sharecroppers worked someone else s land for a return of roughly half of what was produced .
 Both trends worked against increased agricultural efficiency, reducing land yields . Both trends were seen as a result of increased land efficiency and increased land production .
 Taxes and tithes (payments owed the Catholic Church—in principle, 10 percent of income) weighed heavily on the poor .
 Peasants, particularly in the southwest, sporadically revolted against taxes, and against their landlords, during the period from 1560 to 1660 . Peasant revolts in the period between 1560 and 1660.
 Many of the rebels espoused the popular belief that their violence might restore an imagined world of social justice in which wise rulers looked after the needs of their people . The rebels were killed by government forces in 2009 .
 Followers of John Calvin arriving in France from nearby Geneva attracted converts in the 1540s and 1550s . French Calvinists and the Crisis of the French State Followers arrived in France . Followers came from Geneva to France .
 Henry II began a religious repression that created Calvinist martyrs, perhaps further encouraging Protestant dissent . Henry II succeeded his father Francis I, who succeeded him in the reign of Calvinism .
 The spread of Calvinism led the king to sign the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 1559 . The treaty ended a protracted struggle between France and Spain .
 Henry II agreed to respect Habsburg primacy in Italy and control over Flanders . After decades of reckless invasions, Henry II . Henry II fought to avoid invasion of Flanders and Italy .
 King Philip II of Spain promised that Spain would desist in its attempts to weaken the Valois kings . Philip II promised to desist from Spain in return for the promise . Spain promised not to try to weaken Valois Kings .
 The two most powerful kings in Europe ended their struggle for supremacy because their resources were nearly exhausted . They viewed with alarm the spread of Calvinism in Western Europe, both within the Netherlands (a rich territory of the Spanish Habsburgs) and within France itself .
 After signing the treaty, Henry II and Philip II could now turn their attention to combating Protestantism . Philip II and Henry II signed the treaty in 1615 .
 Some nobles in France, wary of the extending reach of the Valois monarchy, resisted the monarchy . Some nobles were tired of providing funds for wars .
 Perhaps as many as 40 percent of French nobles converted to Calvinism . Some of them were nobles of relatively modest means squeezed by economic setbacks . Calvinism came to prominence in France .
 In 1559, King Henry II was accidentally killed by an errant lance during a jousting tournament celebrating peace with Spain . Henry II died in 1559 after being hit by a lance at a tournament in Spain's capital .
 Catherine de’ Medici served as regent to the first of her three sickly and incapable sons . Catherine was a talented, manipulative, and domineering widow .
 That she was the daughter of the man to whom Machiavelli had dedicated The Prince added to the “legend of the wicked Italian queen” in France . The Prince was dedicated to The Prince by Machiavellani .
 The throne immediately faced challenges to its authority by three powerful noble families, each dominating large parts of France . The throne was ruled by Napoleon III, who died in 1866 .
 The Catholic Guise family, the strongest, concentrated its influence in northern and eastern France . The Guisees family is the strongest in northern France .
 In the south, the Catholic Montmorency family, one of the oldest and wealthiest in the kingdom, held through marriage alliances, the allegiance of some of the population there . In the South, the family held the allegiance by marriage alliances with the population .
 The influence of the Huguenot Bourbon family extended into central France and also reached the far southwestern corner of the country .
 In 1560, Louis, prince of Conde conspired to kidnap Francis II and remove him from the clutches of the House of Guise, who were related to Francis’s wife, Mary Stuart, queen of Scotland . Louis was a member of the Huguenot
 The Guise clan, who discovered the plot, killed some of the Bourbon conspirators . Some of the conspirators were killed by the Guise family .
 Francis died after a stormy reign of only eighteen months . He was succeeded by his ten-year-old brother Charles IX under the regency .
 The rivalry between the Guise, Montmorency, and Bourbon families undermined royal authority . The rivalry led to the death of the French king .
 Henry IPs lengthy war with Spain had drained the royal coffers . The economic downturn made it extremely difficult to fill them again .
 Several members of the House of Guise held important positions within the Catholic Church hierarchy . Such attempts only infuriated the House, several of whose members held important roles in the church hierarchy .
 Philip II of Spain and the Jesuit religious order backed the Guise family . Philip II and the Jesuits backed Guisees .
 The political crisis of France became increasingly tied to the struggle of the Church with Protestants . France's political crisis was tied to its struggle with the Church, Protestants .
 French Calvinists became bolder in practicing their religion . Taking advantage of the confusion surrounding the throne, they became bold .
 Calvinists seized control of Lyon in 1 562, forcing the rest of the population to attend their services . Calvinists took control of the city in 1.562 . The rest of Lyon was forced to attend the services .
 Calvinists desecrated Catholic cemeteries, smashed ornate stained-glass windows, shattered altar rails of churches, and covered statues of saints with mud . Calvinists covered statues with mud and covered them with mud.
 Calvinists were forced to wear crowns of thorns, like Christ, to their death . Catholics replied by slaughtering Calvinists, more than once forcing them to wear them to death .
 The violence of a holy war was accentuated by rumors that the Huguenots indulged in orgies . Protestants accused Catholics of idolatry and of doing the devil’s work .
 Some brave souls urged religion toleration in France . Yet in other parts of Europe where the Reformation had taken hold, they urged toleration .
 There is no sense in wanting to use force in matters of conscience and religion, because conscience is like the palm of the hand, the more it is pressed, says the author .
 Francis ordered the execution of Huguenots who had been found worshipping on his land . It began when Francis, the duke of Guise, ordered the executions . The execution began when Huguens were found to be worshipping in the area .
 Members of the Catholic lay confraternities took oaths to protect France against ‘heresy’ and erected crosses in public places as a sign of religious commitment . Members of France’s Catholic community erected crosses as sign of commitment .
 This first stage of the war, during which a Huguenot assassinated Francis, the duke of Guise, ended in 1 563 . It was during the first stage during the war . The first stage ended in the first year of war .
 A royal edict granted Huguenots the right to worship in one designated town in each region, as well as in places where Calvinist congregations had already been established . Huguensots worshiped in designated towns and places where it was established .
 It dragged on to an inconclusive halt three years later in a peace settlement that pleased neither side . The peace process dragged on for three years after it was reached in 2007 .
 In 1 572, Charles and Catherine agreed to provide military support to the Dutch Protestants, who had rebelled against Spanish authority . Charles and his wife, though Catholics, initially agreed to support the rebels, but did not .
 Charles soon renounced assistance to the Dutch and agreed to accept instead the guidance of the Catholic House of Guise . But pressured by his mother and fearful of upsetting the more radical Catholics, as well as the pope, he renounced help from the Dutch to accept the guidance .
 Guise family tried but failed to assassinate Admiral Gaspard de Coligny, a Montmorency who had converted to Protestantism . They blamed him for the earlier murder of the Catholic Francis, duke of Guise .
 Charles’s sister, Margaret, a Catholic Valois, and Henry of Navarre, a Bourbon Huguenot, were to be, in principle, one of religious reconciliation . The marriage was to be one of a religious reconciliation between the two families .
 The negotiations for the wedding had specified that the Huguenots in Paris come to the wedding unarmed . The negotiations also stipulated that Huguensots in France come unarmed .
 Guise advisers convinced him that the only way of preventing a Protestant uprising against the throne was to strike brutally against the Huguenots . But the king’s Guise . advisers, and perhaps his mother as well, convinced him .
 Catholic assassins hunted down and murdered Huguenot leaders on August 24, 1572 . The Huguens were killed by Catholic assassins in the French Revolution .
 Admiral Gaspard de Coligny's battered corpse was thrown through a window, castrated, and dragged through the streets of Paris by children . During what became known as the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre, the duke of Guise killed him . Admiral G
 For six days Catholic mobs stormed through the streets, killing more than 2,000 Protestants . Catholic mobs killed more than two,000 Protestant Protestants during the six-day period .
 Thousands of Huguenots emigrated or moved to safer places, including fortified towns they still held in the southwest of France . Thousands of people still held fortresses in the south of France, many of which were still under attack .
 At his coronation, the crown twice slipped from Henry’s head, a bad omen in a superstitious age . The crown slipped from his head at the coronation of Henry VIII .
 He seemed pious, undertook religious pilgrimages, and hoped to bring about a revival of faith in his kingdom . He seemed to have seemed pious .
 He also spent money with abandon and enjoyed dressing up as a woman, while lavishing attention on the handsome young men he gathered around him .
 Henry III also had to confront a worsening fiscal crisis compounded by a series of meager harvests . Henry III faced a growing fiscal crisis in 18 years .
 Estates deeply resented the influence of Italian financiers at court, the luxurious life of the court itself . Estates resented influence of Italians at court and the lavish life of court itself, and nobles who had bought royal favor .
 A group of moderate Catholics, known as the politiques, pushed for conciliation . The politiques are a French group of moderates who want conciliation between Catholics .
 Tired of anarchy and bloodshed, they were ready to put politics ahead of religion . They were tired of anarchy, bloodshed, and were ready for politics to take over .
 The politique sought to win the support of the moderate Huguenots, and thereby to bring religious toleration and peace to France . The politiques therefore sought to . bring religious tolerance and peace . France .
 Henry III signed an agreement that liberalized the conditions under which Protestants could practice their religion . In 1576, Henry III agreed to liberalize the conditions for Protestants in France .
 Angered by these concessions to Huguenots, a nobleman in the northern province of Picardy organized a Catholic League, which because of its size posed a threat to the monarchy . The Catholic League was a threat not only to Hugenots but also to the monarch .
 Henry, duke of Guise, vowed to fight until Protestantism was completely driven from France . Henry was subsidized by Philip II of Spain .
 Another military campaign against Protestants led to nothing more than a restatement of the conditions under which they could worship . Protestants were not allowed to worship in the Roman Catholic Church .
 Henry of Navarre was born in the town of Pau on the edge of the Pyrenees Mountains in southwestern France . He was the first French monarch to be born in France .
 The son of Antoine of Bourbon, patriarch of the powerful Bourbon family, and Jeanne d’Albret, inherited the keen intelligence of his mother and his father’s indecisiveness .
 Henry converted to Catholicism when his father sent his wife back to the southwest in 1562 . His father was notoriously unfaithful to his wife, who was sent back to her father's wife .
 Taken to the royal court as a hostage by Catherine de’ Medici, he was permitted to have Huguenot tutors . He was allowed to use the tutors at the end of his life .
 Henry of Navarre’s wedding in Paris in August 1572 to Margaret, Catherine de’ Medici's daughter, occurred . The Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre occurred in 1572 . The massacre took place in Paris after the wedding of Catherine de' Medici�
 Henry Henry was given the choice of embracing Catholicism or being executed . Henry then chose to embrace Catholicism or embrace Catholicism . Henry was executed for his actions .
 When the fighting temporarily ended, Henry had more time for his favorite pursuits: hunting and hunting . Henry had time for women and hunting, and was known for hunting .
 The Huguenots had every reason to be wary of a young man who seemed to change faiths with such ease . The young man changed faiths with ease .
 He seemed to have reconciled himself to the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre . Furthermore, he still counted the duke of Guise among his friends, had accompanied the Catholic army, albeit under guard .
 Henry formally abjured Catholicism and took up residence as royal governor in the southwest of France . Henry abjured his Catholicism and moved to the south of France, where Protestantism was strong .
 He tried to steer a path between militant Catholics and Huguenots in France . He was a leader in France during his time there .
 After Henry of Navarre became heir to the throne in 1584, the Catholic League rallied its forces . The League drew its muscle from the artisans of Paris and other northern towns .
 In defiance of the king, it forced the Parlement of Paris to withdraw the toleration afforded the Huguenots . It forced the Parisian Parlement to withdraw its toleration .
 Catholic League’s goal was to put the Cardinal de Bourbon on the throne, although the duke of Guise wanted it for himself . The Catholic League's goal was put the cardinal de Bourbon .
 Henry III first allied with Henry of Navarre and with the duke of Montmorency against Henry of Guise . Henry III also allied with the duke of Guise against Henry, duke . Henry's son was Henry III's son .
 Guise family provocatively accused the king in 1585 of destroying the kingdom through inept rule . Called for a rebellion that would bring the duke of Guise to the throne and drive Protestantism from the kingdom .
 Treaty of Nemours abrogated all edicts of religious toleration . Catherine de' Medici and Henry, duke of Guise, turned over a number of towns to the Catholic League .
 Henrys denunciation of foreign influence was a shrewd piece of political propaganda aimed at moderate Catholics—the politiques —and the Catholic clergy . Henrys increasingly depended on German and Swiss mercenaries for his army .
 Henry of Navarre defeated the combined forces of the king and the Catholic League at Coutras, near Bordeaux, in 1587 . In 1587, the king defeated the Catholics in Coutras .
 His defensive position and use of artillery and cavalry proved decisive in the battle . His use of the cavalry and artillery proved decisive .
 Henry went back to hunting and making love after his victory over the Catholic army . Instead of following up his surprising victory, Henry went to hunting .
 Henry Ills marched the next year to Paris, where he and the Catholic League enjoyed support . Angered by his inability to prevent the execution of his niece, Guise, at the urging of the king of Spain, he marched .
 The Spanish king hoped to keep the French king from contemplating any possible assistance to England . The Spanish Armada sailed toward the English Channel on its way to England in the early 1900s .
 When Henry III sent troops to Paris to oppose the duke of Guise, the Parisian population rose in rebellion on May 12, 1588, stretching barricades throughout the city center .
 The ‘Day of Barricades’ marked the victory of a council led by clergymen known as the Sixteen, then the number of neighborhoods in Paris .
 For several years, the Sixteen had been energetically supporting the League, while denouncing the king, the Catholic politiques y and Huguenots with equal fervor . The Sixteen denounced the king and the Catholic politics .
 In 1588, delegates to the Estates-General gathered in the Loire Valley town of Blois . Many of the delegates were members of the Catholic League, many of them .
 Henry Ills bodyguards murdered Henry, duke of Guise, shortly before Christmas 1588 in the Chateau of Blois . Catherine de' Medici lay dying in a room beneath the bloody struggle .
 The Valois king had the Cardinal de Bourbon and other prominent members of the Catholic League arrested . The Catholic League members were arrested in 17th century .
 The duke of Guise's assassination drove the Catholic League to fullfledged revolt against Henry 111 . Henry 111. The Catholic League revolted against the king .
 Henry III was forced to make an alliance with Henry of Navarre against the Catholic League . Henry III then made an alliance of convenience with the Navarre king . Henry was then forced to join the League .
 As their combined armies besieged Paris, a monk assassinated Henry III in August 1589 . Henry III was assassinated in 1589 by a monk in Paris .
 Catholic League proclaimed five years earlier that Cardinal de Bourbon would become king upon Henry Ill’s death . The Catholic League, however, had proclaimed five . years earlier, that he would be king upon his death .
 Henry of Navarre's forces defeated Catholic League armies twice in Normandy, in 1589 and in 1590 . Henry of the Navarre defeated the Catholic League in Normandy .
 The arrival of a Spanish army from Flanders to provision Paris helped win Henry further support from moderate Catholics . Moderate Catholics resented Spanish intervention that might prolong the siege .
 As Henry’s army besieged Paris, Spanish troops defeated forces loyal to him in several provinces . Spanish forces defeated troops loyal to the king in several of the provinces .
 The death of Cardinal de Bourbon in 1590 led Philip II to proclaim the candidacy of his Spanish granddaughter as heir to the throne of France . Philip II then suggested that he might claim the throne himself .
 Henry’s continued successes on the battlefield and conciliatory proclamations furthered his popularity . In the meantime, Henry's continued successes continued to grow in popularity .
 Henry of Navarre, a man of changing colors, had another major surprise up his sleeve . Henry was one of the most powerful men of the medieval world .
 In 1593, he astonished friend and foe alike by announcing that he would now again renounce Protestantism . He astonished friends and foes alike by renouncing Protestantism.
 Paris, as he put it, was worth a Mass, the price of the capital’s obedience . Paris, he said, was as much as a Mass as the cost of a Mass .
 Following his coronation as Henry IV at Chartres the following year, Paris surrendered after very little fighting . Paris surrendered following the coronation of Henry IV .
 Henry’s entry into his capital was a carefully orchestrated series of ceremonies that included the “cure” of hundreds of people afflicted with scrofula (a tuberculous condition) by the royal touch . The monarchical tradition in France and England went back centuries
 Henry nodded enthusiastically to the women who came to their windows to catch a glimpse of the first Bourbon king of France . Henry nodded to them enthusiastically .
 Catholic League forces gradually dispersed, one town after another pledging its loyalty to Henry, usually in return for payments . The Catholic League eventually dispersed, with the help of Henry .
 Henry’s declaration of war on Spain in 1595 helped rally people to the monarchy . Henry declared war against Spain in the 1595, which helped rally supporters of the king .
 Henry, having secured the frontiers of his kingdom, signed the Treaty of Vervins with Philip II to end the war that neither side could afford to continue .
 The wars of the Catholic League caused great damage and dislocated the economy in many parts of France . The Catholic League was founded in 1903 .
 He did slightly reduce the direct tax, of which the peasants bore the brunt . The peasants were hit by the brunt of the tax .
 Henry rooted out some of the corruption in the farming of taxes . Government officials allowed ambitious middlemen to collect taxes in exchange for a share . Henry also rooted out corruption .
 In 1596, he convinced an Assembly of Notables to approve a supplementary tax . He convinced them to approve the tax in 1596 .
 A new imposition permitted officeholders, through an annual payment to the throne, to assure that their office would remain in the hands of their heirs . The new imposition allowed officeholders to assure they had their office .
 The paulette gave the wealthiest nobles of the realm a greater stake in the monarchy . It gave them a greater role in the power of the state .
 In 1602 and again two years later, he uncovered plots against him by nobles in connivance with the Spanish monarchy . The plots were uncovered in 1602, 1601 and 1602 .
 Small wonder that he carried two loaded pistols in his belt and that some nervous soul tasted his food and drink before he did . Small wonder he also had two loaded guns in his pocket .
 Henrys Edict of Nantes made Catholicism the official religion of France in 1598 . Henrys edict of 1598 made Catholicism an official state of religion in France .
 The nation’s 2 million Protestants (in a population of about 18. million) were granted the right to worship at home, hold religious services and establish schools in specified towns . Almost all in the southwest and west, almost all of the towns were fortified . But it also granted
 A series of secret decrees promised Paris, Toulouse, and other staunchly Catholic towns that Protestant worship would be forbidden within their walls . But careful to placate powerful sources of Catholic opposition, the decrees were also promised to ban Protestant worship .
 The Edict of Nantes left the Protestants as something of a separate estate with specified privileges and rights, but still on the margin of French life . The Protestants were left on the margins of life .
 By registering royal edicts, the parlements gave them the status of law . The parlements registered them as law by registering them .
 Huguenots had arguably more secure status than any other religious minority in Europe . In this case, they only gradually and grudgingly registered the edict, which provided them with a secure status .
 Henry’s foreign policy, which appeared pro-Protestant, was based on dynastic interests . Henry supported the Dutch rebels against Spain and certain German states against the Catholic Habsburgs .
 This support of Protestant rebels and princes made it impossible for Henry to consider further concessions to the Huguenots . Henry's support of Protestants made him impossible for him to give up .
 The Church benefited from a revival in organizational zeal and popularity . The Church was founded in 1881 .
 Henry allowed the Jesuits to return to France in 1604, a sign that religious tensions were ebbing . Henry allowed several Italian religious orders to return, including several Italian orders .
 With various would-be assassins lurking, Henry had to think about an heir . Henry had an heir to the throne .
 He sought a papal annulment of his marriage to Margaret of Valois, whom he had not seen in eighteen years . He sought the papal annulment of his marriage, which he had never seen in 18 years .
 While waiting, he prepared to marry one of his mistresses, she died miscarrying their child . While waiting he prepared for the wedding, the mistress died of a miscarriage . She died of her pregnancy .
 The Huguenot provinces are the most populated provinces of the Catholic League . St. Pau is one of the most important provinces in the French Revolution .
 Wars of Religion in France in the Sixteenth Century France at the time of the Edict of Nantes, 1598 . Wars of religion in France were fought in 16th Century France .
 The map indicates neutral provinces, Huguenot provinces, and Catholic League provinces during the wars of religion, as well as Huguensot and Catholic . League towns and battle sites during the . wars . The map was created by Napoleon III in 15731642 .
 This second marriage of convenience brought a sizable dowry that Henry used, in part, to pay off more international debts . Henry used the dowry to pay for more international debt .
 Henry kept abreast of events throughout his vast kingdom . Henry was well organized and well organized throughout his reign .
 He had little sense of protocol, often rushing out of the Louvre palace by himself . But he often rushed out by himself as his guards scurried to catch up .
 The king of France was extremely slovenly, sometimes wearing torn or ragged clothes . In contrast to the portraits he encouraged depicting him as Hercules or Apollo, or arrayed in a splendid white plume and a warrior helmet .
 He became renowned for his physical vigor on the battlefield and gambled large sums, with a notorious lack of success . He was renowned for physical vigors and gambling .
 Marie de' Medici bore the constant burden of her husband’s various infidelities and occasional bouts of gonorrhea . Marie de’ Medici was the wife of the Medici, who died in 1903 .
 Henry produced six illegitimate children by three mistresses, along with the three bom to the queen . Henry also had three children by mistresses . Henry died at the age of 92 .
 Henry IV was a patron of new architectural projects that added to the beauty of the city of Paris and imprinted his rule upon it . Henry IV knew nothing of music or poetry, and regularly fell asleep at the theater, but was a fan of new architecture .
 He ordered the construction of four quays facilitating the docking of boats along the Seine River . The Place Dauphine is ringed by elegant buildings on the western end of the island of Cite, where his equestrian statue now stands .
 He orchestrated the construction of the Place Royale, with pavilions of symmetrical arcades, brick construction and steeply inclining roofs in the northern architectural style .
 The Place Dauphine was one of Henry IV’s grand architectural projects . Henry IV laid the foundations for what would become the strongest power in seventeenth century .
 His reign was an exercise in early modern European statemaking as he reimposed royal authority throughout the realm . The king's reign was a period of monarchial rulemaking .
 Henry IV made the monarchy more powerful by dispensing privilege, favors, and, above all, money with judiciousness that earned loyalty . Henry IV was a king who made it more powerful . He dispensed privileges, favors and money with a judiciously way of winning loyalty .
 The noble Estates assessed and collected taxes; in the latter, royal officials assumed these functions . In the past, the Estates collected taxes and assessed taxes .
 Provincial governors represented the interests of the monarchy in the face of the privileges and resistance to taxes maintained by the provincial parlements and Estates . Provincial governors were important to the monarchy .
 Conciliatory royal language began to disappear when it came to asking for money . The royal family has a history of speaking with the Queen .
 The governors strengthened the monarchy at the expense of towns that prided themselves on their ancient privileges, further eroding their fiscal independence . The governors weakened the monarch's authority in towns that had prided on ancient privileges .
 The royal privy council, some of whose members were chosen, strengthened the effectiveness of state administration and foreign relations . Sully was chosen from the ranks of lesser nobles known for their competence .
 The king personally oversaw this council, excluding troublesome nobles . King personally oversaw the council .
 Henry monitored the activities of his ambassadors and his court, whose 1,500 residents included the purveyors of perfume, of which he might have made greater use . Henry monitored his ambassador's activities and court .
 Sully was the son of a prosperous Protestant family whose great wealth had earned ennoblement . Sully's family was rich enough to ennoblele .
 He established budgets and systematic bookkeeping, which helped eliminate some needless expenses .
 The monarchy gradually began to pay off some international debts, including those owed to the English crown, and the Swiss cantons, whose good will Henry needed to counter Spanish influence in the Alps .
 Henry's debt repayments allowed him to contrast his honor in the realm of finances with that of the Spanish monarchy, whose bankruptcy declarations of bankruptcy left creditors grasping at air . Henry's repayment of debts was a contrast to that of Spain's bankruptcy .
 The nobles reaffirmed their own economic and social domination over their provinces . Meanwhile, the nobles were reaffirming their own social domination .
 Henry VIII restored the hierarchy of social orders based upon rank and privilege . Henry restored the social structure of social order .
 The ‘nobles of the robe’ were men who claimed noble status on the basis of high administrative and judicial office, for example, in the parlements . The “nobles were not a coherent or self-conscious group,” while not a . coherent or
 Henry strengthened the social hierarchy by bolstering established institutions, including the parlements, the treasury, the universities, and, ultimately, the Catholic Church . Henry was a strong supporter of established institutions such as parlements and the treasury .
 Henry also took an interest in encouraging French manufacturing, particularly silk and the production of tapestries . Henry also encouraged the French manufacturing of silk and silk .
 He encouraged investment in the construction of several canals linking navigable rivers . To promote internal trade, he encouraged investment .
 Two years later, the first two French Jesuit missionaries arrived in what became known as New France . The first two Jesuits arrived in New France in 17th Century France .
 On May 14, 1610, Henry’s carriage became ensnared in traffic in central Paris . Henry's carriage was caught in traffic on the way through traffic in Paris .
 A crazed monk named Francois Ravaillac jumped up to take revenge for the king’s protection of Protestants . When some of his guards dashed forward to try to clear the way, some of the guards darted forward .
 Henry’s sudden death left Marie de’ Medici, his widow, as regent for his young son, Louis XIII, who was eight years old at the time . Louis XIII and the Origins of Absolute Rule are discussed .
 Neither Philip Ill of Spain nor James 1 of England nor any of the princes of the German states were in a position to try to intervene in France on behalf of Huguenots or Catholics .
 Marie put aside Henry’s planned campaign against the Habsburgs and adopted a policy that considered Catholic powers to be friends . Marie considered Catholics to be ‘friends’ with the Catholic powers .
 The convocation of the Estates-General in 1614 accentuated the eagerness of noble rivals to gain influence with the young king .
 The king ordered the murder of one of his mother’s confidants . Louis then exiled his unpopular mother, hoping to restore calm . The king then exiled the unpopular mother . Louis was exiled his mother .
 When a group of nobles took this as occasion to raise the standard of revolt, the young king’s army defeated them at Ponts-de-Ce near Angers .
 The royal army then defeated a revolt by Huguenot nobles in the southwest and west . The royal forces then defeated the revolt in the west and south .
 Louis XI11 never really grew up. Emotionally, the stubborn and high-strung boy-king boy-kicks never grew up . Louis XI XI11: "Louis XI11" was born Louis XVI11 .
 Throughout his life, he demonstrated the psychological burdens of having been regularly whipped as punishment on his father’s orders . He demonstrated that he had psychological burdens .
 Louis XIH’s marriage to an Austrian princess began with a wedding-night fiasco . It led to a six-month period in which they did not even share a meal together . The couple were married for six months .
 After suffering several miscarriages, the queen produced an heir in 1638, but the royal couple was otherwise unhappy . The queen and her husband died in 1639, a year after their marriage .
 Louis XIII was intelligent and liked to sketch and listen to music, the latter calming him when he fell into a rage . Louis XIII liked sketching and listening to music to calm him down when he was angry .
 He enjoyed hunting and winning at chess, once hurling the offending pieces at the head of a courtier who had the bad grace to checkmate him . The courtier once threw the offending chess pieces .
 Among those executed were a number of nobles convicted of dueling . The king detested the practice because it represented to him the possibility that nobles could raise private armies against the throne . Among the executed were those convicted of the practice .
 Richelieu’s family, solidly entrenched in the west of France, had long served the monarchy in court, army, and church . The family had long been loyal to the French monarchy .
 The gaunt, clever Richelieu staked his future on and won the patronage of the queen mother . He won the title of France's first king in 1777 .
 President Obama perfected the art of political survival during the court struggles of the next few years . He perfected the . art of . the . court struggles .
 His foreign and domestic policies reflected his politique approach to both . His foreign policy reflected his approach to the French presidency .
 Richelieu divided France into thirty-two districts . He organized and extended the king’s authority .
 Officials called intendants governed each district, overseen by the king’s council . They were ultimately responsible to the king himself .
 In order to enhance the authority of the monarchy and the Church, Richelieu turned his attention to the Huguenots . The Huguensots were the first French monarch to become monarch .
 After forcing the surrender of insurgent Protestant forces at La Rochelle in 1628, he ordered the destruction of the Huguenot fortresses in the south and southwest, as well as the chateaux of other nobles whose loyalty he doubted .
 Louis XIII, influenced by Richelieu, reversed his mother’s pro-Spanish foreign policy during the Thirty Years' War . Louis XIII returned to the traditional French position of opposition to the Habsburgs .
 The dynastic rivalry between the two powers proved greater than the fact that both kings were Catholic . Both kings were Roman Catholics .
 Louis XIII joined England and the Dutch Republic against the powerful Catholic Austrian Habsburgs during the Thirty Years’ War . Louis XIII surprised and outraged the Spanish king by joining England and Dutch Republic .
 Richelieu’s successes, however, did not stand well with his resentful enemies within France . The French premier's successes were not well with some of his enemies within the country .
 His toleration of Huguenot worship drew the wrath of some Catholic nobles, as did continuing costly wars against the Catholic Habsburgs, which led to French subsidies to Protestant Sweden . Sweden's continued costly wars with the French led to subsidies to Protestants .
 Revolts occurred in Dijon and Aix, both seats of provincial parlements . Local notables resented having to bow to the authority of the royal officials .
 One of the most conservative Catholic nobles, a royal minister, briefly turned the king against Richelieu . The king's son was born in France in 1881 .
 Marie de' Medici, returned from brief disgrace, tried to convince her son to dismiss the cagey cardinal .
 Marie de’ Medici, Louis XIII, and Richelieu were at the center of the "Day of Dupes" Marie de' Medici was a high-stakes family shouting match between the Medici and the French king .
 Marie left thinking she had won the day, but awoke the next morning to find that the king had ordered her exile . Marie's exile was ordered by the king of the kingdom . Marie is believed to be the most famous woman in the world .
 After decades of religious wars and the assassination of Henry IV, the monarchy of France had nonetheless been greatly strengthened, building upon the accomplishments of his predecessor . Henry IV was a fragile, temperamental young monarch around whom plots swirled .
 Louis XII I s sometimes decisive and brutal actions enhanced the reputation of the king . He was known to many of his subjects as “The Just,” whether fitting or not .
 Louis XIII died of tuberculosis in 1643 at the age of fortv-two . Louis XIII was a hypochondriac whose health was even worse than he feared .
 Philippe de Champagne’s sad-cvcd portrait of the monarch had, with Richelieu, laid the foundations for absolute monarchical rule in France .
 In Central Europe, religious divisions and intolerance led to the Thirty Years’ War . The largely mercenary armies of Catholic and Protestant states laid waste to German states .
 Dynastic rivalries were never far from the stage, bringing the continental Great Powers into the fray . World's most famous battles were fought in the Middle Ages .
 Treaty of Westphalia established a territorial and religious settlement that lasted until the French Revolution . The treaty was signed in 17th century .
 The Holy Roman Empire was a loose confederation of approximately 1,000 German autonomous or semi-autonomous states . It was formed from around 1,200 German states .
 These states ranged in size from powerful Habsburg Austria to Hamburg, Lubeck, and other free cities in the north . Even smaller territories no more than a few square kilometers in size run by bishops .
 It would have been almost impossible for a traveler to determine where one state stopped and another began had it not been for the frequent toll stations . Toll stations provided revenue for each state, providing revenue .
 Geographic factors further complicated the political life of the German states . Germany's political history was complicated by the rise of independence .
 A few of the largest states included territories that were not contiguous . The U.S. has been home to many of the world's largest states .
 The Upper Palatinate lay squeezed between Bohemia and Bavaria . The Lower Palatine lay far away in the Rhineland . The Upper Palatinate was the most populous state of Germany .
 Since 1356, seven electors (four electoral princes and three archbishops) selected each new Holy Roman emperor . The seven electors were chosen by the Holy Roman Empire .
 The empire had a chancery to carry out foreign policy and negotiations with the various German princes . The empire s loose federal structure had a loose federal system .
 Only in confronting the threat of the Turks from the southeast did the German princes mount a consistent and relatively unified foreign policy . The German princes mounted a consistent foreign policy in the face of the Turkish threat .
 Other institutions of the Holy Roman Empire also reflected the political complexity of Central Europe .
 An imperial Diet brought princes, nobles, and representatives of the towns together when the emperor summoned them . The emperor summoned princes and nobles to the Diet when he summoned them to meet him .
 Imperial Court of Justice ruled on matters of importance to the empire . Imperial court of justice ruled on important matters of the Empire .
 The Holy Roman Empire, once the most powerful force in Europe, was weakened by its battles with the papacy in the thirteenth century . It had been weakened by the battles with papacy .
 The empire offered a balance between law and order and political independence . Empire offered a figure of authority to maintain law and independence of states .
 This formula, however, did not end religious rivalries or the demands of religious minorities that rulers tolerate their beliefs .
 It helped secularize the institutions of the Holy Roman emperor by recognizing the right of the German princes to determine the religion of their states . It also helped .
 Charles V was trying to establish an empire that would bring together all of the Habsburg territories in the German states, Spain, and the Netherlands . This also served to end the hope of Charles V to establish a united empire . Charles V died in 17th century .
 Rudolf II wanted to launch a religious crusade against Protestantism . The Origins of the Thirty Years' War . Rudolf wanted to fight Protestantism in Germany .
 He closed Lutheran churches in 1 578, reneging on an earlier promise to Bohemian nobles that he would tolerate the religion to which many had converted .
 Rudolfs imperial army, which had been fighting the Turks on and off since 1593, had annexed Transylvania . Rudolf's imperial army had fought the Turks in the area since then .
 Protestants rebelled in both places in 1605, when Rudolfs army undertook a campaign against the Turks in the Balkans . Protestant rebels rebelled against Rudolf's army in both locations .
 A Protestant army invaded Moravia, which lies east of Bohemia and north of Austria, close to the Habsburg capital of Vienna . Moravia was a Protestant stronghold in the region of Austria and close to Vienna .
 Emperor Rudolf, only marginally competent on his best days, lived as a recluse in his castle in Prague . Rudolf was subject to depression and later to fits of insanity .
 His family convinced his brother Matthias to act on Rudolfs behalf by making peace with the Hungarian and Transylvanian Protestants, and with the Turks . Rudolf's family made peace with Protestants and Turks .
 Matthias was recognized as head of the Habsburgs and Rudolfs heir . Matthias then recognized as heir to Rudolf's son Matthias .
 Most everyone seemed pleased with the peace except Rudolf, who concluded that the plague that was ravaging Bohemia was proof that God was displeased with the concessions he had granted Protestants .
 Matthias allied with the Protestant Hungarian noble Estates and marched against Rudolf, who surrendered . Rudolf was defeated by Matthias and Matthias . Matthias was the son of the Hungarian king of the Hestest .
 Rudolf ceded Hungary, Austria, and Moravia to Matthias in 1608, and Bohemia in 1611 . Matthias ceded Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia in 1609 .
 The decline in the effective authority of the Holy Roman emperor contributed to the end of a period of relative peace in the German states . The decline of the emperor contributed .
 In the last decades of the sixteenth century, these states had become increasingly quarrelsome and militarized . In the 16th century, they had become more quarrelsome, militarized.
 Rulers of some member states began to undermine imperial political institutions by refusing to accept rulings by the Imperial Supreme Court . Some monarchs even refused to attend convocations of the Diet .
 Catholic Reformation profited from acrimonious debates and even small wars between Lutherans and Calvinists . For a time, it was a time of acrimony between Calvinists and Lutherans . Now, it's a time to celebrate the end of the debate .
 Protestants put aside differences, however substantial, in the face of some Catholic rulers' determination to win back territories lost to Protestantism . But increasingly Protestant groups put aside their differences in face of continued determination to reclaim territories .
 The following year, Duke Maximilian of Bavaria sent troops to assure Catholic domination . The next year, the Bavarian state of Germany was ruled by the Catholic Church .
 This angered Calvinist princes in the region, as well as some Lutheran sovereigns . It angered Calvinists and Calvinists in the Middle Ages .
 Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II refused to increase Protestant representation in the Diet . The imperial Diet convoked two years later broke up in chaos when he refused .
 The political crisis now spread further when some of the German Catholic states sought Spanish intervention in a dispute over princely succession in the small northern Rhineland Catholic territories of Cleves-Jlilich . Henry IV of France threatened to invade the region, which Henry IV had threatened to
 In 1609, Catholic German princes organized a Catholic League, headed by Maximilian of Bavaria . The League was formed by the Catholic Germans in 1609 . It was the first of its kind in Germany .
 Six Protestant princes signed a defensive alliance, the Protestant Union, against the Catholic League . The Protestant Union was formed in response to the threat of a Catholic League in England .
 Matthias wanted to make the Catholic League an institution of Habsburg will . Matthias, who had been elected Holy Roman emperor in 1612, wanted to keep the league an institution .
 He also hoped to woo Lutherans from the Protestant Union, which was dominated by the Calvinists . He also wanted to woo the Lutherans .
 Matthias’s obsession with Habsburg dynastic ambitions, his history of having fought with the Protestant Dutch rebels against Spain, and his opportunistic toleration of Lutheranism cost him the confidence of some Catholic princes .
 Archduke Ferdinand, ruler of Inner Austria, waited in the wings to lead a Catholic crusade against Protestantism . Archduk Ferdinand was ruler of the Inner Austria until his death .
 Ferdinand inherited the throne of Hungary in 1617 and that of Bohemia the following year . He became Holy Roman emperor upon his uncle Matthias’s death in 1619 . Ferdinand inherited his uncle's throne in 1616 and inherited Bohemia in 1618 .
 Ferdinand was a pious man whose confessor convinced him that he could only save his soul by launching a war of religion . Ferdinand's confessor told him he had to launch a war on religion to save his life .
 Protestant resistance in Bohemia mobilized, seeking Protestant assistance from Transylvania and the Palatinate . In the meantime, Protestant resistance sought help from the Transylvia and the Palatinate.
 In Bohemia, Ferdinand imposed significant limitations on Protestant worship . Ferdinand's reign in Bohemia marked the end of the Protestant era .
 Calvinists and Lutherans began to look outside of Bohemia for potential support from Protestant princes . In Prague, Calvinists looked outside of Prague to find potential support for the Protestants .
 Protestant and Catholic armies clashed in battles that ranged back and forth across Europe . The Thirty Years’ War, 1618-1648, saw Protestant armies clash with Catholic armies in Europe .
 Following Defenestration of Prague in 1618, Protestant leaders established a provisional government in Bohemia . The government of Bohemia was established by Protestant leaders in 1619 .
 Catholic and Protestant forces began a destructive war that would last thirty years . It lay waste to many of the German states, and finally brought a religious and territorial settlement . The war would last for two centuries and bring a religious settlement .
 Bohemia rose in full revolt against not only the Church but the Habsburg dynasty as well . Bohemia was a major revolt against the Church and its dynasty . The revolt was the result of a revolt in Bohemia against the Catholic Church .
 Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II learned that Protestant rebels had refused to recognize his authority in Bohemia and had offered his throne to Frederick Frederick . Frederick offered the throne to Ferdinand II .
 Ferdinand was determined to drive Protestants out of his realm but lacking an army, he turned to outside help . Ferdinand turned to the help of an army of soldiers .
 The Catholic king of Spain agreed to send troops he could ill afford . The price of his intervention was the promise of the cession of the Rhineland state of the Lower Palatinate to Spain .
 The Catholic Maximilian 1 of Bavaria also sent an army, expecting to be rewarded for his trouble with the Upper Palatinate and with Frederick’s title of elector in the Holy Roman Empire .
 Protestant armies besieged Vienna, the Habsburg capital, until the arrival of Catholic armies in 1619 . Catholic armies arrived in Vienna in 1618 .
 The Dutch could not provide assistance to the Protestants, as they were fighting for independence from Spain .
 Several Protestant states also declined, fearing Catholic rebellions in their own lands . Several of the German Protestant states declined .
 The Bohemian crisis had reached the point of no return . Spanish armies and monies were already on the way . However, the internationalization of the crisis had already reached a critical point .
 In 1620 the Catholic League raised a largely Bavarian army of 30,000 troops . The Catholic League was raised by Bavarians in 1620 .
 Count from Flanders managed to subdue Upper Austria and then defeated the main Protestant Union army at the Battle of White Mountain, near Prague, in November . The depressed, indecisive count of Flanders won the battle in his first major battle .
 Tilly’s army then overran Silesia, Moravia, Austria, and part of the Upper Palatinate . With the Catholic forces now holding Bohemia, Tilly's army held Bohemia until the end of the war .
 The extent of the Catholic League's victory expanded the war, increasing the determination to crush all Protestant resistance . Protestant forces to resist at all costs .
 Frederick’s Protestant forces fought on, counting on help from France and other states who had reason to fear an expansion of Habsburg power in Central Europe . Frederick's Protestant forces were defeated by the French in 1883 .
 Frederick also hoped to convince James I of England that a victory of the Catholic League would threaten Protestantism . Frederick hoped to persuade James I that a Catholic League victory would threaten Protestants . Frederick also wanted James I to convince him of the threat posed by the League .
 In 1622, the Spanish army defeated Dutch forces at Jiilich in the Rhineland, eliminating any possibility of English armed assistance to Frederick through Holland .
 Frederick’s only effective force was a plundering mercenary horde in northeastern Germany . Frederick was forced to rely on his mercenary horde for the moment . Frederick's forces were only effective forces in Germany .
 Frederick was encouraged by the renewed possibility of English assistance after James’s plans for the marriage of his son to the Spanish princess fell through . Frederick turned north to Scandinavia for assistance after plans for his son's marriage fell through and the marriage was cancelled .
 The Danish Period Christian IV had ambition and money, but not a great deal of sense . Christian IV was the Protestant king of Denmark . He had ambition, money and ambition, but didn't make sense .
 The gambling, hard-drinking Dane wanted to extend his influence and perhaps even add territories in northern German states . Also duke of the northern German state of Holstein, he wanted to expand his influence in the region .
 Frederick’s difficulties seemed to offer the Danish sovereign the opportunity of a lifetime . Frederick's difficulties offered him the opportunity to become a Danish monarch .
 In 1625, he led his troops into the northern German states . He assumed that the English and the Dutch, and perhaps the French, would rush to follow him against the Habsburgs .
 King James I of England died and was succeeded by Charles I, whose provocative policies generated increasing opposition from Parliament . Charles I had little time to consider intervening on behalf of the Protestant cause on the continent .
 England and the Netherlands sent only some money and a few thousand soldiers to help the Danish king . The Danish king was defeated by the Danish army in 1777 .
 Louis XI11 of France was besieging Protestants at La Rochelle . He provided the Danes with only a modest subsidy to aid the fight against the Habsburgs .
 Christian was unaware of the approach of a large imperial army commanded by one of the most intriguing figures in the age of religious wars . Christian, essentially left to his own devices, was unaware that the approaching army was approaching .
 Albrecht Wallenstein was a Bohemian noble who, after marrying a wealthy widow, had risen to an even greater fortune as a supplier of armies . He was the son of a wealthy Bohemian aristocrat who died in 1881 .
 He converted to Catholicism at age twenty and became the most powerful of the Catholic generals . Raised a Lutheran, he converted to Catholic at age 20 . He was the son of a Germanic general .
 The fact that a convert could rise to such a powerful position again reveals how a religious war evolved into a dynastic struggle between the rulers of France, Spain, and Austria, as well as Sweden and Denmark . mercenary soldiers of fortune played a major part .
 Wallenstein, an ardent student of astrology, was ambitious and ruthless . Wallenstein was ambitious, ruthless, and possessed a violent temper . He was a passionate astrologist who was an ardent admirer .
 Because he detested the sound of barking or meowing, he sometimes ordered all dogs and cats killed upon arriving in a town . He forbade the townspeople and his soldiers from wearing heavy boots or spurs or anything else that would make noise .
 He alternated between extreme generosity and horrible cruelty, and was always accompanied by an executioner awaiting his master’s command . ‘He alternated . between extreme . generosity and terrible cruelty,’ he said .
 Wallenstein was entrusted by Ferdinand with raising and commanding an army drawn from states for the Catholic cause . Wallenstein's army marched north with 30,000 men. Wallenstein commanded the army .
 Wallenstein's successes engendered nervous opposition within the Catholic states . Wallenstein’s successes engender nervous opposition in the Catholic States . But Wallenstein was able to reach the heights of the modern world .
 His troops devastated the lands of friend and foe alike, extracting money and food, plundering, and selling military leadership positions to any buyer, including criminals . Furthermore, his troops also plundered the lands and sold military positions to criminals .
 Christian, who had bankrupted his kingdom during this ill-fated excursion, signed the Treaty of Liibeck in 1629, whereby he withdrew' from the w'ar and gave up his claims in northern Germany . Christian's kingdom was bankrupted by the treaty .
 The treaty was less draconian than it might have been because of the seemingly endless war was wearing heavily on some of the Catholic German states . The treaty signed in 1866 was the result of a treaty between Germany and Italy .
 They feared an expansion of Habsburg power, and some of them did not want to add Protestants to their domains . Some of the Habsabsburgs feared a Protestant expansion of power .
 Ferdinand II implemented measures without convoking the imperial Diet . Ferdinand II now implemented measures against Protestants without convoked the imperial diet .
 He expelled from Bohemia Calvinist and Lutheran ministers and . nobles who refused to convert to Catholicism . He ennobled new men, including foreigners, as a means of assuring Catholic domination .
 He confiscated the property of nobles suspected of participating in any phase of the Protestant rebellion .
 Frederick’s electorship now transferred to Maximilian I of Bavaria, the Habsburgs could count on the fact that a majority of the electors were Catholic princes . Frederick's electorship has now been transferred to the Bavaria .
 Captured Habsburg dispatches in 1628 made clear that Ferdinand sought to destroy the freedom of the Protestant German cities of the Hanseatic League in the north in the interest of expanding the Habsenburg domains . Captured dispatches from 1628 show that Ferdinand wanted to destroy
 Ferdinand found that it was not easy to impose Catholicism in territories where it had not been practiced for decades . Ferdinand found it difficult to impose Catholicism in areas that had not seen it in decades .
 In the Upper Palatinate, the first priests who came to celebrate Mass there were unable to find a chalice . The first priests in the region had to come to find it .
 Italian priests brought to Upper Austria could not be understood by their parishioners . They were brought to Austria by Italian priests who were not understood .
 The Edict of Restitution allowed Lutherans to practice their religion in certain cities, but ordered them to return to the Catholic Church . The edict was signed by signatories of the Peace of Augsburg in 1552, when signatories gathered .
 The Edict of Restitution also gave rulers the right to enforce the practice of their religion in their territories . The war went on because of the Edict .
 England, the Dutch Republic, the northern German state of Brandenburg, and the Palatinate asked the Lutheran king Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden to intervene on the Protestant side . The Swedish Interlude was the Swedish king's intervention .
 Gustavus, the “Lion of the North,"" survived a shipwreck at the age of five, had been tutored in the art of war by mercenary soldiers . Gustavus was tutored by mercenaries during his time in the North .
 He also played the flute, composed poetry, and conversed in ten languages . He also composed poetry and composed poetry .
 Gustavus retained, as did a disproportionate number of rulers in his century, a violent temper . Gustavus Gustavus was known for his violent temper as a ruler .
 Once, coming upon two stolen cows outside an officer's tent, he dragged the thief by the ear to the executioner . The thief dragged the stolen cows by the eye to an executioner's hand .
 His courage was legendary—he barely paused as cannonballs exploded nearby and as his horses were shot out of under him or fell through the ice . His bravery was legendary, and he barely paused to protect his horses .
 Gustavus formed his battle lines thinner—about six men deep—than those of rival commanders . Gustavus, influenced by an appreciation of Roman military tactics, formed a thinner battle line than those of his rivals .
 Gustavus organized his army into brigades of four squadrons with nine cannon to protect them, sending the unit into battle in an arrow-shaped formation . Gustavus' army was divided into four brigades, with nine cannons protecting them .
 Superior artillery served his cause well, hurling larger shot farther and more accurately than the cannon of his enemies . Superior artillery hurries larger shot .
 The dashing young Swedish king subdued Catholic Poland with his army of about 70,000 men . Swedish king captured Catholic Poland in 16th century .
 Swedish intervention and the continuing woes of Spain, now at war in the Alps, Italy, and the Netherlands, gave Protestants reason for hope .
 Swedish troops occupied Pomerania along the Baltic Sea in 1629 . Swedish troops defeated a combined Polish and Habsburg army in 1628 . Swedish forces occupied the area along the Baltic Sea in 1630 .
 Emperor Ferdinand convoked the imperial electors to recognize his son as his heir . Emperor Ferdinand declared his son to be the heir to the throne .
 Protestant electors of Saxony and Brandenburg refused even to attend the gathering . Protestant electors in both states refused to attend even to the event .
 Catholic electors demanded that the powerful Wallenstein be dismissed . Even the king of Spain feared the general's powerful ragtag army .
 Ferdinand dismissed the one man whose accomplishments and influence might have enabled the Habsburg monarchy to master all of the German states . Ferdinand thereby dismissed the man who might have been able to master Germany .
 Gustavus Adolphus enjoyed the support of only a few tiny Protestant states . Gustavus had a sizable subsidy from the king of France, but only a handful of Protestant states supported him .
 Some Lutheran German states hoped to receive territorial concessions from the Habsburgs . Some Lutheran states still hoped to get territorial concessions .
 The Catholic dynasty preferred Lutherans to Calvinists, viewing the latter as more radical reformers . Catholic dynasty favored Lutherans over Calvinists .
 He besieged Protestant city of Magdeburg in Brandenburg, forcing its surrender in 1631 . He besieged the Protestant city, forcing it surrender .
 The subsequent massacre of the population and accompanying pillage had an effect similar to that of the Defenestration of Prague . The story of the atrocities spread across Protestant Europe . The massacre had a similar effect on Protestant Europe, spreading across Europe .
 The combined Protestant forces under Gustavus Adolphus defeated Tilly's imperial Catholic army at Breitenfeld near Leipzig, Germany . Gustavus Adolphus Gustustanus gustustus and Tilly defeated .
 The Swedish army, swollen by German mercenaries, then marched through the northern German states, easily reversing Habsburg gains over the previous twelve years . Swedish army then marched into northern Germany states .
 The expansion of Swedish power generated anxiety among both Protestant and Catholic states, including France . Louis XIII had helped finance Gustavus Adolphus . Louis XI had helped fund Gustavus Adolphus.
 In Bavaria, the Swedes defeated Tilly, who was killed in battle in 1632 . Tilly died in Bavaria in 1631 .
 Spain, its interests spread too far afield in Europe and the Americas, could not then afford to help . Spain, which has interests in the Americas and Europe, would not then be able to help.
 The plague prevented another Catholic army from being raised in Italy . Even the pope begged off a request for help by complaining the eruption of Mount Vesuvius was preventing the collection of taxes .
 In April 1632, Ferdinand turned once again to Wallenstein to save the Catholic cause . Ferdinand agreed to raise a new imperial army in return for almost unlimited authority over it .
 Gustavus led the largest army that had ever been under a single command in Europe . Gustavus was led by Gustavus, Gustavus's largest army .
 Gustavus Gustavus attacked Wallenstein in the fog at Liitzen in Saxony in November 1632 . Gustavus took a chance by attacking Wallenstein during the fog in November . The Swedish army should dig in for the winter of 1632, Gustavus said .
 The two sides fought to a bloody draw, but a draw amounted to a Catholic victory . The result was a bloody victory for the Catholic church .
 His new army was now living off the land in Central Europe, engendering peasant resistance . The new army of peasants was now being used to fight back against the government .
 Wallenstein demanded command of a Spanish army that had subsequently arrived to help the Catholic forces . Furthermore, Wallenstein, who was ill, demanded command .
 Wallenstein considered joining Gustavus after the Battle of Breitenfeld in 1631 . Wallenstein was offering his services to both France and the German Protestants .
 In February 1634, an Irish mercenary crept into Wallenstein's room, and killed him with a spear . Wallenstein died in 1634 from a wound wound in the head .
 The Spanish army defeated the combined Swedish and German Protestant army in 1634 in Swabia . With the aid of the remnants of Wallenstein’s forces, the Spanish army won the battle . Wallenstein's forces were defeated .
 The elector of Saxony abandoned the Protestant struggle, making peace in 1635 with Ferdinand Ferdinand . Ferdinand made peace with the Electorate of Saxon .
 The Thirty Years’ War was certainly one of the crudest episodes in the history of warfare .
 1 can’t say much about the captured wives, hired girls, and daughters because the soldiers did not let me watch their doings . They put one of the captured bumpkins in the bakeoven and lighted a fire in it .
 Several factors may have contributed to the barbarity of soldiers during the Thirty Years’ War .
 Soldiers pillaging a farmhouse during the Thirty Years’ War . Some tortured the farmer over his hearth while others rape the women and steal the food . Mercenaries and volunteers were usually fighting far .
 Strident propaganda against other religions may have contributed to the brutality . Strident anti-Muslim propaganda may have been a factor .
 Gustavus Adolphus and other leaders imposed harsh penalties, including execution, for atrocities . Not wanting to so frighten the local population that ordinary channels of provisioning the army would disappear, he feared ordinary channels would disappear .
 At least 50,000 soldiers died between 1621 and 1632 from battle wounds and, more often, disease . Even Sweden, where there was no fighting, felt the impact of the death of at least half a million soldiers .
 Few soldiers died in battle, but relatively few succumbed to illness and to civilians who died at the hands of marauding troops . Yet, considering the number of troops engaged in the long war, relatively few soldiers perished .
 Armies rampaged through the German states, Catholic and Protestant, speaking many languages, taking what they wanted, burning and looting . Armies took over Germany in the early 1900s, burning, looting and burning, taking over .
 The armies themselves remained ragtag forces, lacking discipline and accompanied by, some cases, the families of soldiers . The armies were often accompanied by families .
 The presence of large numbers of women and children as camp followers may have contributed to the length of the war . Life in the army seems more normal for soldiers, making life seem more normal .
 Some had leather clothes, carried rain cloaks against the damp German climate, and wore felt hats . Others had felt hats, leather clothes and leather clothes .
 Some Habsburg troops sported uniforms of pale gray, at least at the beginning of a campaign . The Habsabsburg army wore pale gray uniforms .
 As the months passed and uniforms disintegrated, soldiers were forced to disrobe the dead, friend and foe alike, or to steal from civilians . The dead and enemy alike were disrobed by soldiers, friends and enemies .
 The imperial forces placed red symbols in their hats, plumes, or sashes if they could find them . Red symbols were placed in the imperial forces' hats and plumes if they found them .
 The Habsburg army included Saxons, Bavarians, Westphalians, and Austrians . Maximilian’s Bavarian army counted various other Germans, Italians, Poles, Slovenes, Croats, Greeks, Hungarians, Burgundians, French, Czechs
 Some soldiers may have joined regiments because they were searching for adventure . Others joined out of religious conviction . Some soldiers joined because of adventure or religious conviction.
 Many soldiers fought against armies of their own religion, changing sides when a better opportunity arose . Yet a multitude of soldiers fought for the better side of their religion .
 Army recruiters gave religion not the slightest thought in their search for soldiers to fill quotas for which they were being handsomely paid . Recruiters were being paid handsomely for their quotas .
 Recruits on both sides were attracted by the possibility that they would be better clothed and fed than they were when they joined up . Recruits were attracted to the U.S. by the prospect of better food and clothing .
 Richelieu hoped to force Habsburg armies away from the borders of France . Richelie hoped to stop Habsberg armies from entering the borders .
 He took as a pretext the Spanish arrest of the elector of Trier . The elector was arrested in Trier, a French ally of the Spanish king . The arrest was a pretext for the arrest of an ally .
 Alliances with the Dutch Republic and Sweden had prepared the way, as did reassurances given by neighboring Savoy and Lorraine .
 French incursions into the Netherlands and the southern German states did not go well . The French incursion into the Dutch and German states went well in the early years .
 Louis XIIFs army was short on capable commanders and battle-experienced troops, largely because France was already fighting in Italy, the Pyrenees, and the northern German states . Louis XIFs army had already fought in Italy and the Pyrees .
 Frances Frances' involvement, like that of Sweden before it, did provide the Protestant states with some breathing room . But Frances involvement did not provide enough breathing room for Protestants .
 French forces helped defeat the imperial army in Saxony . French forces joined the Swedish army in the battle .
 When the pope called for representatives of the Catholic and Protestant states to assemble in Cologne for a peace congress in 1636, no one showed up . The pope called on representatives of both sides to meet in Cologne .
 A combined French and Swedish force defeated the Habsburg army four years later . Four years later, another combined French, Swedish and French forces defeated the French and Austrian army .
 Spanish defeats in northern France in 1643, as well as in the Netherlands and the Pyrenees, left the Habsburgs with no choice but to make peace .
 At the same time, unrest in France, including plots against Richelieu, and the English Civil War, began in 1642, warned other rulers of the dangers that continued instability could bring .
 Swedish population was tiring of distant battles that brought home nothing but news of casualties . The Swedish people was tired of seeing casualties from distant battles . Swedish soldiers were tired of returning to distant battles with casualties .
 Louis XIII wanted the war to go on, at the expense of the Austrian Habsburgs . Among the rulers of the great powers, only Louis XIII . Louis XIII was the only monarch who wanted the conflict to continue .
 He helped subsidize an invasion of Hungary by Transylvanian Protestants in 1644 . He also subsidized a 1644 invasion by the Protestants in Hungary .
 As Swedish and Transylvanian forces prepared to besiege the imperial capital of Vienna, Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand III concluded a peace treaty with the prince of Transylvania, promising to tolerate Protestantism .
 Ferdinand III offered amnesty to princes within the empire who had fought against him . After Habsburg armies suffered further defeats in 1645, Ferdinand III realized that he had to make peace .
 The preliminaries for a general peace agreement had begun in 1643 and dragged on even as a Franco-Swedish army drove the imperial army out of the Rhineland and Bavaria in 1647 .
 The Treaty of Westphalia was unlike any previous peace settlement between two or three states . It was unlike previous peace settlements, which had invariably been between two and three states, rarely more . The Treaty was unlike many previous peace deals between states and nations .
 Its framers believed that they could restore international stability and diplomatic process in a Europe torn by anarchy by eliminating religious divisions as a cause of conflict . The framers of the Constitution believe that religious divisions should be eliminated .
 The treaty proved almost as complicated as the Thirty Years’ War itself . The treaty was signed in 17th century and lasted for more than a century .
 Thousands of diplomats and other officials shuttled back and forth between two towns . Thousands of people are still in the United States .
 Letters took ten to twelve days to reach the courts of Paris and Vienna, and at least twenty to Stockholm, and a month to arrive in Madrid . Letters took between ten to 12 days and 12 weeks to reach courts in Paris, Vienna, Stockholm and Madrid .
 In the meantime, the French tried to delay any treaty, hoping to force Spain to surrender . In the meanwhile, the Spanish army refused to accept the Treaty of Spain .
 In the summer of 1648, the Swedes reoccupied Bohemia, hoping to win a larger indemnity and toleration for the Lutherans . The Lutherans were the last Lutherans to live in Bohemia .
 The Spanish Army of Flanders fought against France in a last-ditch effort to help Ferdinand 111 . By the separate Treaty of Munster, Spain formally recognized the fait accompli of Dutch independence, Spain finally recognized it .
 In August 1648, the French defeated a Spanish force a month after the Swedes had captured part of Prague . The French defeated the Spanish forces a month earlier .
 Ferdinand signed the peace treaty, finally concluded on October 24, 1648 . The treaty was signed by Ferdinand Ferdinand in 1648, and Ferdinand signed it .
 The Treaty of Westphalia redrew the map of Europe confirming the existence of the Dutch United Provinces and Switzerland . The treaty redrewed Europe's map of the continent . The Treaty was signed in 1783 .
 The treaty did not end the war between Spain and France, but it did end the wars of the German states . In doing so it put an end to one of the most brutal, ghastly periods in European history .
 France annexed the frontier towns of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and parts of Alsace . France annexed parts of France by an agreement signed two years earlier, two years later .
 Maximilian 1 of Bavaria kept the Upper Palatinate, and therefore the status of an elector . He was the first Bavarian monarch to hold the title of elector .
 Frederick's Protestant son ended up with the Lower, or Rhine Palatinate . Frederick’s Protestant son was born in Germany .
 With this addition of an elector, eight votes would now be necessary to elect the Holy Roman emperor . Eight votes would be needed to elect an emperor, with eight more votes needed .
 The territorial settlement reached in Westphalia remained in place until the French Revolution of 1789 . With minor exceptions, the territorial settlement was only made after the French revolution .
 For the most part, the treaty ended wars of religion in early modern Europe . The treaty ended religious wars in Europe .
 It was rewarding those who had worked for and advocated religious toleration, or suffered intolerance and repression, during the long, bloody conflicts . It encouraged religious tolerance, finally rewarding those people who had . worked for or advocated religious . toleration .
 The philosopher Baruch Spinoza (1632— 1677), who had been forced to flee intolerance in Portugal, wrote: “As for rebellions which are aroused under the pretext of religion ... opinions are regarded as wicked and condemned .”
 The treaty ended the Thirty Years’War. Europe after the Treaty of Westphalia, 1648 . The treaty was signed in 1648.
 The Treaty of Westphalia reinforced the strong autonomous traditions of the German states . Germany emerged from the long nightmare of war with more independence from the weakened Holy Roman Empire .
 Member states could carry out their own foreign policy, though they could not form alliances against the empire . Member states were able to form alliances with each other against empire .
 The Habsburg dynasty’s dream of forging a centralized empire of states fully obedient to the emperors will had failed . The dream had failed to be realized and the Habsabsburg empire failed .
 Bohemian Protestant landowners recovered neither their lands nor religious freedom . Bohemian Protestants lost both lands and religious freedom in Bohemia .
 By the Treaty of Westphalia, German Calvinists gained the same rights as those previously granted to Lutherans . The Treaty was signed in 17th Century Germany . The treaty was signed by the Pope in 18th Century Europe .
 The settlement granted religious toleration where it had existed in 1624 . It was granted religious tolerance where it was first granted by the settlement .
 The Peace of Augsburg confirmed the establishment of territorial churches . It also confirmed that territorial churches were still to be determined by the religion of the ruler .
 Dissident groups were often forbidden, and their followers were persecuted . Dissidents were often banned, and followers of them were persecuted. Dissidents are often forbidden in the Soviet Union .
 Lutheranism remained dominant in the northern half of the Holy Roman Empire . Catholicism in the southern half, with Calvinists in the Rhineland . Calvinists also dominated the northern part of the empire .
 Catholic Mainz, occupied by the Swedes, lost 25 percent of its buildings and 40 percent its population . Mainz was occupied by Sweden in the early 1950s . The city is now home to a population of about 40 percent .
 In four years, the predominantly Protestant duchy of Wiirttemberg lost three-quarters of its population while occupied by imperial troops . The majority of the population was Protestant, but the majority was Protestant .
 Almost 90 percent of the farms of Mecklenburg were abandoned during the course of the war . The area was devastated by the Second World War, with the loss of millions of millions .
 German cities lost a third of their population during the Thirty Years’ War . The rural population declined by 40 percent during the war .
 Central Europe, like the rest of the continent, may have already been suffering from the economic and social crisis that had begun in the 1 590s . Central Europe may already be suffering from an economic crisis that began in the 1990s .
 The population of the Holy Roman Empire fell from about 20 million to 16 million people . But the wars contributed to the huge decline of the population . The population fell from 20 million people to about 16 million in the late Roman Empire .
 Towns were clogged with starving, vulnerable refugees from the fighting and marauding . Towns were also clogged by starving, hungry refugees . Towns have been clogged up with starving refugees .
 It would be decades before the German states recovered from the Thirty Years' War . The Thirty Years’ War ended in 16th century Germany .
 Much of the religious settlement of the Treaty of Westphalia would endure, but dynastic rivalries still raged . Although much of the treaty was religious settlement, dynastic rivals still fought .
 France had emerged from its religious wars with a stronger monarchy . Louis XIII had made his state more centralized and powerful. Louis XIII was made more centralized .
 France s rivals, too, would extend their authority within their own states . France's rivals would extend authority within themselves states .
 In the mid-seventeenth century, Europe would enter the era of monarchical absolutism .
 The most powerful European states, above all, would enter a period of aggressive territorial expansion . Louis XIV s France was one of the most powerful states in Europe .
 Dynastic wars would help shape the European experience from the mid-seventeenth century to the French Revolution of 1789 . The French Revolution was the result of a series of wars between France and England .
 Discovery and then colonization of the Americas contributed greatly to the development of the Atlantic economy . Spain and England began their rivalry across the Atlantic Ocean in 17th century .
 English victory over Spanish Armada symbolizes shift in power from southern to northern Europe . Armada in 1588 symbolized shift in Spain's power in northern Europe, even if Spain was stronger .
 England and the Dutch Republic maintained representative governments in the seventeenth century . The Dutch Republic and England maintained their representative governments .
 The English Civil War led to the defeat and execution of the king in 1649, the fall of the monarchy, and in 1688, the “Glorious Revolution” The revolution affirmed the civil liberties of the English people and the rights of Parliament .
 The largely Protestant Netherlands earned its independence after a protracted struggle against Catholic Spain . The prosperous merchants retained a republican form of government and helped generate the golden age .
 Many European rulers relentlessly extended their power between 1650 and 1750, becoming absolute rulers . In contrast, many European rulers continued to extend their power .
 In principle, they were above all challenge from within the state itself, affecting the lives of more people than ever before through taxation, military service, and the royal quest for religious orthodoxy as Europe entered the era of absolutism . In principle they were . affecting the . lives of
 Protestant England went to war with Catholic Spain in 1585 . In 1585, Protestant England and Catholic Spain fought in Spain .
 The English fleet attacked King Philip IPs Armada along the English coast on August 7 . The Armada was the first to attack King Philip's fleet .
 After the Armada anchored near Calais, the English sent ships set on fire against the Spanish Armada, which caused the Spanish ships to break their tight tactical formation . The English set fire to the ships, causing them to break formation .
 The English pinned the Spanish ships against the shore, and destroyed six of them, in the longest and most intense naval artillery battle . The battle was so intense that sailors could hurl insults at each other at close range .
 Superior English cannon, shot, and gunners took a toll on the Armada . The Armada was defeated by the Spanish Armada in 1777 .
 The captain of one Spanish ship that had failed to answer the flagship s call for help was hanged from a yardarm . His body was hauled from ship to ship to reestablish discipline .
 The English ships failed to follow up their advantage, however, letting the Spanish galleons escape . The Spanish ships were able to defeat the English ships .
 The rough winds of the Channel carried the Spanish ships away from the dangerous Flemish shoals toward the North Sea and then on a long voyage up to the Orkney and Shetland Islands .
 More than thirty Spanish ships sank in gales off the western coasts of Scotland and Ireland . More than 30 Spanish ships were sunk by the gales .
 Spanish Armada off Calais in the English Channel in 1588 . English and Spanish vessels attacked each other off the coast of Spain .
 At least a third had sunk or wrecked, and many others had been severely damaged . At least one third of the ships had been sunk or damaged .
 Victory over the Spanish Armada accentuated England's rise to international dominance . Victory over Spain accentuated the country's rise in international dominance.
 English armies crushed an Irish rebellion in 1603, ending fears of an effective Irish alliance with Catholic Spain . English armies then crushed the Irish rebellion ending fears .
 Despite the defeat of the Spanish Armada, Philip did not make peace with England, and the war between the two nations dragged on until 1604 .
 The rise of Spain, England, and the Netherlands must be seen in the context of the sixteenth-century expansion of the European economy . Spain, the Netherlands, Spain and England were among the most successful economies in Europe .
 European population had begun to recover slowly from the Black Death, the disastrous plague that had swept the continent a century earlier . By 1450, Europe had recovered slowly from a century-long plague .
 The European population of the Turkish Ottoman Empire remained extremely sparse, about half that of France and Italy in 1600 . But the Mediterranean region, too, suffered population decline, too .
 During the sixteenth century, the commercial and manufacturing center of Europe shifted from the Mediterranean to northwestern Europe . During the 16th century, Europe's commercial and . manufacturing center shifted from . Mediterranean to northwest Europe .
 By 1700, Venice had failed to adapt to the global economy that was expanding across the Atlantic Ocean to the Americas . Venice, alone among the Italian city-states, had managed to retain significant trade links with Asia .
 Spain, France, England, and the Dutch United Provinces emerged as burgeoning colonial powers in the late sixteenth century . Spain developed trade routes to Asia and gradually establishing empires .
 Spain's preeminence did not survive the end of the seventeenth-century economic crisis . Spain's economic crisis was the result of a political crisis in Spain .
 Its merchants lacked the flexibility shown by the English and Dutch to adjust to the varying demand for colonial products and create new trading opportunities .
 Amsterdam and London merchants expanded trade by using innovative commercial techniques . Seville merchants in the Spanish city of Seville used innovative techniques to expand trade .
 Spanish merchants proved less able than their northern rivals to lower costs of transportation from the New World . Spanish merchants failed to lower the costs of transporting them to the Americas .
 English textile merchants found new markets in Spain and the Mediterranean for their cloth . In contrast, English merchants found .
 Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can produce enough additional food to feed more people . Populations need to grow in rural areas to meet their needs . Rural economies must produce enough food to meet the needs of the rural population .
 Dutch reclamation of land from the sea in the Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries provides the most spectacular example of the expansion of farm land . The Dutch reclaimed more than 36,000 acres between 1590 and 1615 alone .
 Modest agricultural progress was, however, limited to Western Europe, in villages with access to urban merchants, markets, and trade routes . Agricultural progress in Western Europe was limited to villages with urban merchants and markets .
 Serfs labored to produce enough grain to feed the population and to generate a surplus that their lords could sell to Western European traders . In Russia and Eastern Europe, hundreds of thousands of serfs were legally bound to the land . Serfs were able to grow enough grain in Russia and
 Population growth generated an expansion of small-scale manufacturing, particularly handicrafts, textiles, and metallurgy in England, Flanders, Italy, parts of northern Italy, southwestern Germany, and Spain .
 Only iron smelting and mining required marshaling a significant amount of capital . Only iron mining and iron mining required significant capital to invest in .
 Woolens and textile manufacturers, in particular, utilized rural cottage production . The cottage production took advantage of cheap and plentiful rural labor . Woolens, textile manufacturers used cottage production to make products .
 Members of poor peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at home for scant remuneration in an attempt to supplement meager family income .
 Extended trading networks developed the European economy . Spain and England expanded trading networks in the early 1900s .
 Improved banking and other financial services contributed to the expansion of trade . Improved banking led to the growth of trade in China .
 By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver .
 Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes that could be sold to third parties, and in this way they provided credit . The bills of exchange are now known as Bills of Exchange .
 Merchants no longer had to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys, nor did they have to identify and assess the approximate value of a variety of coins issued by mints here and there . Merchants now no longer have to assess the value of coins .
 An Amsterdam merchant purchasing soap from a counterpart in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay him the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency .
 The exchanger would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing him to pay the Marseille merchant in his own currency after the actual exchange of goods had taken place . The exchange took place between Marseille and Marseille .
 Bills of exchange contributed to the development of banking, as exchangers began to provide loans, profiting from the interest attached to them . Exchanges began providing loans to people who exchanged bills of exchange .
 The rapid expansion in international trade increased the role of merchant capitalists, particularly in northern Europe, in the emerging global economy .
 The infusion of capital stemmed largely from gold and silver brought by The money changer’s office . Money changer's office brought in gold, silver from the bank .
 This capital financed the production of goods, storage, trade, and even credit across Europe and overseas . This capital was used to finance the production, storage and trade across Europe .
 Joint-stock companies provided capital by drawing on the investments of merchants and other investors who purchased shares in the company . Unlike short-term financial cooperation between investors for a single commercial undertaking, joint-stock firms provided capital . Joint stock companies provide capital through their joint stock investments .
 Amsterdam and then London emerged as the banking and trading centers of Europe . Amsterdam and London emerged in the 1950s as the banks and trading hubs in Europe .
 Merchant towns in Castile, Catalonia, Italy, Holland, and England, as well as the Hanseatic cities of northern Germany, each had their own merchant dynasties . Each merchant town had a merchant dynasty .
 Trade with the Americas and Asia provided new outlets for European goods . Trade with Asia and the Americas provided new outlet for European trade . European trade is a key part of the European economy .
 It also brought from the New World products such as tomatoes, corn, bell peppers, rum, and spices to those who could afford them .
 The construction of larger ships, weighing as much as eighty tons, would not be surpassed until the middle of the nineteenth century, facilitated oceangoing trade . Ship sizes were built in the early 1800s to facilitate trade .
 From seaports, trade followed the major rivers from the Rhine to the Mediterranean . The Rhine flows from Switzerland to the North Sea; the Danube flows from Central Europe to the Black Sea . The Seine links Paris to the English Channel; the Rhone carries boat traffic
 The Scheldt River estuary led from the North Sea to Antwerp, which already had a population of more than 100,000 people . The city is now the most important trading hub in the world, with more than a million people .
 There, vast quantities of English and Flemish goods and colonial products were traded for goods from the German and Italian states .
 Land trade routes also remained important—for example, the route from Marseille to northern France and the Netherlands, that from Valencia on the Mediterranean to Madrid and Toledo in the heart of Castile .
 Specially chartered East Indian trading companies helped mobilize investment capital in England and the Netherlands . They enjoyed monopolies issued to them by each state, set out to make money .
 Trade companies represented the interests of the state . Although officially independent of each government, trade companies represented state interests .
 colonial trade played a major role in the development of the national economy . England's manufactured goods increasingly found markets in its developing settlement colonies in North America .
 Overseas trading remained a risky business, however; storms, wars, and pirates all posed considerable risks . Spain and England remained a major source of commerce in Europe .
 England, Spain, Portugal, and France spent fortunes maintaining fortresses and trading ports in colonies and along trading routes .
 Funds available to finance global treks could quickly disappear in times of political crisis or international conflict . European markets for European goods, never very certain, could quickly dry up . The funds available to fund global trips could also disappear during political crises .
 The first English company to receive royal authorization for a monopoly on colonial trade was called the London Merchant Adventurers . The company received royal authorization from the Queen for monopoly .
 Spanish kings were notorious for declaring bankruptcy and repudiating all debts . They borrowed money from wealthy subjects based on the expectation—sometimes in vain—of the arrival of valued colonial goods .
 The major European powers had only limited means of exerting authority over their merchants and other subjects in distant places . They had to exert authority over merchants, other subjects, in order to protect them .
 Trading strategies followed negotiations and, often, angry confrontations between royal officials and aggressive trading lobbies . Trading strategies were often followed negotiations .
 Early attempts to establish full-fledged colonies in Asia and Africa discouraged early attempts . This, in addition to the daunting problems of distance, was also discouraged .
 Life not only dangerous but often short, particularly in tropical climates . Diseases indigenous to regions to which Europeans traveled as well as those they carried with them made life dangerous . The diseases indigenous to Europe made life long and dangerous .
 The rise in population and the economic boom of the sixteenth century brought a considerable rise in prices, particularly during the last few decades of the century . Price Revolution and Depression led to the price revolution and the depression of the 1930s .
 A pound of mutton now costs as much as a whole sheep used to, says one Spaniard . A whole sheep now costs a pound more than a pound of meat .
 Prices rose dramatically even before the arrival of silver from Latin America . The silver was a cause of continued inflation during the second half of the century . Prices rose significantly even before arrival of the silver .
 Cost of living far outdistanced wage increases as real income fell for ordinary people . The cost of living has far outstripped wage increases in the United States .
 Among those who suffered were small landholders in England, relatively poor nobles in France and Italy whose tenants had long-term leases, and landless laborers in city and country alike .
 Those affected adversely by the price revolution were quick to blame rapacious landlords, greedy merchants, hoarders of grain, selfish masters in the crafts, usurers, and the spirit of acquisition engendered, some believed .
 Long-term causes included the infusion of gold and particularly silver brought principally by the Spanish from the Americas . Currency debasement undertaken by monarchs to help finance wars, and population increase itself .
 A long depression followed the economic expansion of the sixteenth century . The depression followed a long period of economic prosperity .
 Spaniards had begun to exhaust the gold and silver mines of Latin America, disrupting the money supply . Furthermore, Spaniards began to exhausts the gold, silver mines in Latin America . The money supply had been disrupted by the Spaniards .
 A leveling off of the population probably compounded the saturation of European markets . Europe's population has peaked in recent years, but the population is now in a steady decline .
 Urban growth slowed, and many of Europe’s old ecclesiastical, administrative, and commercial centers stagnated . Urban growth slows in Europe's ecclesiastical and administrative centers .
 Amsterdam, Hamburg, and Liverpool grew with the expansion of the Atlantic trading system . In sharp contrast, ports such as Amsterdam and Hamburg grew in sharp contrast .
 Castile was by far the larger and wealthier; its vast stretch of mountainous land across much of the center of the Iberian Peninsula contained a population of about six million . Castile is now the largest and wealthier state in Spain .
 Spain and England people, five-sixths of the population of Spain as a whole, are Spanish and English . Spain and English people make up 5% of Spain's population .
 Aragon prospered during the Middle Ages because of its flourishing Mediterranean trade . Aragon, lying in northern Spain, had prospeered during its Middle Ages .
 Portugal was a relatively poor Atlantic state of mariners lying on the western edge of Iberia . Despite its precocious development of trade routes along the West African coast and as far as the Indian Ocean and beyond, Portugal was relatively poor .
 Philip 11 of Spain claimed the Portuguese throne by virtue of being the only son of Isabella of Portugal, daughter of King Manuel 1 . Following the death of the Portuguese king without a male heir, Philip 11 claimed the throne . Philip 11 was the son of Manuel 1 and Isabella 1
 In 1469, Isabella of Castile married Ferdinand , heir to the throne of Aragon . Isabella married Ferdinand in 1469 . The Spanish monarchy was founded in 1466 .
 Castilian policies were successfully implemented to create a relatively centralized monarchy . Castilian policy was successful in creating a relatively central monarchy .
 Granada was the last part of the Iberian Peninsula controlled by the Moors . In 1492, Spanish armies captured Granada, which was last place in the region to be controlled . Granada is now the capital of the Granada region .
 Like other monarchs, they brought the Church, its privileges, and some of its income from tithes and the sale of indulgences under royal control .
 While the Reformation shook the foundations of the Church in much of Europe, it barely challenged Spanish religious orthodoxy . The Reformation barely challenged religious orthodoxy in Spain .
 Spanish Inquisition, whose original purpose had been to enforce conversion of Islamic Moors and Jews, served the Catholic Reformation in the late sixteenth century . The original purpose of the Spanish Inquisition was to enforce conversions of Muslims and Jews .
 The tribunal of the Inquisition interrogated and punished those accused of questioning Church doctrine . The tribunal was founded by the Inquisition of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Inquisition became a respected agent of royal as well as Church authority in some parts of Spain . Housed in Castile, the Inquisition became an important institution in some of the country .
 Local people resisted the Inquisition, seeing it as another aspect of Spanish domination . Elsewhere, Sicily and the Dutch Netherlands, above all, saw it as an aspect of Spain domination .
 In Castile, Ferdinand and Isabella centralized the system of justice and made towns more subservient to the royal will . In the 15th century, towns were subservent to the king's will .
 Castilian nobles were stripped of some of their privileges while dispensing titles and positions . They stripped some of the Castilian noblemen's privileges . They were also stripped of positions and titles .
 In Catalonia and Valencia, nobles resisted, maintaining most of their noble prerogatives . In Catalonia, the nobles resisted the change, maintaining their noble rights .
 Catalan and Valencian nobles were willing allies with the crown in maintaining social hierarchy and order . Nonetheless, they feared a revolt of the lower classes .
 Parliamentary traditions in the Spanish principalities limited the reach of the Castilian monarchy . The Castilian kingdom was one of the most important Spanish monarchies .
 The rulers of Spain were not able to tamper with Catalonia’s traditionally less centralized constitutional traditions . Catalonia's constitutional traditions dated from the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, when Catalonia itself had been a Mediterranean power .
 Catalonia and Valencia maintained their political institutions, principally their Cortes, which continued to limit the authority of the monarchy . The Cortes had to be consulted in order to comply with royal edicts .
 The Spanish monarchy was less a “new monarchy” outside of Castile than that of France . But particularly strong institutional limits on its effective authority remained . The French monarchy was not a "new monarchy" outside Castile .
 In Castile, disagreements between the monarchy and the Cortes were frequent during the middle decades of the sixteenth century . The Cortes and the Spanish monarchy were often at odds with each other .
 Cortes excluded nobles and included only representatives from the eighteen most important cities and towns of Castile . Castile was the most important city and town in Spain . The Cortes included no nobles and excluded only representatives of the eighteen important cities .
 The Castilian Cortes refused taxes to subsidize the monarchy for thirty-five years . The Cortes, which maintained the right to approve special taxes, refused tax subsidies .
 The long reign of Philip II began and ended with a declaration of royal bankruptcy . Philip II's long reign was ended by declaration of Royal bankruptcy .
 During the first years of the Spanish colonial period, Mexican gold helped finance the next wave of conquests . Gold helped finance many of the first Spanish conquests of Mexico .
 In 1545, Spaniards discovered the rich silver mines of Potosi (then in Peru, now in Bolivia), and a year later they uncovered more deposits in Mexico . The mines were discovered in 1545 in Potosi, then in Peru and Mexico .
 A new refining process helped Spain triple the silver resources of Europe to its own profit . Spain's silver resources are now worth more than $1 billion .
 Mules carried silver extracted at Potosi on a fifteen-day journey down 12,000 feet and many miles to the port of Arica in northern Chile . Then the sea voyage of several months by convoy began .
 The silver paid for slaves brought from the coast of Africa . Among other things, it was used to pay for the slaves brought in from Africa .
 The Spanish Empire contributed considerably to the sixteenth-century European trading boom . The Empire contributed significantly to the trade boom .
 Spain shipped colonial products and Spanish woolens to France and the Italian city-states . Spain's woolens were shipped to Italy and France .
 Spanish ships also supplied wine, oil, European grain, shoes, clothing, and clothing .
 Castile was divided between land for agricultural production and for raising sheep . The mountain ranges and central plateaus of Castile were divided between agricultural and sheep-growing land .
 The mining of silver, lead, iron, and mercury also developed in sixteenth-century Castile .
 Agricultural production was closely linked to manufacturing, as were sheep to the production of woolen goods . Agricultural production is closely linked with manufacturing .
 85 percent of the land of Spain could not be plowed because it was too mountainous or rocky . The land was not irrigated because of the high elevation or mountainous terrain . Nonetheless, the land was plowed in Spain .
 The crown imposed protectionist measures against foreign goods . The crown banned the export of gold and silver, and attracted Italian and Flemish craftsmen to Spain .
 In northern Spain, the Cantabrian coast was populated by farmers and fishermen . The mountains and valleys of the rainy Cantabrians were populated by fishermen and farmers .
 Castilian provinces of Andalusia and Granada produced wheat, olives, and wine . To the south, the provinces also produced wheat and olives .
 Castilian farmers expanded production by terracing hillsides and planting them in perennials, including grapefruit and olive trees . The hillsides are terraced and planted in perennial perennials .
 Farm towns built irrigation works and processing facilities such as wine and olive presses, flax-soaking ponds, and grist and fulling mills to turn crops into commodities .
 Spanish nobles incurred no social stigma by engaging in wholesale or international commerce until the 17th century . Spanish nobles incur no stigma from engaging in international commerce .
 Many nobles capitalized on revenues from farm products by building facilities to store and process the products . These facilities include flour mills, tanneries, and wine cellars, which often doubled as taverns .
 Castile owned the tuna fishing rights on Castile s Mediterranean shore . They exported fish preserved in salt or olive oil all over Europe . The family owned the rights to Castile's tuna .
 The Spanish throne passed to the Austrian branch of the Habsburg dynasty in 1496 . Ferdinand and Isabellas daughter, Princess Joanna, married Philip the Fair, the duke of Burgundy, the son of the Holy Roman emperor .
 Ferdinand married a niece of King Louis Xll of France in 1504 . Ferdinand hoped to produce an heir to the Spanish throne . Isabellas died a year after her death in Spain .
 The royal couple's infant son died three years later . The royal family was also subject to the harsh demographic realities of the age .
 Charles 1 of Spain inherited the throne of Castile and Aragon in 1516 . Charles 1 was the son of Joanna and Philip the Fair . He was born in Flanders, France, and died in 1515 . He inherited the Spanish throne of 1516 from his parents .
 In 1519, he became Holy Roman Emperor Charles V upon the death of his grandfather, Maximilian I . Along with Spain's American territories, he inherited Aragon’s Italian possessions .
 The emperor only briefly resided in Catalonia and rarely visited Castile . He only briefly lived in Catalonia .
 The Spanish king demanded extraordinary taxes from his Spanish subjects to pay for his wars abroad . But with far-flung dynastic interests, he demanded extra taxes . He defended the Spanish-Italian possessions of Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia against France .
 The kings departure from Spain in 1520 was followed by open revolt against royal taxation . The king's departure from the Spanish capital was seen as a rebellion against the king .
 The revolt of the Comuneros began in Toledo and spread to other towns in northern Castile . The Comunero revolt was the first of its kind in Spain .
 Bourgeois and artisans opposed the royal officials Charles had imported from Flanders . The revolt was also directed against Castilian nobles .
 After royal forces burned the arsenal and town of Medina del Campo in August 1520, the young king suddenly switched tactics . The young king switched tactics after the town and arsenal burned .
 He suspended supplementary tax collections and agreed not to appoint any more foreigners to office in Spain . He also agreed to suspend tax collections .
 Charles’s army gradually restored order, brutally executing the leaders of the rebellion . When uprisings continued, Charles's army slowly restored order and executed the leaders .
 Charles V arranged the marriage of his son, Philip, to the English princess Mary Tudor of England in 1554 . With an eye toward his succession, the marriage was arranged for his son Philip to marry the princess .
 Spain and England lands under Philip II Habsburg lands under Ferdinand I NORTH SEA . Russia lands in 17th century .
 Philip II inherited Spain, the Netherlands, the Spanish colonies in the Americas, and parts of Italy . He inherited Spain and the Netherlands from the Dutch .
 Ferdinand I inherited the Habsburg ancestral domains, including Austria . Ferdinand I was elected Holy Roman emperor . He inherited the ancestral domains of Austria and Austria .
 This ended the period when one ruler held all Habsburg territories . It also eliminated any possibility that a single Catholic monarch would rule all of Europe . This also eliminated the possibility of a Catholic monarch to rule the continent .
 It did not end the cooperation and strong family ties between the two branches of the Habsburg dynasty . However, it did not, however, end a cooperation .
 Mary Tudors death in 1558 eliminated the intriguing prospect that England might have become part of the Spanish Empire . Mary Tudor's death eliminated the possibility of becoming part of Spain's empire .
 Like its rivals France and England, the Spanish state developed a large, centralized bureaucracy . Spain's royal councils were essential to the operations of the empire .
 The council of state and the council of war offered the king advice on matters of internal and colonial policy . The king's advice was given to the king by the council .
 Royal secretaries handled correspondence and busied themselves with the operations of the royal household . Royal secretaries dealt with correspondence and other duties of the household .
 Most such officials were commoners, for whom such positions provided financial and social advantages . Most commoners in the United States were commones .
 It could take two years for administrative instructions or correspondence to reach distant officials in Latin America and for their response to arrive in Spain . It could be two years to send instructions to distant officials .
 Madrid became a capital city of nobles and bureaucrats, many of whom, in one way or another, lived off the court . Madrid, in the center of Castile, was the capital of Spain's first capital city .
 The city grew from about 30,000 people in the 1540s to well over 150,000 inhabitants in the 1620s . The city is now a UNESCO World Heritage City .
 Madrid survived through a ‘command economy’; royal commissioners paid government-fixed prices for what they wanted from the capital’s hinterland . Madrid survived .
 As Spain’s capital grew, it had to import supplies, which were transported from distant regions by mule trains that traversed rough mountain ranges and deep valleys .
 Philip decided he needed a permanent royal residence that would provide an elegant symbol of his power . Philip decided that he needed to have a permanent residence . He decided to build a permanent home that would be a symbol of power .
 The king’s only public appearances after he became crippled by gout were elaborate religious ceremonies at the palace . The ceremonies were carefully orchestrated to uphold the sanctity of the throne .
 Rituals of court etiquette affirmed a sense of authority, social hierarchy, and order that were supposed to radiate from the Escorial through Spain and to the far reaches of the empire .
 Philip II led a tragic life marred by the premature deaths of four wives and a number of children . Philip II's life was marked by premature deaths and the deaths of many of his children .
 The king himself may have contributed to the misfortunes of his offspring . The king may also be responsible for the king's death .
 In 1568, he ordered Don Carlos, his bad-tempered and irresponsible son by his first marriage, placed under lock and key . Don Carlos was the son of the first marriage .
 Don Carlos seemed Philip II of Spain ruled during the unfit to rule; . furthermore, detesting height of Spanish power . Don Carlos seems to have ruled out of power .
 Spain and England his father, he may have even entered into contact with Dutch leaders who had begun to denounce Spanish policies in their land .
 Don Carlos’s death six months later haunted Philip, inevitably generating stories that he had ordered him murdered . Don Carlos died six months after his death . Philip's death haunted Philip .
 The introverted king thereafter lived among the whispers of intrigue and storms of aristocratic rivalries of the noble families and factions .
 Habsburg domination of Italy secured by the 1559 Peace of Cateau-Cambresis with France with France . Philip turned his attention to fighting the Turks .
 Ottoman Empire had expanded The Ottoman Empire of Suleiman the Mag. The Sultan had expanded the Ottoman Empire .
 A r c n V , j c . l . l into Europe following the conmiicent threatened Spanish rule during the r ° sixteenth century . A r r r n V . l became a major city in 1453 .
 Suleiman the Magnificent (ruled 1 5201566) expanded his territories in the Balkans, where some of the Ottoman cultural heritage endures today, and into Hungary .
 Turks also became bolder in attacks on Spanish ships in the central and western Mediterranean . The Turks also attacked Spanish ships .
 When the Turks took the Venetian island of Cyprus in 1571, the pope helped initiate the Holy League, in which Venice and Spain allied . The Holy League was formed by the pope in the wake of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus .
 The long naval war against the Ottoman Empire lasted from 1559 to 1577 . The war lasted between 1559 and 1577 and lasted until 1677 .
 With southern Spain virtually undefended and with the Moriscos rebelling against taxes, the Turks might well have captured Granada . The Turks may have captured the Spanish city .
 The Turkish threat in the western Mediterranean ended, although the possibility of the further expansion of the Ottoman Empire in southeastern and central Europe remained .
 In the meantime, overexpansion had already planted the seeds of Spanish imperial decline . Spain's imperial decline was already under way, but it was still growing .
 Tudor monarchs held in check the great landed magnates, putting down rebellions and extending the reach and prestige of royal government . From the reign of Henry VII to that of Elizabeth 1, they extended the reach of the monarchy .
 During the same period, the English state expanded its control over Wales and Ireland while holding at bay Scottish threats to the Tudor dynasty .
 Thomas Wolsey was archbishop of York and adviser to the king . He brought to the King’s Council loyal officials from the ranks of the nobility and clergy .
 These men met in a room known as the Star Chamber because its blue ceiling, like the night sky, was spangled w'ith stars . They met in the room because of the blue ceiling .
 He imposed tariffs protecting the cloth and wool industries, decreed acts unifying weights and measures, and put forth edicts punishing vagabondage and begging . He also imposed tariffs .
 Monopolies were extremely unpopular among the middle and lower classes . They kept the prices of some products artificially high, but were unpopular with the middle .
 When selling offices failed as a means of assuring compliance, he resorted to the sheer coercive power of the throne . He resorted to selling offices to assure compliance . When that failed, he tried to use the power of his throne .
 The Star Chamber enforced compliance, exacting fines and sometimes arresting the recalcitrant for real or imagined offenses . "The Star Chamber" was the Star Chamber .
 Henry obtained from Parliament writs of attainder and forfeiture, by which he could declare anyone guilty of treason, order their execution, and seize their property . Henry obtained the writs from Parliament .
 These men dispensed justice, collected taxes, enforced troop levies, and maintained order . These men were largely drawn from prosperous landed families .
 Their judicial authority covered every criminal offense except treason except treason . The judicial authority was their judicial authority . They were able to make decisions on the basis of their authority .
 The royal Assize Courts took responsibility for felony cases . Gradually, the royal courts began to take responsibility for cases .
 Assize Courts helped extend the Tudor state's effective authority . Charged with enforcing parliamentary statutes and the orders of the Privy Council . Assize courts were also tasked with enforcing the orders from the state .
 Henry VIII became king upon his father's death in 1509 . He married Catherine of Aragon, who was Ferdinand and Isabella's daughter, as well as his brother's widow . Catherine was Ferdinand's widow and the daughter of Isabella and Ferdinand .
 Henry's proud and impetuous character lay a deep-seated inferiority complex that he tried to overcome with grand deeds . Beneath Henry was a proud and impetuous character with a deep insistency complex .
 The new king spent vast sums fighting against France for more than a decade, beginning in 1512 . His new king was the first king to defeat France in France .
 Cardinal Wolsey, who had been his father’s trusted adviser, sought to restrain Henry's ambition . Henry's father was his father's trusted adviser . Henry was the son of the cardinal .
 Henry simply debased the currency, giving the state more spending power at the cost of higher inflation . The House of Commons refused to provide the king with more funds, so he debased it .
 To raise money, the spendthrift monarch heaped more financial obligations on the backs of the poor . The poor are the victims of his spending spree .
 Wolsey utilized the cynically named “amicable grant,” a royal assessment first imposed in 1525 on lay and ecclesiastical revenues . Wolsey used the ‘amicable grants’ to gain control of the state .
 Henry responded to the threat by forcing landowners to loan money to the crown, imprisoning some of the wealthiest and confiscating their estates . Henry also debased the currency adding to inflation .
 Henry shifted control of the state’s finances from the royal household of the king's servants to a small but able bureaucracy of officials . To make his monarchy more efficient, Henry shifted royal government, including control of state finances, to a smaller bureaucracy .
 He reduced the size of the king’s advisory council and formalized its structure . The king reduced the number of advisers to the advisory council .
 The Privy Council assumed oversight functions and routinely communicated with the local justices of the peace . It was established in 1881 .
 The king appointed new administrative officials and established new revenue courts . The king also established a new revenue court system .
 At the same time, the general acceptance of the ‘king’s law’— common law — helped generate a sense of national unity . At the time, common law helped generate national unity. At the . same time .
 Henry extended the power of his monarchy by breaking with Rome in the 1530s over his divorce of Catherine of Aragon . Henry extended his power by breaking away from Rome over the divorce of his wife .
 He established the Church of England, which kept some of the ritual and doctrine of the Catholic Church . It was established in 1881 .
 Henry became head of Church of England, dissolving monasteries and confiscating and selling ecclesiastical lands . Henry was head of the church of England . Henry became king of England in 1383 .
 Henry planted seeds for future conflicts between Protestants and Catholics in England . Henry planted the seeds of future conflicts with Protestants in England.
 Henry established English domination over Wales and direct rule over Ireland . Fearing that the Welsh or Irish might assist Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in an attempt to invade England to restore Catholicism, Henry established his rule over Wales .
 Since the late twelfth century, English lords had gradually increased their military colonization of Ireland, pushing back the Gaelic tribes and claiming the finest land by virtue of ancient titles .
 English authority was fragile in Ireland as long as the crown’s continental interests took precedence . Yet effective English authority remained fragile in the country .
 After the English Reformation, the crown selected English Protestants for all posts in Ireland . English Protestants were selected for the post in Ireland after the 16th century .
 Henry proclaimed himself king of Ireland and head of the Irish Church in 1541 . After a minor rebellion against royal authority, which was put down with great cruelty, he declared himself king . Henry died in 1542 at the hands of the King of Ireland .
 In exchange for the Gaelic chieftains’ recognition of Henry as their king and acceptance of English law, the crown recognized them as Irish lords . Henry was Henry VIII of the 13th century . The crown recognized him as the king of Ireland .
 The costs of administering Ireland increased rapidly, requiring more troops, as the Irish chafed at English rule . Thereafter, however, thereafter, the costs increased rapidly .
 English forces defeated a combined Irish and Spanish force at the Battle of Kinsale in 1601 . The battle took place in 1602 .
 O’Neill left Ireland and ended up in Rome, where he was welcomed by the pope . The pope welcomed the president of Ireland in Rome .
 Relations between Scotland and England deteriorated when Henry VIII became king . In 1503 the Scottish King James IV had married Henry VIl’s daughter, Margaret Tudor . Relations deteriorated when he became king, Henry VIII .
 When James invaded England in 1513 in support of France, Henry VI11 undertook a major military campaign against the Scots . The campaign was launched in response to the invasion of England by James II in England .
 This ended with a bloody English victory at the Battle of Flodden, where James IV was killed . The English victory ended with the death of James IV, who was killed in the battle .
 In 1542, an English army again invaded Scotland, defeating the Scots at Solway Moss . The English army invaded Scotland again in 1542 and defeated the Scots .
 Following James V’s sudden death a month after the battle, Mary Stuart became queen of the Scots . Mary Stuart is the current queen of Scotland . She is the daughter of James V, who died a month later .
 In 1546, after Henry’s war with France dragged to a halt, another English army laid waste to Scotland . The capital and university town of Edinburgh was sacked by the English army in 1546 .
 On his deathbed, the king left money to pay for Catholic Masses to be said for the eternal repose of his soul . The king's insistence on divorce began the English Reformation .
 The nine-year-old son of Henry and Jane Seymour became King Edward VI . Under the tutelage of his uncle, the duke of Somerset, who served as Lord Protector .
 Edward undertook an aggressive campaign on behalf of the Reformed Church of England . While seeking accommodation with Protestant dissenters, the young Edward was aggressive . Edward became a prominent figure in England's Reformed Reformed church .
 Mary Stuart fled to safety, marrying Francis, the son of Henry II, the king of France . After English troops defeated a French force sent to help the Catholic cause there, Mary Stuart married Francis . Mary Stuart was the young Catholic queen of Scots .
 Allied with fearful Catholic nobles, the earl of Warwick overthrew Somerset in 1549 . Somerset was overthrown by the Earl of Warwick, who was allied with the earls of Warwick . Somerset's reign was the first of its kind in England .
 Warwick assumed the role of Lord Protector and took the title of duke of Northumberland . Warwick assumed his role as the Lord Protector of the Protector .
 Northumberland quickly betrayed the Catholic lords who had supported him . The Catholic lords supported him, but he was soon overthrown .
 He tightened the crown’s control over the Church of England and undertook a repressive campaign against Catholicism . The crown tightened its control of the church of England during the reign .
 Northumberland’s influence over the sickly young king whetted his desire for power . Northumberlands’ influence over King Henry VIII whetted the desire to power .
 Lady Jane Grey (1537-1554; Henry VIIl’s niece and third in line to the monarchy) plotted for her to ascend the throne after she married his son . He plotted for Lady Jane to ascend to the throne in 1554 .
 After Edward’s death, Northumberland proclaimed his daughter-in-law queen of England . After Edward's death, Queen Elizabeth was proclaimed queen .
 Most nobles rallied to the cause of Mary Tudor , daughter of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon . But most nobles rallied around the queen's cause .
 She seemed to them the rightful heir to the throne, despite the fact that she was Catholic . She was Catholic, but was not the only daughter of a Catholic .
 Mary Tudor succeeded her half brother and attempted to return England to Catholicism . She succeeded her father and tried to return the country to Christianity .
 She restored all rituals and doctrines of the Catholic Church . She also acknowledged the primacy of the pope over the Church of England .
 The queen abrogated Henry Vlll’s reforms and began to persecute Protestants, some of whom fled to France . Some of the Protestants fled the kingdom to escape .
 England joined Spain in its war against France, which had long rivaled the Habsburgs in Italy . The war was the first of its kind in Spain, ending in 17th century .
 Sparked by widespread opposition to her Catholicism, which was popularly identified with France and Spain, a rebellion broke out against her . The queen's Catholicism was popularized in Spain and France and France .
 Elizabeth 1 , Anne Boleyn’s daughter, restored Protestant rule to England . Elizabeth 1 became queen at age twenty-five, succeeding Mary, her half-sister .
 Elizabeth’s throne was threatened by religious division, which was compounded by the antagonism of Catholic France and Spain . Elizabeth's throne was . compounded by religious . division, compounded by . antagonism .
 Elizabeth was a woman of intelligence, vanity, sporadic fickleness, and an occasional flash of temper . Elizabeth was an intelligent woman who had a 'moment of temper'
 She enjoyed music, dancing, hunting, and the Mary Tudor, later queen of England . She also enjoyed music and dancing .
 Tall, with reddish hair and an olive complexion, she was cautious, even suspicious . She was raised in a world of conspiracy, having been raised in conspiracy .
 The queen preferred to wait out many pressing problems in the hope that they would just go away . The queen wanted to wait until she could find a solution to many of the problems .
 Elizabeth learned French, German, Italian, and Italian, as well as Latin, and enjoyed translating texts from these languages into English . Elizabeth was educated in the tradition of Italian humanism .
 It was not uncommon for women to remain unmarried in early modern Europe . In England, about 10 percent of all women remained single throughout their lives .
 The question of whether Elizabeth would ever take a husband preoccupied the other rulers of Europe, as well as her subjects . Elizabeth's husband was the King of England, who died in 1783 .
 Elizabeth rejected one continental hopeful after another, beginning with the handsome but dull Philip II of Spain . Philip II was Catholic widower of Mary Tudor. Elizabeth rejected him, and he died in 1515 .
 The death of Lord Robert Dudley's wife in 1560 from a suspicious fall down a flight of stairs fueled rumors for some years . Her death from a suspected fall in a stairwell led to rumors of her marriage to Lord Dudley .
 Elizabeth I was determined to find a means to resolve religious conflict within England . Spain and England settled religious settlement under Elizabeth I . Elizabeth I found a way to end religious conflict in Spain and Spain .
 Elizabeth had been raised a Protestant, but she did not hold particularly strong religious convictions . She rarely attended church and rarely attended a church .
 Parliament passed Act of Uniformity and Act of Supremacy in 1559 . Act reorganized the Church of England to have Protestant dogma but essentially Catholic structure . Act established the lasting foundations of the church of England .
 The bill barely passed the House of Lords, and probably would not have passed had two bishops not been imprisoned in the Tower of London and thus been unable to vote . Two bishops were imprisoned in London and therefore were not able to vote on the bill .
 The Act of Supremacy required all officials, clergy, and candidates for university degrees to take an oath acknowledging the queen as ‘governor’ of the English Church . It also required all . clergy, . candidates for . university degrees . to take oath of allegiance to the
 This title replaced that of ‘head’ of the Church and suggested that the queen would not interfere in matters of doctrine . This title was replaced by the title 'head of the church'
 The Thirty-Nine Articles, enacted in 1 563, provided an institutional framework for subsequent relations between state and church in England . They provided a framework for later relations between the state and the church .
 The landed elite, strengthening its control of Parliament during Elizabeth’s reign, generally supported the Church of England . Landed elite strengthened its control over Parliament during the reign .
 Some English Protestants wanted to carry the reforms farther than Elizabeth’s religious settlement . Elizabeth II was the first queen of England to hold a series of religious reforms .
 Church of England sought to eliminate vestiges of elaborate Catholic ceremonies, such as baptismal crosses, altar rails before which the faithful knelt while receiving communion, and elaborate priestly garb, and stained glass windows .
 Puritanism, the English version of Calvinism, emerged in the late 1550s as a dissident force within the Church of England . Puritanists first emerged as dissident forces within the church of England in the 1560s .
 They insisted on a simplified but more intense religion based on individual conscience, the Holy Scriptures, and a community of belief in which preaching played a role .
 Puritans wanted the Church of England to be separate from the English monarchy . A few Puritans served as bishops in the church of England . Others wanted to separate the church and monarchy .
 The Tudor monarchy wanted to make the Church serve its secular goals of national glory, prosperity, and public order . Tudor monarchs wanted the Church to serve their secular goals, prosperity .
 A modest Catholic revival, aided by the arrival of Catholic Jesuit missionaries from the continent, accentuated religious divisions in England . The arrival of Jesuit missionaries in England accentuated the religious divisions .
 A Jesuit missionary was tortured to death on the rack in 1581 . Six years later, the first Puritan was executed for having spoken in Parliament on behalf of free speech .
 Mary Stuart stood next in line for succession to the English throne . Since Elizabeth had no heirs, she stood next to her Catholic mother-in-law . Mary Stuart was next to Elizabeth's Catholic sister .
 After her husband King Francis 11 of France died in 1560, Mary returned to her native Scotland to assume the power that her mother wielded as regent until her death that same year . Mary died that year in Scotland .
 Scottish Reformation began when theologian John Knox returned home from Geneva to preach reform . John Knox was the first Scottish theologian to return to Scotland to evangelise .
 Elizabeth made peace with Scotland and France soon after coming to the throne of England .
 Elizabeth and Protestants worried that if Mary became queen of England, she would restore Catholicism to England . Protestants worried she would bring back Catholicism to the country . But Elizabeth feared that if she became queen, she'd restore Catholicism .
 When Protestants forced Mary to abdicate the Scottish throne in 1568, she fled to England . She fled to Scotland when Protestants forced her abdication . Mary was forced to flee to England after her death .
 In 1569, Catholics in the moors and bogs of the isolated English north rebelled in the hope of putting Mary Stuart on the English throne . Elizabeth’s order for her rival to be imprisoned precipitated by her order for Mary Stuart's imprisonment .
 The Catholic force marched southward, but hastily retreated upon learning that sizable English forces loyal to Elizabeth awaited them . The Catholic forces retreated southward .
 English troops defeated a second Scottish army near the border between the two countries . The English army was defeated by a second English army in Scotland .
 The Catholic Church’s hopes for a successful Counter-Reformation in England were finally dashed . This ‘Northern Rising’ ended in complete failure, and the Catholic Church's hopes were dashed .
 Pope Pius V excommunicated Elizabeth in 1570 from the Church to which she did not wish to belong . The queen's Catholic subjects were removed from the obligation of obedience to her and encouraged several more plots .
 Two years later, French Catholics undertook the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre of Protestants in Paris . The horror of the horror of which firmed Elizabeth's resolve to resist her claims to the throne at all costs . Two years after the massacre of Protestants, the horror firmed
 She vowed to support the Dutch, most of whom were Protestant, in the rebellion against Catholic Spain . She then vowed to back the Dutch in their rebellion against Spain .
 In 1 583, she foiled a plot, which involved the Spanish and French embassies, to depose her in favor of Mary Stuart . The plot was foiled by the French and Spanish embassies, in which they plotted against her .
 Queen Elizabeth ordered Mary Stuart's execution in 17th Century . Elizabeth ordered her execution four years later, under pressure from Parliament . Mary Stuart was executed in 16th Century of Spain .
 The reach and efficiency of the English state increased under Elizabeth’s guidance . Elizabeth's Statemaking increased under her guidance . The reach of the state was increased under the queen .
 Lords and other wealthy gentlemen served on the Privy Council . The council consisted of between twelve and eighteen members drawn from the nobility, landed elite, and officers in the royal household . Lords and others served as members of the council .
 The office oversaw the lordlieutenants, a new office that gave noblemen control of local militia . The office was set up to oversee local militia and oversaw local militia operations .
 England's queen, like her predecessors, used patronage to foster loyalty to the crown . The queen's patronage helped foster loyalty among the loyalists .
 Most desirable posts were at court, including those in the royal household . The most desirable posts at court were at the royal house .
 In Elizabethan England, unlike France, churchmen did not serve in the highest offices of the realm . Churchmen were not allowed to hold the highest office in the country .
 The Lord Chancellor dispensed patronage by selecting officials and filling local positions in the counties . The most powerful officials at court, such as the Lord Chancellor, dispense patronage to the county .
 The office of the Exchequer resembled similar offices created by continental monarchs . It was closely tied to the satisfaction of the private interests of the landed elite . The office was created by monarchs who did not have to contend with a representative body .
 Parliament met during only three of the forty-five years of Elizabeth’s reign . The crown needed its assent for new laws and new taxes .
 Upon ascending the throne, Elizabeth found the crowns financial situation bleak . The crown's financial situation was bleak .
 Revenues raised through taxation and customs dues were inadequate to finance the war against Spain and campaigns in Ireland . Revenue was inadequate to pay for the war .
 The sale of some royal lands, forced loans, the seizure of a Spanish ship laden with silver or gold, and purveyance (the right of agents of the monarchy to buy food at below-market prices) could only be temporary expedients .
 The collection of ‘ship money’ (a tax on ports, which the crown with dubious logic extended to inland towns as well) was extremely unpopular and generated resistance during the hard times of the 1 590s .
 The crown managed to replenish its coffers by exercising frugality in the expenses of government and increasing taxation . It is another sign of a stronger and more efficient state, despite a decade and a half of expensive warfare against Spain .
 The English monarchy in the Elizabethan Age was relatively more efficient than that of Spain or France . The English monarch was relatively less efficient than Spain and France .
 English nobles by the 1590s no longer had full-fledged private armies that could threaten the throne’s monopoly on force . English nobles no longer have private armies .
 This contrasted with the situation in France during the same period, when the Guise and Bourbon families, among others, maintained their own armies in the wars of religion . The Guise, Bourbon and other families maintained their armies during the period .
 Foreign wars served to increase the reach of central government in England . Foreign wars also served to help the government of England .
 During the last eighteen years of Elizabeths reign, more than 100,000 soldiers were impressed into service for wars on the continent and to maintain English hegemony in Ireland . During the reign of Queen Elizabeths, over 100,00 troops were impressed .
 Lord-lieutenants assumed responsibility for troop levies in the counties . Lord-louutenants took over control of the counties of Scotland .
 The vast majority who were conscripted as soldiers were the poorest of the poor . Unfortunate men were those who happened to be at the wrong place and the wrong time .
 The monarchy imposed English law on northern England, Wales (which Henry VIII had absorbed into England) and Ireland . Henry VIII's reign was the first monarch to impose English law in northern England .
 The emergence of a national market economy increasingly linked to London also played an important part in the nationalization of English political institutions, says David Cameron .
 Within England, the sense of belonging to a nationality was certainly more advanced than anywhere else on the continent . Within England it was more important than any other country in Europe .
 With the exception of part of Cornwall in southwestern England (where the Cornish language was spoken), the people of England spoke English, however great the variation in dialect and accents .
 A somewhat Anglicized Welsh elite began to send their sons to Oxford and Cambridge Universities . The Welsh elite now sends sons to Cambridge and Oxford universities .
 The fact that Britain is an island may have made the English more xenophobic and precociously nationalistic than their continental counterparts .
 Strong traditions of local government and loyalties persisted in England, however, fueled by social differences and the overwhelming influence of wealthy local landed families . Strong traditions in England persisted in local government .
 The county and parish remained the economic, social, and political universe of most people in England . County and parish remain the economic and social universe of people .
 The state still remained an abstraction until the tax collector or the press-gang arrived . The state was still an abstraction, until the state was an abstraction .
 In the last half of the sixteenth century, England emerged as a commercial and manufacturing power . In the 16th century, the country became a major industrial and commercial power .
 The population of England and Wales grew rapidly in the 1520s to more than 3. million in 1580 . The population grew rapidly, reaching about 4 million in 1610, reaching a population of 4. million .
 Reduced mortality rates and increased fertility, the latter probably generated by expanding work opportunities in manufacturing and farming, help explain this rapid rise in population . The rise in fertility is likely to be due to increased work opportunities .
 While epidemics and plague occasionally took their toll, people in England suffered them less often than those in Europe .
 Despite the wrenching effects of the English Reformation, the country had been spared the protracted wars of religion that occurred in France and Central Europe . Furthermore, despite the . wrenching effect of the . Reformation .
 English towns grew as migrants arrived in sufficient numbers to overcome high mortality rates caused by catastrophic health conditions stemming from poor sanitation . Poor sanitation in English towns was a major factor in growth of English towns .
 About 8 percent of the population of England lived in London by the mid-seventeenth century . About eight percent of England's population of 16th century lived in the capital .
 England provides the primary example of the expansion of agricultural production well before the “agricultural revolution” of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . England provides a primary example .
 A larger population stimulated increased demand for food, as well as for manufactured goods . The population increased in the 1970s and '90s .
 Through crop specialization, English agriculture became more efficient and market oriented than almost anywhere on the continent . English agriculture is now more efficient than anywhere else in the world .
 Between 1450 and 1650, the yield of grain per acre per acre increased by at least 30 percent . The yield per acre has increased 30 percent since 1450 .
 English landowners brought more dense marshes and woodlands into cultivation . In sharp contrast with farming in Spain, English farmers brought marshes to cultivation .
 The great estates of the English nobility largely remained intact . Many wealthy landowners aggressively increased the size of their holdings .
 Younger sons of independent landowners left behind the family land to find other respectable occupations, often in the church or in urban trades .
 Larger farms were conducive to more commercialized farming at a time when an expanding population pushed up demand and prices . The larger farms are conducive to commercializing farming, experts say .
 Some landowners turned a part of their land into pastureland for sheep in order to supply the woolens trade . Some of the land was used as pastureland to supply woolens .
 Some great landlords, as well as yeomen, reorganized their holdings in the interest of efficiency . Some of the great landlords and yeomen (farmers whose holdings and security of land tenure guaranteed their prosperity and status) reorganized .
 Open-field farmers selected crops in response to the growing London market . Farmers selected crops based on response to London market demand for food .
 Between 1580 and 1620, landlords raised rents and altered conditions of land tenure in their favor . Landlords preferred shorter leases and forcing tenants to pay an “entry fee” before they would agree to rent them land. Landlords raised rents in a quest for greater profits,
 The tenants pushed tenants toward more productive farming methods, including crop rotation . The tenants also pushed tenants to use crop rotation and crop rotation in farming .
 During hard years, the peasants might be forced to sell their land, while wealthy neighbors could survive with relative ease . Wealthy neighbors could also survive during hard years without selling their land .
 Parliamentary acts of enclosure aided landowners by allowing them to buy wastelands, consolidate arable strips of land and divide up common lands and pasture areas .
 Enclosure drew considerable resistance, for it left many of the rural poor fenced out of common land on which they had depended for firewood, gleaning, and pasturing . The rural poor had depended on common land for their firewood .
 Thomas More's Utopia blames enclosure for England's economic inequities on enclosure . The Utopia describes an imaginary island where all people live in peace and harmony .
 England's exceptional economic development drew upon the country’s natural resources, including iron, timber, and, above all, coal, extracted in far greater quantities than anywhere on the continent .
 New industrial methods expanded the production of iron, brass, and pewter in and around Birmingham . New industrial techniques expanded the city's iron and brass production .
 Woolens, worsteds, and cloth found eager buyers in England as well as on the continent . Woolens and worsteds were found in England and Europe . Woolen and cloths were sold in England, Europe and Australia .
 Late in the sixteenth century, English merchants began making forays across the Atlantic . Textiles were also sold in the New World .
 Cloth manufacturers undercut production by urban craftsmen by “putting out’s work to the villages and farms of the countryside . Cloth makers undercut production .
 Poor rural women and girls could do spinning and carding (combing fibers in preparation for spinning) of wool in their homes . In such domestic industry, poor rural women would do spinning, carding .
 The English textile trade was closely tied to Antwerp, where workers dyed English cloth . The English textiles trade is closely linked to the Belgian city . English cloth was dyed by workers who dyed it .
 Sir Thomas Gresham, a sixteenth-century entrepreneur, became England’s representative in the bustling river port . He was the man responsible for the port in the 16th century .
 Wining and dining the city’s merchants and serving as a royal ambassador, he so enhanced the reputation of English merchants that they could operate on credit, no small achievement in the sixteenth century .
 Spain and England cities of northern Germany and to authorize lucrative English trading monopolies . Spain and Germany cities of north Germany and northern Germany . Germany .
 Gresham s shrewd sense of finance saved the relatively meager royal coffers from bankruptcy on several occasions through the negotiation of timely loans . The royal family's finances were saved from bankruptcy several times .
 Gresham advised the crown to explore the economic possibilities of the Americas . The crown was advised to explore economic possibilities in the Americas by the crown .
 English overseas ventures were undertaken with commercial profits in mind . Far more than Spanish colonialism, they were undertaken to promote commercial profits .
 When the Spanish closed the Scheldt River in 1566, English merchants responded by seeking new outlets for trade across the oceans . The Dutch rebellion against the Spanish began against their rule in the 1566 .
 Sir Francis Drake (15401596), an explorer and privateer, sailed around Cape Horn in his search for a passage that would permit commercial ties with Asia . From 1577 to 1580, Drake sailed around the world in search of a passage to allow commercial ties to Asia .
 English society in the Tudor Period reflected sharply defined social groups . English society under the Tudors reflected what a churchman writing in 1577 called “degrees of people”
 Ownership of land in the form of estates—inherited or acquired—conferred status, or “gentility,” in England . Ownership conferred status, or "gentility in England, was a form of "gentleness"
 All nobles (that is, with a noble title passed on by inheritance) were gentry . The vast majority of gentry were not titled nobles or peers in the House of Lords .
 Gentry status came from the ownership of land, and gentry dominated the House of Commons . Gentry was dominated by the gentry, who dominated the Commons .
 In exchange for military service, the crown granted titles that were inherited by the eldest son . The eldest son was granted titles by the crown after his military service .
 The nobility and gentry dominated England for more than the next three centuries from their country manors that commanded the surrounding countryside . The nobility dominated England from their manors to the countryside .
 Ordinary people addressed the nobleman as ‘your lordship’ and the wealthy gentleman as “sir’; poor women curtsied to them as a mark of respect . Poor women curted to the noblemen as a sign of respect.
 Wealthy landowners mediated in village disputes and provided some charity in exchange for deference . Wealthy farmers mediated in villages disputes .
 The education of gentlemen at Oxford and Cambridge Universities or through private tutoring helped shape common cultural values and social homogeneity among what was increasingly becoming a national elite .
 Yeomen stood beneath the gentry on the social ladder, but they could move up if they were able to purchase and maintain large estates, and they could vote in parliamentary elections . Yeomen were below gentry but could move on if they could purchase large estates and maintain estates .
 Within the upper reaches of the “middling sort” were men considered “of sufficiency,” even if they were not lords or gentlemen . Men considered ‘sufficiency’ were considered sufficiency even if not lords .
 They were believed by virtue of steady income to be worthy of assuming some kind of public responsibility . They were thought to be worth a living in public service . They are believed to have been worthy of responsibility for society .
 England’s precocious economic boom in the sixteenth century increased the wealth and status of merchants and manufacturers .
 Wealthy merchants and artisans from the guilds served on town councils, perpetuating their influence from generation to generation . Wealthy artists and merchants from guilds were influential in the town councils .
 Lower on the social scale were smallholders, farmers who owned just enough land to get by . Poor clergymen depending for survival upon small fees rendered for their services, and ordinary craftsmen .
 The majority of the population owned neither land nor skills, and thus lay at the bottom of the social hierarchy . The majority owned neither skills nor land nor land, and lay at bottom of society .
 Cottagers lived on bread, cheese, lard, soup, beer, and garden greens . They were employed as farmhands but also employed as spinners, weavers, carders, or nail makers .
 Spain and England as common laborers, porters, and sweepers, or in other menial occupations, living in squalor . Many of them lived without shelter or in poverty .
 During the sixteenth century, the rich got richer—and lived that way, dressing and eating differently from the poor . The rich and the poor dressed and ate differently from each other .
 Parliament had earlier in the century decreed that only dukes, earls, and barons could wear sable cloth woven of gold and embroidered with gold and silver . Parliament had previously banned anyone with money could buy the best clothing .
 Cardinal Wolsey had earlier attempted to moderate the dietary excesses of wealthy people, including the high clergy, including those of the clergy .
 He specified the number of separate dinner courses that people of various ranks might consume, with the largest number—nine—reserved for cardinals .
 Soaring food and lodging prices sapped the meager earnings of craftsmen, landless cottagers, rural laborers, and unskilled workers . Food, lodging prices have sapped some of the world's poorest workers .
 Tudor England was a period of social mobility in the Tudor era . New economic opportunities brought greater prosperity to gentry, yeomen, merchants, and manufacturers .
 The interests and lifestyles of the middling sort gradually moved closer to those of gentlemen and their families . The interest and lifestyle of middling men has moved closer and closer in recent years .
 Social advancement remained relatively rare among the poor, whose numbers are rapidly expanding along with their impoverishment . Social advancement was relatively rare for the poor in the United States .
 Harvest failures in the 1590s brought the period of economic expansion to an abrupt halt in England . After almost a century of inflation accentuated by a rising population, harvest failures brought an abrupt end to economic expansion .
 Never had there seemed to be so many poor and hungry people on the roads, dressed in rags, sleeping in fields, searching for wild berries or edible roots, and begging .
 Food riots spread throughout much of England, as the poor seized grain and sold it at what they considered a reasonable price . The riots spread across much of the country, with the poor seizing grain and selling it .
 Women usually made up the majority of participants in the food riots because it fell to them to try to make ends meet at the market . Women made up most of the participants in food riots .
 Such disturbances increased the resolve of the state to maintain order at all costs, says state . Such disturbances increase the state's resolve of maintaining order, says the PM .
 The prosecution of serious crimes increased rapidly during Elizabeth's reign, peaking between 1590 and 1620 . Serious crimes were prosecuted during the reign of Elizabeth II .
 Vagrancy was the most prevalent offense, as people took to the road in search of food . Vagranacy was most prevalent among the offenses, with people taking to the roads to find food .
 Vagrants arrested and placed in stocks for three days, before sent home . Vagrants were arrested and put in stocks before being sent home. Vagrants are arrested and sent home from the prison .
 Theft of goods worth more than twelve shillings could bring the death penalty . Offenders were publicly whipped, branded, mutilated by having an ear cut off, or sent to serve as oarsmen .
 Women were often treated more harshly than men, unless they were pregnant . Women's treatment was often more severe than men's in the 1930s .
 Only about 10 percent of capital crimes were actually executed, such as slow strangulation by hanging and being slowly crushed to death by weights . Such punishment was particularly brutal .
 The English upper classes, convinced that most crimes went unpunished, became obsessed with maintaining order . Shakespeare’s plays, in which ordinary people appear as potential threats to social order .
 Many Elizabethans believed that social order depended on the maintenance of social hierarchy and the securing of obedience to the moral authority of government . Elizabethans thought social order was important to maintain social hierarchy .
 Spain and England a doctrine of obedience to authority, basing their arguments on religious teaching . Spain, England and Spain a doctrine .
 Elizabethan literature and drama constantly returned to the theme of a moral law based upon the necessity of social order . Elizabethan drama and literature often returned to a theme of the law based on a need for order .
 Parliament passed the first ‘poor law’ in 1598, followed by another in 1601 . Parliament passed another poor law in 1501, 1601, after a series of poor laws .
 These laws recognized for the first time the principle that the needy ought to receive some sort of assistance from the community in which they live .
 Justices of the peace, under the supervision of the clergy, were to oversee the distribution of assistance to the poor . Justices and the clergy were responsible for distributing the assistance .
 In 1576, two theaters opened in London, followed by others in a number of provincial towns . The Elizabethan Theater opened in 1576 .
 The plays had been staged in royal castles, country manor houses, or entire towns . They staked their survival on their ability to attract audiences that would pay to see them .
 More than 2,000 different plays were staged in London between 1580 and 1640 . Most of the plays were romances and dramas, mainly dramas .
 William Shakespeare reflected uncertainty, ambivalence, and even disillusionment about contemporary English society . Shakespeare's plays reflected uncertainty and ambivalent feelings about contemporary society . The plays reflect uncertainty and disillusionment in English society, he says .
 He was born in Stratford-on-Avon, where his father made gloves . He was able to provide him with a primary school education .
 Shakespeare moved with his wife to London to become an actor . In the late 1 580s he began to write plays . Shakespeare moved to London in the late 1800s to become a writer .
 Shakespeare was part owner and actor in the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, an acting company of the Globe theater . The Globe theater was the largest of London's six private theaters . Shakespeare became part owner of the company .
 Seats at such theaters cost at least six times more than the cheapest tickets at the public theaters, which included places for the ‘penny stinkards’ who stood in the uncovered pit below the stage . Seats in such theaters were at least 6 times more expensive than the
 The playwright Christopher Marlowe died in a brawl in an inn under mysterious circumstances . Ben Jonson killed another actor in a duel . The actor and playwright died in mysterious circumstances in a house fire .
 Most London theaters stood outside the city walls . Because of their rowdy reputations, they stood outside of the city's walls .
 London officials sometimes tried to close theaters because they thought that disease spread easily among assembled crowds . Officials sometimes closed theaters because of complaints about profanity and lewdness on stage .
 During the later years of Elizabeth's reign, bitter battles for influence and power within Elizabeth’s inner circle belied the appearance of relative harmony .
 Elizabeth died in 1603, the forty-fifth year of her reign, leaving England a substantially more unified, effectively ruled, and powerful state . England had begun to look across the oceans in the interest of expanding trade .
 Spain and England extending its influence across other oceans, as well . Spain, England extending influence across oceans .
 The development of English overseas trade allowed London to replace Antwerp as Europe's leading center of trade . London became the most important city in the world of trade in 18th century .
 London's Merchant Adventurers competed with Spanish and Portuguese rivals for spices and other products .
 They traded textiles and other manufactured goods for slaves, gold, and ivory from the African and Brazilian coasts . The slaves were traded for slaves and gold, gold and ivory .
 West Indian sugar from Barbados entered the English domestic market in lucrative quantities . Barbados sugar was sold in the UK in a lucrative way .
 In 1600, Queen Elizabeth chartered the East India Company with the goal of competing with Dutch traders . The company was created to compete with the Dutch .
 Raleigh sought to establish a colony in Virginia between 1584 and 1587 . The Spanish already had a colonial empire that stretched several thousand miles from what is now the southern United States to Tierra del Fuego .
 Spain took possession of its colonies in Mexico and Latin America in 17th century . Jamestown in Virginia was the first colony to be established in the Americas .
 Tobacco began to reach England in the first decades of the seventeenth century . Tobacco was first introduced to England in 16th century .
 Tobacco was, to an extent, the equivalent of what silver was to the Spanish Empire, because of its great role in the economic development of the English colonies . Tobacco was the equivalent to silver, because it played a key role in English colonies' economic development . Tobacco is now the equivalent
 The Spanish arrived in the Americas as conquerors, the English came intent on developing trade . The Spanish came to the Americas to conquer the Americas and trade .
 Gradually, the English began to arrive in North America as permanent settlers . The English arrived in the 17th century . They were the first Europeans to settle in America .
 The Virginia Company, a joint-stock company, received a royal charter to settle the region of Chesapeake Bay in 1606 . Virginia Company received a charter from the king to settle in the region .
 The Virginia Company brought the first slaves to North America ten years later . It was not until late in the century that a full slave system emerged . The first slaves were brought to the U.S. by the Virginia Company .
 The Massachusetts Bay Company received its charter in 1629 . The Puritan settlement in Plymouth followed in 1620 .
 English colonies reflected the Reformation, including Protestant dissidents like the Puritans, as they sought religious freedom .
 The rising English population encouraged more emigrants to the New World . Despite the high cost of the difficult trip across the Atlantic, emigrants emigrated .
 In the developing colonies, settlers moved westward to take available land, pushing Native Americans farther back . Native Americans were pushed farther back by settlers .
 The absorption of the emerging colonies of North America into what became an English and then a British Empire proceeded at a much slower and unpredictable pace, following the vicissitudes of trans-Atlantic trade . Unlike that of the Spanish Empires colonies in the Americas, the absorption took place at a slower
 There was no English equivalent of the Council of the Indies, which oversaw the Spanish Empire in the Americas . The Council was created in the 17th century to oversee the Spanish empire in America .
 In England's North American colonies, administrative institutions, representative assemblies, judicial systems developed at their own pace without a phalanx of royal officials .
 The local administration of the English colonies continued to be influenced by regional differences . There was no centralized distribution of resources that characterized the Spanish Empire .
 A sense of political participation developed in the English colonies, at least among men of property, in the colonies . The English colonies were the colonies' colonies .
 With this went the growing sense that the colonies were a place of liberty, as many colonists arrived seeking religious freedom . Many colonists arrived in 17th century seeking freedom .
 In contrast to Spain, the English felt less of a mission to bring Christianity to indigenous peoples . Spain and England developed an empire marked by the firm alliance of Church altar and the throne .
 Unlike Catholicism in the case of the Spanish Empire, the established English religion, Anglicanism, was just one religion among others in the English colonies .
 Only an estimated 2,500 Native Americans converted to Christianity in 1675 . By 1675, only 2,000 Native Americans had been converted .
 In the Spanish Empire, many colonists undertook inter-ethnic marriages . This helped bring about a considerable mixed population, allowing social mobility for select few .
 In contrast, English settlers from the beginning sought to exclude and push back the indigenous population . English settlers have been pushing back indigenous population since the 1800s .
 Fearful of cultural mixing and of those they continued to consider “savages,” most of whom showed no interest in assimilation, the settlers drove them farther west .
 The ‘decline’ of the overstretched Spanish Empire was first noted in 1600 . The Decline of Spain was first recorded in 1600.
 Castilians still regarded Spain as a haven of peace and prosperity compared to the rest of Europe, which was wracked by religious wars . Castilianians still believed Spain was a haven for peace compared to rest of the continent .
 The decline of Spanish power began with the Dutch revolt . The Dutch revolt was the start of the Spanish revolution .
 In the Netherlands, Dutch nobles and officials resented higher taxes imposed by the Spanish crown . The Spanish crown imposed higher taxes on the Dutch .
 Many Dutch were angered by the Spanish king's attempt to promote the Catholic Reformation by imposing the Inquisition in a land where most people were now Calvinists .
 In the early 1560s, resistance first began against the presence of Spanish garrisons . In the 16th century, resistance began to grow against the Spanish presence .
 In 1567, Philip II appointed the duke of Alba to restore order in the north with 10,000 Spanish troops . Philip II was in charge of the Spanish army in 1567 .
 The ruthless Castilian ordered the execution of prominent Calvinist nobles on the central square of Brussels . He established military courts, imposed heavy new taxes, and virtually destroyed self-government in the Netherlands .
 Alba’s reign of terror as governor helped transform the resistance of Dutch nobles and officials, led by William of Orange, into a national revolt . Alba was governor of the Dutch from 16th century to 17th century . He helped transform Dutch nobles, officials and officials into
 In the Southern Netherlands, Alba’s Council of Troubles executed thousands of people from 1567 to 1573 . Thousands of people were executed by the Council of Blood, known as the “Council of Blood”
 Dutch ships sailed over the rushing waters to drive the Spaniards away from Leiden, southwest of Amsterdam . When a Spanish army undertook a siege, the people of the town opened the dikes to drive away .
 The Dutch revolt signified the decline of Spanish power in the Southern Netherlands . The revolt in the Netherlands followed .
 There Catholic nobles began to have second thoughts about continuing a struggle launched by Dutch Protestants . Catholic nobles had second thoughts on continuing the struggle .
 In 1579, the Dutch provinces formed the Union of Utrecht, and declared their independence from Spain as the Dutch United Provinces . Two years later, two years after they declared independence, they declared their sovereignty from Spain .
 Spain, which was also at war against France, could supply its armies because Alba s armies had recaptured some of the Southern Netherlands . Philip II maintained peace with England .
 As the Dutch revolt wore on, however, the problems of fighting a war a thousand miles away plagued the king .
 Military contractors or entrepreneurs recruited mercenaries . Italians, Burgundians, Germans, and Walloons made up much of the Spanish army .
 Spanish routes for troops, supplies, and bullion to the Netherlands had to be maintained through a combination of diplomatic charm, cunning, and coercion .
 The Spanish Road was the route taken by the Spanish armies, supplies, and money to the Netherlands . It passed through mountainous terrain and many states, including the duchy of Lifcge .
 Spain’s acute problems of recruiting and supply were exacerbated by dubious efforts to save money, including charging sharpshooters for powder and shot . Spain has been plagued by problems recruiting, supply of shooters and ammunition .
 The army’s guarantee to carry out the written wills made by soldiers also seems to have been a curiously self-defeating approach to inspiring confidence .
 Desertions and mutinies—the largest involving non-Spanish troops—occurred with ever more frequency as troops demanded payment of back wages, better and more regular food, and decent medical care . The largest mutinees and desertions were in Spain, with the largest in the
 By 1577, the Spanish army in the Netherlands, unpaid for months, had dwindled in size from 60,000 to no more than 8,000 men . The army in 1577 was reduced to just a fraction of the size of the army .
 Throughout the long war, the superior Dutch fleet kept the Spanish ships in port . During the war, Spanish ships were kept in port by the Dutch .
 The ships of “sea beggars” as they were called, harassed Spanish ships . Spanish ships were harassed by the ships of the ‘sea beards,’ as they called, .
 When the Spanish fleet sailed north in 1588, the result was the disastrous defeat of the Armada . The Armada was the result of a disastrous defeat by the Spanish .
 At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Dutch gradually fell back behind protective town fortifications and natural barriers formed by rivers .
 The war became a series of long Spanish sieges against frontier towns defended by brick fortifications, bastions, and moats . The system had its origins with the Italian city-states .
 With the defense having a marked advantage, towns could be conquered only by being starved out . The defense had an advantage, with towns only being able to be conquered .
 France withdrew from the war in 1598, and England withdrew six years later . England withdrew in 1597, and France withdrew in 1697 .
 A truce between the Spanish and the Dutch, signed in 1609, lapsed in 1621 . The Spanish and Dutch had a truce between 1609 and 1621, ending in 1622 .
 The war party appealed to Calvinist religious orthodoxy by calling for a crusade against Catholicism that would also free the Southern Netherlands from Spanish rule . Led by Maurice of Nassau, the son of William of Orange, was assassinated in 1584 .
 Army officers wanted to keep the struggle against Spain going as long as possible . Army officers and merchant traders wanted to stay in the fight against Spain .
 Castile fell from a position of European domination in the seventeenth century . Castile's decline underlay Spain's fall from European domination . Spain's decline in economic power underlay its decline in power .
 Population fell by almost a quarter to about 5. million by the middle of the seventeenth century . Plague, plague, smallpox, war and emigration took their tolls on the population .
 The “price revolution’s sharp rise in inflation during the sixteenth century in Europe may have affected Spain less than some parts of northern Europe, but it still had adverse effects on Spanish monarchy .
 Gold and silver from the Americas accelerated inflation by increasing the supply of money, as did royal monetary policies of currency debasement . The price of gold and silver increased in the Americas .
 The monarchy had declared bankruptcy in 1557, suspended payments in 1575, and again in 1596, renegotiating loans at more favorable rates . The monarchy was bankrupted by the collapse of the 15th century .
 From 1568 to 1598, Spain had five times the military expenditures of the Dutch, English, and French combined . Spain spent five times more than the Dutch and English combined between 1568 and 1598 .
 Spain has been forced to borrow money from foreign bankers at disadvantageous interest rates . The Spanish state attempted to find new sources of revenue after being forced to rely on foreign loans .
 Castilian Cortes agreed to an extraordinary tax assessed on towns in 1590 . To raise funds, the crown imposed a tithe, or assessment of a tenth of the most valuable piece of real estate in each parish .
 This undermined the economy by encouraging the middle class to abandon business in favor of the acquisition of perpetual privileges, and thus tax exemptions, as they obtained noble status . The middle class was encouraged to seek perpetual privileges and tax exemptions .
 Spain's massive expulsion of the Moriscos in 1609 proved counterproductive . Spain and England expelled the Spanish people from Spain . The Moriscoans were forced to leave Spain .
 The king succumbed to pressure from the Catholic Church and from wealthy families eager to seize Moorish land . He succumbed to the pressure of the Catholic church and wealthy families .
 Valencia region of Valencia lost one-third of its population, including skilled craftsmen and farmers . The region has been hit hard by the loss of many skilled craftsman and farmers, including many skilled farmers .
 Nobles added the lands of indebted peasants to their large estates ( lati fundta ) Nobles showed little interest in increasing the productivity of their land, in contrast to their English counterparts .
 Farmers hampered by a stateimposed fixed maximum for grain prices, which discouraged ambitious agricultural initiatives . Farmers were hampered by the state imposed fixed grain prices . Farmers are hampered by this stateimposed minimum of grain prices which discouraged them .
 Royal policies favored sheepherding over farming because it was easier to collect taxes on sheep than on agricultural produce . Royal policies also favored sheep herding because of its easier tax collection than farming .
 Fine woolens manufacturing suffered competition with foreign textile imports, especially lighter cloth brought from France and the Netherlands . The woolens industry suffered from competition with textile imports .
 Spanish colonies became a financial drain on the crown because of the cost of administering and defending them . The Spanish colonies themselves became a . financial drain .
 Latin American silver paid less than a quarter of the crowns colonial and military expenses . The flow of silver slowed to a trickle beginning in the 1620s .
 Spain had never really developed commerce with the empire to the same extent as the English . The English had made trade the basis of their maritime empire .
 Emigration to the New World from Spain had slowed to a trickle by the early eighteenth century . Economic opportunities in Spanish-held territories were relatively limited in Spain's territories .
 This was compounded by the prohibition of non-Spanish migration to Spain s American colonies . The Spanish colonialists were not allowed to settle in America .
 The colonies had also developed their own basic agricultural and artisanal production . The colonies relied far less on Spanish goods .
 The Atlantic ports of northern Castile suffered competition not only from Seville and Cadiz, but from Spain s own colonies, and above all from England and the Netherlands .
 The burden of taxes in Castile increased by four times between 1570 and 1670 . The Spanish crown proved less efficient in collecting taxes than the monarchs of France and England .
 Spain's Italian subjects resisted contributing money for distant wars that did not concern them . Spain s Italian subjects were reluctant to contribute money to distant wars .
 Several years later, he was captured by Turkish pirates and spent five years as a slave . He managed to return to Spain before being captured by the pirates .
 Don Quixote is on one level a humorous tale of a zany noble intent on bringing true chivalry back to Spain . He is accompanied by his sensible, subservient squire, Sancho Panza . The novel is set in Spain .
 On a deeper level, however, it is the story of national disillusionment in the face of perceived national decline . The story is the country's story of disillusionment, but it is also the story .
 Pedro Calderon de la Barca portrayed in his plays the floundering Spanish aristocracy struggling to preserve its honor . The dramatist's plays portray the Spanish aristocrats struggling to maintain their honor .
 His Burial of the Count Orgaz shows figures gazing up at a vision of celestial glory . The splendor of the splendor is heightened by the dismal scenes below them on earth .
 Spain's mounting economic problems were exacerbated by the fact that the empire’s interests were spread so widely, not only in Europe, but across the seas . The empire's interests are spread too widely in Europe and across the world .
 Philip IV succeeded to the throne in 1621 . Philip IV was intelligent and had a keen interest in the arts, but he was stubborn .
 Spain and England as his chief adviser Gaspar de Guzman, the duke of Olivares . Gaspar was an Andalusian noble whose family had, like Spain itself, suffered reverses .
 The short, fiery, and increasingly obese Olivares sketched ambitious plans to shape the rebirth of Spanish might . Olivares was an increasingly obese, short, and obese man .
 Olivares sensed that Spain could not remain a power without a marked economic resurgence . Olivares felt that Spain needed to be stronger in order to remain a powerful power .
 Count Duke, as he was called, mastered his master, convincing the indolent king that only hard work and reform could restore the glories of the not-so-distant past . The Count Duke was called the Count Duke of Sax Saxelderburg .
 He would tutor the king, whose chamber pot he once ceremoniously kissed, in the fine art of monarchy . The king's chamber pot was once ceremonially kissed by the monarch .
 Count Duke espoused the growth of monarchical power and state centralization . Count Duke was a proponent of monarchism and centralization of the state .
 His motto “one king, one law, one money” generated resistance, in the latter case because of the by then notorious instability of the Castilian currency . The motto ‘one king’s one law’ generated resistance .
 Olivares sought to subject all of Spain to the laws and royal administration of Castile . Olivares promised the king that, if he did so, he would become the most powerful prince in the world .
 Olivares wanted to force Dutch capitulation to restore the monarchy’s reputation . Olivares was afraid that the Dutch rebellion might begin a chain reaction that would destroy the empire. Olivares feared that the rebellion might start a chain .
 He persuaded the king to allow the truce with the Dutch to lapse in 1621, thus necessitating massive expenses for land and sea warfare . In 1621 the king allowed the truce to lapse .
 Olivares sought to bolster, at great expense, Spanish interests in northern Italy and in Austria . Olivares wanted to preserve the ‘Spanish Road’ to preserve .
 France cut the Spanish supply routes in Savoy in 1622 and then in Alsace nine years later . Spain cut the supply routes to France in 1623 and 1683 .
 This enormous loss made it imperative that the crown find new resources with which to wage war . The crown needed to find new sources of resources, the crown said .
 For the first time, Castile’s monarchs could not establish credit with foreign investors . Castile's monarchs were unable to establish credit for foreign investors for first time .
 Increased taxation, the flotation of short-term loans through bonds through bonds, the sale of yet more privileges, and the imposition of new financial obligations on Aragon and the Italian territories all proved inadequate to the task of financing expensive wars .
 Three decades of intermittent warfare with France began in 1635, as the Thirty Years’ War became a struggle between competing dynasties .
 As more and more bullion from the Americas had to be diverted to pay military expenses in the Netherlands and Italy, the monarchy demanded new contributions from Catalonia and Portugal . Spain had assumed the expensive and ultimately damaging responsibility for protecting Portuguese shipping around the world .
 Tumultuous tax riots broke out in Portugal, where the upper classes resisted Spanish authority . The riots were the result of tax riots in Portugal .
 Catalan leader has ordered the arrest of several Catalan leaders . Faced with resistance, he ordered the arrests of several leaders . He has ordered an end to the crisis in Spain .
 Catalan nobles put aside their differences, and a full-scale revolt against Castilian rule began in 1640 . The revolt was a revolt against the Castilian rulers .
 A year later, Andalusian nobles were foiled in a plot to create an independent kingdom there . A year after the plot was foiled, the Andalusians tried to create a new kingdom in Spain .
 Philip packed off the despondent Olivares into exile . Three years later, Philip packed them off into exile. Philip died of his injuries .
 The illusion of Don Quixote was maintained that the restoration of traditional aristocratic and ecclesiastical values would restore Spanish power and prestige . However, the illusion of the illusion was maintained . The restoration of aristocratic values was maintained by the Spanish government .
 Olivares established two court academies intended to train young nobles in the art of government . Olivares set up the academies in order to train noblemen and women in government .
 Heeding the advice of churchmen, he censored the theater and books, prohibiting certain kinds of fancy clothing and long hair . Heeding advice from churchmen he censored theaters and books .
 The crown continued to extend its reach and solidify its authority against possible provincial rebellions . The crown remained in control of the kingdom .
 Catalan nobles accepted the supremacy of the crown in exchange for an affirmation of social hierarchy and royal protection against ordinary Catalans who resented their privileges .
 Philip II (ruled 1665-1700) sustained a period of great cultural accomplishment in the arts and literature . Ironically, given the perception of Spanish decline, the last years of Philip IV and the reign of his pathetic successor, Charles II . Charles II ruled Spain for 1665
 This may have been generated by the prevailing mood of introspection . But this, too, may have come from an introspective mood in the country .
 Olivares put dramatists and a small host of other writers to work in the name of glorifying the monarchy and imparting a sense of purpose that he hoped would revive Spain . Olivares hoped to revive Spain with the help of a new generation .
 Philip IV added more than 2,000 canvases to what already was a rich royal art collection . Many of the paintings were by Italian masters, including many by Italian masterpieces .
 Diego Velazquez painted forty somber portraits of the vain king . The portraits were a commentary on the monarchy’s fading glory and disillusionment . The portrait was taken by the Spanish court painter .
 In the meantime, the Dutch rebels, aided by increased commercial prosperity, had fought the Spanish armies to a draw . Spain and England were at odds with each other in 17th century .
 Treaty of Munster was part of the Westphalia settlement of 1648 that ended the Thirty Years’ War . It officially recognized Dutch independence after a struggle that had lasted three decades .
 The provinces of the Southern Netherlands, which were overwhelmingly Catholic, remained a Habsburg possession . The provinces remained a Catholic province, but were overwhelmingly Protestant .
 The Spanish monarchy, overstretched by its vast empire in the Americas, had not learned that it could not fight effectively on a variety of fronts . Spanish monarchy was overstretched .
 The French monarchy was concentrating its efforts in Italy, for the moment realizing the wisdom of fighting on one front at a time . In contrast, the French monarchy had been concentrating its effort in Italy .
 Spanish victories in the north against French armies were not enough, for when the French turned their attention to Spain, they held their own . Thus, subsequent Spanish victories not enough .
 The Treaty of the Pyrenees was signed between France and Spain in 1659 . It established the border between the two countries that has lasted since then .
 Spain also gave up Milan to Austria, and Naples and Sicily to the Italian Bourbon dynasty .
 The Portuguese, aided by the English, turned back several halfhearted invasions by Spanish armies . In 1668 Spain recognized Portugal’s independence .
 France occupied the Franche-Comte, the last major Spanish holding in northern Europe . Ten years later, France occupied it, and it was the last Spanish holding of the region .
 By 1680, when the depression that had lasted almost a century ended, Spain was no longer a great power . Spain had been in a depression for almost a decade .
 Spanish crown had overreached its ability to maintain its vast and distant empire . This was because of agricultural and manufacturing decline, but, above all, because of the Spanish crown .
 The development of trade across the Atlantic Ocean to the Americas was part of European economic expansion during the sixteenth century . Conclusion: Trade between Europe and the Americas is part of Europe's economic expansion .
 Spain grew into a great power after the union of the crowns of Castile and Aragon . Spain is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Philip II expanded the Spanish Empire in the Americas, which stretched from what is now the southwestern United States to the southern tip of Latin America . In Europe, the Empire included the Netherlands and several Italian states, in Europe .
 In England, the Tudor monarchy overcame religious divisions in the wake of the English Reformation to strengthen its authority . The Tudor monarch overcame the country’s religious divisions .
 In this, it resembled the ruling Valois dynasty of France, another “new monarchy’’ That had enhanced its reach, efficiency, and prestige . In this case, the French monarchy was a "new monarchy'’
 Trade, manufacturing, and agriculture underlay England’s growing prosperity, even as social polarization, reflected in crises of the 1590s, became more apparent .
 The surprising English naval defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 symbolized not only the rise of England but also anticipated the decline of Spanish power . The Armada was a surprise victory for the English in 1688 .
 When silver from the Americas slowed to a trickle, Spain s own limited natural resources and inability to collect taxes efficiently, combined with demographic stagnation that began early in the seventeenth century .
 The long revolt of the Netherlands ended with recognition of Dutch independence in 1648 . Dutch independence was recognized as a result of a revolt against the Dutch monarchy . The revolt ended with a victory for Dutch independence .
 That the Dutch Republic and England, two trading nations, had emerged as European powers reflected the shift of economic primacy to northwestern Europe . The Dutch Republic was two of Europe's two largest trading nations .
 At a time when aggressive European monarchs were forging absolute states, these two seafaring, trading nations maintained representative governments .
 The Stuart monarchs’ flirtation with absolutism in England brought bitter discord, resistance, and civil war . The Stuart monarchy’s flirtation . in England was a source of bitter discord and resistance, resistance .
 The Dutch Republic earned its independence in 1648 after a long war against Spanish absolute rule . The prosperous merchants who dominated the economic and political life of the country brushed aside the House of Orange's challenge .
 In both England and the Netherlands, religious divisions accentuated the struggle between absolutism and constitutionalism .
 The Dutch had risen up in open rebellion in 1566 in part because the Spanish Habsburgs attempted to impose the Catholic Inquisition on what had become a Protestant country .
 In England, Kings James I and Charles 1 attempted to return the English Church to the elaborate rituals that many people associated with Catholicism, thereby pitting the monarchy against Parliament . Charles 1 and James I tried to restore the English church to Catholicism, but Parliament opposed them .
 By virtue of Parliament’s victory in the English Civil War, England remained a constitutional monarchy . England remained constitutional monarchy by virtue of the victory of Parliament's victory .
 England’s new monarchs agreed to a Bill of Rights, which affirmed the civil liberties of English people and the rights of Parliament . The Bill was signed by the King and Queen of England in 1777 .
 The emergence of England and the Dutch Republic as great powers reflected the middle classes in both nations, the relative unity of the two states, and the location of both rising powers on the Atlantic Ocean .
 Amsterdam emerged as a banking center and first port of call for international trade . The Dutch Republic enjoyed the golden age of its culture .
 English Civil War helped define the constitutional and political institutions of modern Britain . Religious conflict between the Stuart kings and Parliament played an important part in the conflict .
 The monarchy tried to impose extralegal taxes without the consent of Parliament . The monarch tried to enhance its authority at the expense of Parliament, it has been claimed .
 English gentry emerged from the period with their parliamentary prerogatives intact . But the gentry, whose status and influence came from ownership of land, remained in power .
 King James 1 succeeded his cousin Queen Elizabeth to the English throne in 1603 . Conflicts between James I and Parliament led to the death of James I . King James I succeeded Queen Elizabeth as King of England .
 As King James VI of Scotland, he had overcome court factionalism and challenges from dissident Presbyterians . He was King of Scotland from Scotland and from Scotland .
 After he also became king of England, the two countries were joined in a personal union . After he became king, he became King of England and King of Wales .
 James was lazy, frivolous, and slovenly, particularly enjoying hurling jelly at his courtiers . The first Stuart king of England was lazy and frivolous . He enjoyed hurling jabs at courtiers and throwing things at them .
 Before coming to the throne, James had sketched out a theory of divine right monarchy . James had sketches of a theory before becoming king .
 The English monarchy found itself in a precarious financial position, with Queen Elizabeth’s war debts at least partially to blame . Queen Elizabeth's war debts were also to blame for the state's financial woes .
 James brought to court like-minded dandies, most of whom proved not only unpopular with Parliament but incompetent as well . Most of them proved unpopular with parliament but incompetent .
 Opposition to monarch’s attempts to raise money in such ways mounted within Parliament . Opposition to the monarch's attempts to . raise money raised within Parliament mounted within . Parliament .
 Parliament transformed itself from a debating society into an institution that saw itself as defending the rights of the English people . Although it met only sporadically and at the king’s pleasure, Parliament met only at the King's pleasure .
 The House of Commons, lashing out at the beneficiaries of royal monopolies, impeached on charges of bribery . Francis Bacon, philosopher of science and once the king s friend, was impeached .
 English foreign policy contributed both to the monarchy’s mounting debt and to the emerging political crisis . The monarchy is now in the throes of a crisis .
 Queen Elizabeth had denied that Parliament had the right to discuss matters of foreign policy . She said Parliament should not be able to discuss foreign policy unless invited by monarch .
 Parliament clamored for war because Catholic Bavaria, an ally of Habsburg Spain, had invaded the Protestant Upper Palatinate . James favored peace with Spain, but Parliament clamor for war .
 In 1621, Parliament refused to provide more funds for the conflict, setting the stage for the greatest constitutional crisis in English history . Parliament refused more funds to support the war, setting up the greatest crisis in history .
 Parliament denounced monarch’s attempt to arrange a marriage between his son, Charles, and the daughter of Philip IV of Spain . Parliament denounced the attempt to marry Charles, the heir to the throne, and Philip IV .
 Members of Parliament objected to a royal foreign policy that seemed pro-Spanish and therefore pro-Catholic . As dynastic marriages were an essential part of foreign policy, members objected to the policy .
 Parliament declared right to discuss the proposed marriage, and thus foreign affairs . Parliament declared its right to talk about foreign affairs. Parliament declared it right to debate the proposal .
 James’s wedding plans for his son fell through in 1623, however, when the Spanish king refused to allow Charles, who had gone to Madrid, even to set eyes on his daughter .
 James arranged Charles’s marriage to Henrietta Maria of France, the daughter of Henry IV and Maria de’ Medici . James arranged the marriage two years later, Charles and Henrietta married in 1777 .
 English Catholics numbered 2 or 3 percent of the population . The king promised to allow English Catholics to practice their religion freely .
 James seemed to be taking steps to favor Catholicism . Anti-Catholicism had been endemic since the English Reformation of the mid-sixteenth century .
 The young king was indecisive and painfully shy, traits compounded by a stammer . The young King was painfully shy and indecisive .
 Even more than his father, Charles rejected the view that his appointments to ministries should represent a wide spectrum of political and religious views . Charles rejected that his appointment to ministries and other important offices should represent broad political views .
 In the seventeenth century, no other realm of life so bitterly divided Europeans as religion . Religion was bitterly divided in Europe as religion.
 In England, religious divisions helped accentuate and define the political crisis . Religious divisions helped define the crisis in the country .
 The Established or Anglican Church faced a challenge from the Puritans . The Puritans were a dissident religious group of Calvinists that emerged during Elizabeth's reign .
 Many Puritans were more sure of what they were against than what were for . The Puritan was not sure what he was for . He was sure of the Puritan's position .
 Puritans were strongly attracted by the Calvinist idea that each individual was predestined by God through His grace to be saved or not to be . Puritan was strongly attracted to the idea that God's grace set out to save or not .
 They emphasized preaching and the individual's personal understanding of the Bible, spiritual devotion, discipline, and sacrifice as the basis of religion .
 Puritans opposed the role of bishops in the Church of England . Puritans emphasized the personal worth of the individual minister, not the value of an ecclesiastical title .
 They de-emphasized the sacraments and wanted worship to be simpler than the contemporary Anglican Church services . They wanted to make worship more simple .
 Puritans held that elaborate church accoutrements in the Church of England smacked of the Roman papacy . Stained glass windows and ornate altar rails were a favorite of Puritans .
 Puritans did not choose the name by which they came to be known in the late sixteenth century . Puritans were originally intended as a term of abuse, but the name was originally intended to be abuse .
 They constituted not more than 10 percent of the population, and perhaps a third of all gentry, but their influence grew . Their influence grew, but they were not as influential as they grew .
 Puritans were increasingly hostile to those who espoused a kind of Protestantism known as Arminianism . The Puritan was increasingly hostile towards those espousing Arminanism .
 Arminians soon came to wield considerable power . At first no more than a handful of ecclesiastics with the king’s ear . Arminianians soon became more powerful .
 English Arminians rejected the Calvinist idea of predestination, which Puritans accepted, and Puritans believed that an individual could achieve salvation through free will .
 Arminians also accepted rituals that to the Puritans seemed to replicate those of the Catholic Church . They emphasized the authority and ceremonial role of bishops, which Puritans opposed with particular vehemence .
 The king’s aggressive espousal of Arminianism enhanced the influence of William Laud, bishop of London . The king's aggressive espousement of the Arminanism enhanced his influence .
 The pious, hard-working, and stubborn son of a draper, Laud warned Charles that religious extremes of Catholicism and radical Puritanism both posed threats to the Established Church . Laud was a hard worker and devout Catholic .
 An Arminian, Laud espoused High Church rituals . Puritans thought he was secretly working to make Catholicism the established religion of England .
 Catholics had remained a force in some sectors of English life . Under Elizabeth 1 and James I, Catholics had continued to be part of some of England's life .
 Fear of a ‘popish plot’ to restore Catholicism as the religion of the English state existed at all levels of English society . Fear of the plot was rife throughout the centuries .
 Landowners are worried that Laud might return ecclesiastical lands to the Catholic Church . Landowners' families had purchased ecclesiastical land during the Reformation . Laud may return them to the church .
 Catholicism and ‘popery’ was popularly identified with the Spanish Inquisition, the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre in France, and the duke of Alba’�s “Council of Blood’ in the Netherlands . Catholicism and popery was
 Charles’s fiscal policies deepened popular dissatisfaction with his reign . Charles I and Parliament Clash . Charles's fiscal policies have deepened public dissatisfaction .
 In 1625, the king decreed a forced loan on landowners, which he levied without Parliament’s consent and which he insisted be paid within three months, an unprecedented short period of time . The king insisted that the debt be paid in three months .
 The next year, he ordered the imprisonment of seventy-six gentlemen who refused to meet the royal demand . The king also ordered imprisonment of sixty-six men .
 Parliament refused to consent to the levies unless Charles met its demands for fiscal reform . Parliament had refused to agree to the levy unless Charles agreed to reform measures .
 The king convoked three Parliaments in four years, but dissolved each when it refused to provide him with funds . King convoked a parliament in his first four years of power, convoked by parliamentarians .
 Buckingham disappeared after a disgruntled naval officer assassinated him in 1628 . Buckingham disappeared as a source of irritation to Parliament when he was assassinated by a disgruntled officer .
 In response, Parliament promulgated the Petition of Right, which forced Charles to accept in return for the granting of a tax . Charles was forced to accept the tax in exchange for the grant of the right to the throne .
 This constrained the king to agree that in the future he would not attempt to impose ‘loans’ without Parliaments consent . No ‘gentlemen’ who refused to pay up would be arrested, nor would anyone else be imprisoned without a just cause .
 The Petition of Right was put forward in 1628 by Sir Thomas Wentworth, an opponent of the crown and one of the men imprisoned for refusing to pay the forced loan . The Petition was a significant document in the constitutional evolution of England . It was initially put forward by Sir Wentworth
 It condemned arbitrary arrest, martial law, and taxes imposed without its consent . It defined the rights of Parliament as inalienable and condemned arbitrary arrests and taxes .
 Charles ordered Parliament’s dissolution in 1629 . Angered by the Petition of Right, Charles ordered the dissolution of Parliament . Parliament's insistence that customs duties were a violation of the Petition .
 Members of the Commons physically held the speaker in his chair so he could not leave . Speaker of the house had the role of communicating with the king on behalf of Parliament . Members of Parliament physically held Speaker in chair to prevent him leaving .
 Puritans considered Laud’s espousal of elaborate High Church ceremonies . Puritans declared that anyone who collected funds not levied with the approval of Parliament would be considered “a capital enemy to the kingdom and commonwealth”
 For the next eleven years, Charles ruled without Parliament and tried to raise monies in new and controversial ways . Charles ruled for 11 years, trying to raise money without Parliament . He ruled without the UK for eleven years .
 Inflation had increased not only the royal debt but also the cost of ships and arms for waging war . Inflation also increased the costs of waging war and ships for war .
 Unlike James, Charles had some scruples about peddling privileges, but none about other means of raising funds . Charles had no scrues about other ways to raise funds, unlike James .
 Most controversially, Charles ordered that ‘ship money’ again be imposed without Parliament’s consent on inland towns beginning in 1634 . Charles also ordered that ship money be imposed in inland towns without permission from Parliament .
 The Scots had never been pleased with the union with England that had been weakly forged in 1603 when James VI of Scotland ascended the English throne as James 1 .
 They demanded that Charles allow a general church assembly to consider the prayer book . Charles has been criticised for not allowing a general meeting to consider it .
 In 1638, some Scottish leaders signed the National Covenant attacking the pope and the prayer book . They swore to defend their religion and liberties against the pope .
 Scottish nobles and landowners began evicting Anglican bishops and taking over churches . In the meantime, Scottish peasants and landowners were evicting bishops .
 King Charles I demanded that the city of London help pay for the war in 1639 . This was a turning point in the dramatic reign of the king's reign .
 London finally consented to lend the crown a large sum, but only on condition that Charles convene Parliament and allow it to sit for a reasonable period of time . After several small allocations, London finally agreed to lend a large amount of money to the crown .
 Nobles and gentry led resistance to royal policies from the beginning . Some were already in touch with the rebellious Scots, who in 1640 occupied Newcastle without resistance .
 In April 1640, the king summoned Parliament for the first time in eleven years . The king was facing mutinies in the royal army and was running short of cash .
 Charles dissolved this ‘Short Parliament’ after less than two months . It refused to allocate money for the war against Scotland until Charles agreed to consider a list of grievances . The king dissolved the "Short Parliament" when it refused to agree to consider the grievances .
 Charles Charles Is defiance of Parliament initiated a full-fledged constitutional crisis . Charles is defiant of Parliament in defiance of the law . Charles Charles is the prime minister of the UK .
 The political crisis of the Stuart monarchy became a constitutional conflict about how England was to be governed . The English Civil War was the result of a political crisis in England .
 Parliament existed to protect fundamental English liberties that had been established under the Magna Carta in 1215 . To the king s opponents, Parliament s opponents said Parliament s . opponents of the king's opponents . Parliament .
 Parliament, led by Puritans, was asserting its traditional role as a balance to royal authority . Parliament was not yet claiming sovereignty, but it was clearly asserting its role .
 Defenders of Parliament believed Laudian religious reforms and the collection of ship money to be the work of power-crazed men perhaps manipulated by the pope .
 Justices of the peace resented the usurpation of their authority by various decrees of martial law and by royal courts that impinged on regional courts . Justices resented martial law decrees and royal courts .
 Local officials believed that the king's lieutenants were exceeding their traditional authority over military affairs . Officials believed that they were bypassing established routines of local approval of military levies .
 The monarchy alienated other Londoners by allowing some craftsmen to operate outside the structure of the London guilds . The monarchy also tried to force the city to provide more money for the war with Scotland .
 The sale of the right to collect royal customs generated controversy as well . The government sold more privileges to pay off those who “farmed" taxes .
 Charles surrounded himself with confidants, advisers, artists, musicians, and musicians . His sense of royal decorum and aesthetic tastes seemed to suggest the influence of continental Catholicism .
 Titled nobles, of whom there were about 1,200, generally supported Charles . Titled noblemen generally supported the king .
 During previous century, many gentry had extended their landholdings . Men enriched by commerce or service in the law or army had become part of the gentry through the purchase of land .
 The roots of confrontation may have come from the struggle of these economically dynamic gentry to obtain political power commensurate with their rising station in English life . It may have been a struggle for the gentry .
 Some gentry of lesser means who had fallen upon hard times may have blamed the monarchy for their plight and hence supported Parliament . Some of the gentry may have supported Parliament because of their plight .
 The English Civil War has been called the “Puritan Revolution,"" even though its causes extended beyond the question of religion . Puritans were not alone in resisting the monarchy .
 A brilliant speaker and debater, Pym was a zealot, an impetuous and perhaps even paranoid man whose strong convictions were in part defined by an obsession that a “popish plot"" existed to restore Catholicism .
 Charles 1 echoed the famous statement of his father, James 1, “No bishops, no king!”—an assertion that would come back to haunt him . Charles 1 said, ‘No bishops no king.” Charles 1 .
 Laud expanded the power of ecclesiastical courts, which tried people accused of offenses against the Church of England . He expanded the powers of the courts to try anyone accused of an offense against the church .
 Charles again convoked a newly elected Parliament the following October . Charles dissolved the “Short Parliament’s” in May 1640, and dissolved it in 1641 .
 The crown’s strengthening of the army with Catholic Irish regiments, commanded by Wentworth, confirmed to credulous ears that a ‘popish plot’ was in the works . Wentworth was now a supporter and adviser of the king .
 Ordinary people smashed altar rails and shattered stained glass windows . People smashed church windows and altar rails, smashed stained glass .
 The English army suffered defeat in Scotland; the war required yet more funds . The war required more funds for the English army to fight .
 It indicted Strafford, who was tried and executed in London before a rejoicing throng . He was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death in prison .
 Parliament denounced as illegal the most unpopular royal acts during the previous eleven years . Parliament denounced some of the courts controlled by the monarchy . Some of the most popular royal acts were deemed illegal by Parliament .
 Parliament proclaimed that it could only dissolve itself, and that in the future the king would have to summon it every three years . Parliament proclaims that it can only dissolve itself . Parliament declared that the future king would need to summon the parliament every three .
 In the meantime, Irish peasants rose up against the English in 1641 and killed many Protestant landlords . In 1641, the English were killed by peasants in Ireland .
 The Irish rebellion highlighted the rights of Parliament by making urgent the issue of who controlled the militia . The rebellion made urgent the question of who controls the militia.
 Parliament considered a history of royal misdeeds . The document denounced “a malignant and pernicious design of subverting the fundamental laws and principles” of English government .
 Parliament divided over how far to carry opposition to royal policies . Its passage by a narrow margin indicated that Parliament remained divided .
 Wealthy nobles began to form a solid bloc around the cause of the king, fearing that reform might weaken their influence . Wealthy nobility fear that reform may weaken their power .
 In some places, fighting began that month, as both sides fought for control of the militias . In some areas, fighting started that month .
 He personally led several hundred armed soldiers into Parliament and ordered the arrest of Pym . Pym's arrest was ordered by the Prime Minister .
 Pym and other leaders had left the House of Commons before Charles arrived, but they remained in London where they were protected by artisans and craftsmen .
 The latter opposed the crowns support of monopolies and for religious reasons supported Laud . Laud supported the crown's support of monopoly monopolies .
 Charles feared for his safety in London, where people had become more forceful in their support of Parliament . Charles headed north with his family to more friendly country, and supporters left Parliament .
 Parliament’s “Nineteen Propositions” denounced the confrontational royal policy in June . In June, Parliament's ‘Nineteen proposals’ were denounced by the royal family .
 Parliament’s soldiers came to be known as “Roundheads” for the short, bowl-shaped haircuts many of them wore . Parliament's soldiers became known as 'Roundheads' for their short haircuts .
 The two sides fought to a draw on October 23, 1642, at Edgehill, south of Birmingham . The two teams fought to each other at Edge Hill in 1642 .
 When a royal military advance on London was turned back, Charles set up headquarters in Oxford, fifty miles northwest of London . When the royal army advance on the capital turned back he set up his headquarters there .
 The king rejected Parliament’s terms for a settlement in February 1643, 1643 . In February 1644, the king rejected the terms of a settlement .
 When a second royal march on London failed, both sides intensified propaganda campaigns . Both sides intensified massive propaganda campaigns to win support .
 More than 22,000 newspapers, newsletters, pamphlets, broadsides, sermons, and sermons were published between 1640 and 1661 .
 Thousands of villages were disrupted by requisitions, plundering, and general hardship . Yet life in thousands of villages was interrupted by requisition and plunder .
 About 10 percent of the English population was forced to leave home during the war . About 10 per cent of those forced out of their homes during WWII .
 Many counties, perhaps most, were neutral, as local leaders struggled to maintain control and keep their counties free of fighting .
 Without London’s credit institutions, Charles financed the war with gifts and loans from nobles, selling more titles, and forced levies . Charles financed his war by selling titles, loans, and forcing levies, selling titles .
 Major battles during the English Civil War kept civil, fiscal, and military authority relatively decentralized in regions under its control . Cavalier and Roundhead strongholds .
 Parliament raised funds through heavy excise and property taxes . Parliament confiscated the property of some prominent families supporting the king s cause .
 A regional military structure developed, based on associations of counties pledging mutual assistance to the parliamentary cause . The military structure was set up in the 1930s .
 Parliament drew considerable support from the most economically advanced regions . Commercialized agriculture had developed through deforestation, draining of marshland, and acts of enclosure .
 Charles I retained most of the allegiance of most of northern and western England . Charles I was monarch of England during his reign . He was the only monarch to hold the title in England .
 In some places, villages became sites for religious and political struggle . Villages in some places became sites of religious or political struggle.
 Traditional festive rituals survived the assault of Puritans, who considered them frivolous, disruptive, and ungodly spectacles that brought drinking, dancing, and sexual freedom . The king's supporters, wealthy country gentlemen, encouraged such merriment .
 In 1643, Parliament allied with the Scots, many of whom were Presbyterians . Oliver Cromwell and the New Model Army were formed in 1643 .
 John PynrTs sudden death at the end of the year did not lessen Parliament’s resolve to force the king to capitulate . The king's sudden death in the year didn’t lessen the resolve .
 In July 1644, the Roundheads and Scots defeated the Cavaliers at Marston Moor, near York . The Cavaliers were defeated by the Roundhead and Scots .
 About 45,000 men fought in this battle, the largest of the English Civil War . The battle was the largest in the Civil War and was the biggest of all the war .
 Scottish participation only added to the determination of the ‘war party’ to whom Charles listened . Charles listened to the "war party" to whom he listened .
 Oliver Cromwell emerged as the leader of Parliament . Cromwell led the Roundheads to victory at Marston Moor in 16th century . He emerged as a leader in Parliament .
 Cromwell, born into a modest gentry family, never lost what more well-heeled gentry considered his rough edges . Cromwell was born in a modest family .
 Several years before being elected to Parliament in 1640, he had undergone a deep spiritual conversion . He became convinced that God had chosen him to be one of the Puritan elect .
 Cromwell displayed idealism as well as the stubbornness of someone who is convinced that he is always right . Cromwell showed idealism and stubbornness as he was convinced he was always right at the heart .
 Cromwell instilled strict discipline, and the Roundhead soldiers’ morale improved with regular wages . Cromwell’s strict discipline was instilled by Cromwell, who instilled regular wages for soldiers .
 Unlike its predecessors, the New Model Army won grudging good will in the counties by paying for supplies and not plundering, in contrast to the king’s army .
 Presbyterians were originally a pro-Scottish group that had rallied behind John Pym . Most (despite the name ‘Presbyterians’) were Puritans .
 They rejected religious toleration and wanted an established national Calvinist Church . Opposed to the bishops’ authority, they rejected religious tolerance and wanted a national church .
 The Independents were militant Puritans who desired more drastic changes than the Presbyterians . The Puritans desired more radical changes than Presbyterians.
 They wanted the church to be a loose alliance of congregations that would choose their own ministers, a more radical position than that of the Presbyterians . The Presbyterians wanted congregations to be able to choose ministers .
 The Independents were less willing to compromise with the king on the issue of parliamentary prerogatives . The king was the only monarch to compromise on parliamentary powers .
 They opposed creation of a new established church and favored toleration of some religious dissent . They opposed the creation of an established church .
 Some of them even desired more far-reaching political reforms that would protect individual rights . Some of the protesters wanted more far reaching political reforms .
 Cromwell's rise to leadership reflected the ascendancy of the Independents in Parliament . Cromwells rise to power reflected the rise of the Independent Party in the UK .
 Cromwell purged Presbyterian commanders within the New Model Army . He replaced them with Independents loyal to him . Cromwell also purged the Presbyterian commanders .
 Cromwell’s ‘Ironsides,” as his troops were called, maintained an air of invincibility . Singing psalms as they rushed fearlessly into battle, Cromwell's "Ironside" maintained air of .invincibility.
 Charles surrendered to the Scots a year later, hoping to obtain a less draconian peace than if he capitulated directly to Parliament . Charles surrendered after a year of war with Scotland .
 Scottish army withdrew from England and left the king in the custody of Parliament in February 1647 . But the Scottish army soon withdrew and the king was left in custody in 1647 by Parliament .
 As the war dragged on, England fell into virtual anarchy amid growing resentment over the billeting of soldiers, food shortages, and rising prices .
 The English Civil War unleashed forces that seemed to challenge the foundation of social and political order . The Civil War was the first of its kind in England .
 Baptists did not believe that children should be baptized, reasoning that only adults were old enough to choose a congregation and hence be baptized . Baptists believed only adults should be baptised, and children were not baptized .
 Baptists permitted couples to marry by simply making a declaration before the congregation . Some Baptists allowed couples to get married by simply declaring a declaration .
 They called for new laws that would protect the poor as well as the wealthy . New laws would be needed to protect the rich and the poor, they say .
 The Levellers proposed a new English constitution and demanded sweeping political reforms . They still based these rights on property ownership, which they defined as men having “a permanent fixed interest in this kingdom” excluding wage laborers and servants .
 Women were prominent in petition campaigns, but calls for female enfranchisement were extremely rare . Women were also prominent in Leveller petition campaigns .
 The ‘Diggers’ denied the claim of Parliament to speak for Englishmen . They opposed the private ownership of land . The “True Levellers’ were the ‘True Levesllers”
 They espoused agrarian reform and began a brief colony that began to share wasteland with the poor and the landless . The colony began to be a colony of landless people living in wasteland .
 The ‘Ranters’ rejected the idea of heaven, hell, and sin . They postulated that true salvation could be found only in drink and sex .
 Some radicals opposed not only hierarchical authority, but also paternal authority within the family . Some radical radicals opposed the idea of paternal authority .
 The assumption that the king ruled his nation as a husband and father directed his wife and children had been prominent in early modern political theory . The assumption of the king ruling his nation had been a key part of early modern politics .
 Some pamphlets denounced the subjugation of women to their husbands . Now some pamphlets denounce the subjugating women to husbands .
 Parliament ordered the disbandment of part of the New Model Army without paying the soldiers . Pressured by the Presbyterians, who feared the radicals of the new model Army, Parliament ordered it to be disbanded . Parliament's Victory was Parliament's victory .
 The army refused to disband, and instead it set up a general council . Some members of the council were drawn from the lower officer corps and even rank and file .
 The New Model Army considered Parliament’s attempts to disband it to be part of a plot against the Independents . The New model Army considered the attempt to disband the army to be a political ploy .
 Cromwell ruthlessly restored order in the New Model Army, subduing mutinous Leveller regiments and ordering several leaders shot . This text anticipated later theorists by claiming that all “freeborn Englishmen/’ not just property owners, were the source of political authority .
 In November 1647, King Charles escaped the custody of Parliament and fled to the Isle of Wight . King Charles was captured by Parliament in 1647 . He escaped from Parliament and escaped to Isle Wight in November .
 House of Commons passed motion that no further addresses should be made to King Charles . Presbyterians hoped that some compromise could still be reached .
 The implication was that Parliament alone should proceed to establish a new government without Charles’s participation or consent . Cromwell and many other members of Parliament had already decided that Charles 1 should be put to death and a republic declared .
 In May 1648, Presbyterian moderates joined Cavalier uprisings in southern Wales and southern England . Presbyterian moderates were moderates in the 1648 revolt against the Cavaliers .
 Charles had been secretly negotiating with the Presbyterian Scots . He hoped that they now would join an alliance of Anglicans and members of Parliament .
 The New Model Army turned back a Scottish invasion in August, and besieged royalist forces in Wales surrendered . But the New Model army turned back the Scottish invasion and surrendered .
 A detachment of the New Model Army, under Colonel Thomas Pride, then surrounded the Parliament house and refused to let Presbyterians join the other members . The New Model army refused to allow Presbyterians to join other members of Parliament .
 Rump Parliament, dominated by Independents, appointed a High Court to try the king on charges of high treason . The court is expected to hear the king's case on a charge of treason .
 Charles 1 was executed at Whitehall on January 30, 1649 . He was the first monarch to be tried and executed by his own subjects . Charles 1 is the first king to be executed in England by his subjects .
 Charles’s beheading had immediate international repercussions . One power after another severed diplomatic relations with England . Charles's beheading led to international isolation .
 The Rump Parliament abolished the monarchy and the House of Lords . The Puritan Republic and Restoration were formed from the Puritan republic .
 Cromwell established a Puritan republic, the Commonwealth of England, with Cromwell as its leader . Cromwell was the leader of the country's Puritan state of England .
 In 1649, Cromwell brutally put down the Irish uprising that had gone on for eight years . Cromwell's death was the result of an eight-year uprising in 1649 .
 The Scottish Protestants did not fare any better for having supported Charles, however belatedly, as Cromwell then conquered Scotland in 1650-1651 . Cromwell was the only Protestant to have supported Charles .
 Cromwell fought wars against the Dutch Republic from 1652 to 1654 and Spain from 1655 to 1659 . Cromwell then fought against Spain and Ireland in a bid to reduce their economic rivals' economic power .
 Cromwell was torn between his determination to assure a ‘godly reformation’ in England and a mistrust of political assemblies . It would not dissolve itself and so so Cromwell dissolved it in a military coup . Cromwell, torn between wanting a 'godly' reformation
 This body came to be called the Barebones Parliament, named after one of its members, a certain “Praise-God Barbon,” a leather merchant . This body became known as the Barebone Parliament, which was named after a certain "Praise God Barbon
 The army council dissolved the Barebones Parliament six months later . It proclaimed a Protectorate under a new constitution, the Instrument of Government .
 Cromwell took the title ‘Lord Protector’ and held almost unlimited power . Cromwell was the only person to hold the title 'Lord Protector' Cromwell held the title of Lord Protector .
 Thomas Hobbes argued that the natural state of mankind is one of war, “everyone against everyone,” seemed now to apply to England . The contention of the philosopher Hobbes seemed to apply .
 The Puritan republic turned out to be as oppressive as the monarchy of the Stuart kings . The British monarchy was as repressive as the Stuart monarchy .
 Cromwell imposed taxes without parliamentary approval . He purged Parliament when it disagreed with him . Cromwell's taxes were imposed without approval by Parliament .
 Cromwell sent its members packing in 1655 . Cromwell was in charge when Parliament produced its own constitution . He sent Parliament members packing .
 Cromwell granted de facto religious freedom to all Puritan sects . Cromwell continued to deny such freedom to Anglicans and Catholics .
 Jews had not been allowed in England since 1290, but were allowed back in 1655 . Jews had been allowed back to England since then, but not since 1655.
 Cromwell lost support as a result of financial impositions necessary to fight wars and supply an army of 50,000 men in England . Cromwell was forced to withdraw from Britain in order to fight war and supply 50,500 men .
 The Lord Protector proved to be a better military administrator than a civilian one . He was a military administrator, not a civilian administrator .
 Cromwell alienated people through his exhortations that people behave in “godly’s Puritan ways, as set forth in a code enforced by the army . Cromwell also alienated people by his exhorting that people .
 Cromwell began to wear armor under his clothes and took circuitous routes in order to foil assassins who might be stalking him . Cromwell wore the armor to protect himself from assassins .
 Cromwell claimed to be a humble caretaker of government who would keep order until godly righteousness prevailed . In the meantime, Cromwell said he was a humble servant of the people .
 In 1657, a newly elected Parliament produced another constitution and offered Cromwell the throne of England . Cromwell was elected to the throne in 1657 .
 He refused, perhaps because he believed God had spoken to him against this and because a monarchy would alienate elements in the army . He refused to accept a monarchy, perhaps as he believed .
 He accepted the terms of the “Humble Petition and Advice,” introducing a second house of Parliament (a nominated House of Lords) and a quasi-monarchical position for the Lord Protector . The Lord Protector was given the right to name his successor, including the right
 Cromwell dissolved Parliament because republicans in it were hostile to an evident monarchial direction . Cromwell then dissolved Parliament in favour of republicanism .
 Cromwell died a year later, succeeded by his less able son, Richard . Cromwell was succeeded by Richard, the New Protector .
 After Richard, several military successors stumbled on, backed by remnants of the New Model Army . After Richard's death, several successors stumbled along .
 It seemed to the upper classes that only the restoration of the Stuart monarchy could restore order in England . Increasingly, however, it seemed to be only to restore order . The Stuart monarchy was restored in 17th century .
 Charles Charles (16301685), heir to the throne of his executed father, lived in exile in The Netherlands . Charles was the son of the executed king, Charles Charles, who was executed in 1616 .
 General George Monck shrewdly kept Scottish tax money to pay his soldiers . Monck was a former royalist officer who now commanded the army in Scotland . He kept the money from Scottish tax to pay soldiers .
 Monck marched with his forces on London and dissolved Parliament . After Parliament tried to assert control over the army, he marched on London . Monck dissolved Parliament in 1717 .
 New elections returned an alliance of royalists and Presbyterians, giving Parliament a moderate majority inclined to accept a restoration .
 When Charles issued a conciliatory proclamation, Parliament invited him to assume the throne of England . Parliament invited Charles to assume throne after he issued a proclamation .
 Charles crossed the English Channel in May 1660 and was crowned King Charles 11 on April 23, 1661 . Eleven years after his father s execution, he crossed the . Channel in 1660, he was crowned king Charles 11 in 1661 and crossed the country .
 The return of monarchy seemed to end the extended period of division and chaos . He earned the affection of most of his subjects . The coronation of King Charles 11 in 1661 was the end of a period of chaos .
 He used grand royal ceremonies to help restore faith in the monarchy . He even attempted to cure sufferers of scrofula with the ‘royal touch’ of his hand .
 Restoration turned the clock back to before the English Civil War . Restoration was a victory for parliamentary rule, but it was also a setback .
 The crown refused to extend official toleration to other religions, and the Church of England expelled Presbyterian ministers .
 Once again the king, chronically short of money, depended on Parliament for funds . Once again, the king needed to rely heavily on the money .
 The way now seemed clear for England to continue to expand its commerce and influence in a climate of social and political peace . England is now in a strong position in the world of business and influence .
 Between 1660 and 1688, the tonnage hauled by English ships more than doubled . The merchant fleet established regular trade routes to Newfoundland, Virginia, and the Caribbean .
 Tobacco, calico, furs, sugar, chocolate, and rum brought from the New World changed habits of consumption . Cigarettes and furs brought from New World brought in from Europe and changed habits .
 London became a booming port, and the East India Company emerged as a powerful force in shaping royal policy . The company was influential in shaping the British monarchy .
 Lloyds of London began to insure vessels sailing to the New World in 1688 . The insurance company began insuring ships sailing to New England in the early 1688.
 England's foreign policy entered a new period in support of English manufacture and commerce . It was a new, aggressive period of support for English manufacture, commerce .
 To undermine Dutch competition, Parliament passed a series of Navigation Acts between 1651 and 1673 . All goods brought to England were transported either in English ships or in those belonging to the country of origin .
 This led to three wars with the Netherlands, in 1652-1654 , 1665-1667, and 1672-1674 . The Dutch led to a series of wars with England in the Netherlands .
 The highly charged issues of royal authority and Catholicism and Catholicism led to the Glorious Revolution of 1688, when Parliament summoned a new king to rule England . The issues of the English Civil War led to another constitutional crisis .
 The following year Parliament passed the Bill of Rights . It enshrined the rights of Parliament and the English people, and above all, men who owned property .
 Stuart Religious Designs were created after the return of the Stuarts to power . Religion once again surfaced as a divisive issue in England, threatening to shatter political unity .
 Charles II had returned if not with strong Catholic sympathies, at least with the conviction that he owed toleration to Catholics, some of whom had supported his father . Charles II returned to the throne with the support of some of the Catholics .
 A Stuart king’s seemingly provocative policies generated determined opposition from Parliament, which asserted its prerogatives . Again, a Stuart king's seemingly . provocative policies . generated determined . opposition . Parliament .
 Charles favored Catholics among his ministers . Charles seemed to be trying to appeal to Dissenters in order to build a coalition against the Church of England .
 Parliament passed a series of laws against Dissenters, known as the Clarendon Code . Parliament passed the laws in response to the protests . The laws were passed by Parliament in the 1880s .
 The Act of Corporation required all holders of office in incorporated municipalities to receive communion in the Anglican Church . The Act also required that all elected officials in incorporated townships receive communion with the church .
 Nonconformists had to take an oath that they would not try to alter the established order of church and state in England . The oath was an oath of nonconformity to not alter the order of the state .
 Hundreds of Quakers, members of pacifist group formed in 1649, refused to pay tithes or take oaths and were incarcerated, left to die in prison . Quakers were pacifist pacifists who refused to take oath or pay tributes .
 Charles 11 signed a secret treaty of alliance with Louis XIV of France in 1670 . In 1670, Charles 11 of France signed a treaty with the king of France . Charles 11 died in 1683 in the wake of his death .
 He promised the king of France that he would declare himself a Catholic when the political circumstances in England were favorable . He promised to declare himself Catholic when political circumstances were favorable for him .
 The hostile reaction to his decision, however, forced the king to reinstate the restrictive measures . The king's decision was made in response to the hostile reaction .
 In 1673, Parliament passed the Test Act, which largely superseded the Clarendon Code . The Act excluded non-Anglicans from military and civil office .
 Many people in England suspected that there were plots to restore Catholicism as the state religion . Many people suspected that the plot was behind a plot to restore it .
 In 1678 a strange man named Titus Oates loudly claimed the existence of a plot by the Catholic Church against England . Although Charles II's agreement with Louis XIV remained secret, the agreement with the French remained secret .
 Oates claimed that the Jesuits were preparing to assassinate the king and slaughter all English Protestants . Oates also claimed that Jesuits planned to kill all English Protestant .
 Charles’s devout Catholic brother, James, would then proclaim James, Charles, to king . They then would proclaim James to be king . Charles's Catholic brother would then become king .
 The monarch could not speak up because of his own secret promise to Louis XIV of France to restore Catholicism to England . But he was not allowed to speak out because he had promised to return Catholicism to the country .
 In the 1670s, two factions had emerged in Parliament that in some ways echoed the split between “Court” and “Country” before the Civil War . In 1680s, Parliament split between "Court" and "Country" before Civil War.
 Members of Parliament who supported the full prerogatives of the monarchy became known as Tories . Some of them trumpeting the theories of divine-right monarchy, some of them trumpeted the theories . The old “Court” faction was known as the old ‘Court’
 Whig leaders orchestrated a plan to exclude James from the royal succession because of his Catholicism . James was excluded from the succession because he was a Catholic .
 The Tories defended James as the legitimate heir to the throne of England . During the ensuing Exclusion Crisis, the Tories defended him as a legitimate heir .
 Charles dissolved Parliament in 1679 after some members of Parliament tried to make Charless illegitimate son heir to the throne . Charles dissolved the Parliament after the attempt .
 Whigs profited from the mood of anti-Catholicism to take a majority of seats . In three subsequent parliamentary elections, Whigs took a majority in parliament .
 Parliaments passage in 1679 of the Habeas Corpus Act reflected Whig ascendancy . The act was part of the 16th century's Whig Party .
 This act forced the government to provide a quick trial for those arrested . This act was forced to provide the government with a speedy trial . The government has been accused of corruption .
 By establishing the legal rights of individuals accused of crimes, it further limited monarchical authority . By establishing a legal rights, it also limited monarchs' authority .
 The Habeas Corpus Act was part of the century-long struggle of the House of Commons for the maintenance of its constitutional role in England’s governance .
 Charles II attempted, like his father before him, to rule without Parliament in 1681 . In 1681, Charles II tried to rule with the help of Parliament . Charles II was the first monarch to attempt to rule in England without Parliament .
 Two years later, a number of Whigs were charged with plotting to kill both the king and his brother, and the king had them executed . The king had the Whigs executed .
 Naive as he was devout, James forgot the lessons of recent history and began to dismiss advisers who were not Catholics .
 The Dissenters also benefited from toleration, because the new king needed them as allies . The new king also benefited, because he needed them to be allies .
 When it became apparent that the queen was pregnant, James boldly predicted the birth of a son and Catholic heir to the throne . James predicted that the birth would be a son .
 For enemies of the king, the timing of the birth of a son and the fact that the only witnesses were Catholics inevitably sparked rumors that the newborn was not really the king’s son but a surrogate baby . The king's son was born at the time of his birth, but
 James entertained visions of implanting monarchical absolutism, a tide that approached from the continent . James may have entertained ideas of a monarch that would be king of England .
 In April 1688, he issued a declaration of toleration and ordered clergy to read it from the pulpit . The Anglican clergy was required to read the declaration of tolerance .
 When the bishops were tried in court, a jury declared them not guilty . However, when they were tried, they were found not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 One of James’s Protestant daughters by a previous marriage, Mary (16621694), had married the Protestant Dutchman William of Orange (16501702), the stadholder of the Netherlands . Mary had married William's Protestant daughter, Mary .
 A group of Tories and Whigs, the “immortal seven’’—six nobles and a bishop—invited William to restore Protestantism and, from their point of view, the English constitution . The ‘immortal’s’ was a group
 William, eager that England assist the Dutch in resisting Louis XlV’s aggressive designs, prepared to invade England from the Netherlands . William was eager to help the Dutch .
 Louis XIVs revocation of the Edict of Nantes had outraged the Dutch, who worried that James s successful restoration of Catholicism in England might make the Dutch Republic more vulnerable to Catholic France . The Dutch worried that the restoration of the Catholic faith might make them more vulnerable .
 England was indispensable partner in helping resist Louis XIV s grand ambitions . They believed that England was an indispensable partner, helping resist his grand ambitions.
 A friendly Protestant monarch on the throne of England might even reduce tensions stemming from the trade rivalry between the Dutch Republic and England . The Dutch Republic is a major trade rival with England .
 Louis XIV’s principal interest remained continental territorial expansion . Louis XIV's main interest was continental territory expansion . The French king wanted continental territory .
 Despite declaring war on the Dutch Republic, Louis limited his attacks to verbal bluster and the seizure of several Dutch ships in French ports . Louis only seized several ships in Dutch ports and seized them .
 Emperor Leopold of Austria, another powerful Catholic monarch, was tied up fighting the Turks in the east . He died in 1881 .
 James appointed Catholic officers in his new regiments and brought more troops from Ireland . James did little to prepare military defenses except appoint Catholic officers and bring more troops .
 Hoping for a last-minute compromise, he promised to summon a “free” Parliament . Hoped for a ‘free’ Parliament, he said: “I will summon a free parliament"
 William accused James of arbitrary acts against the nation, Parliament, and the Church of England . In a declaration promulgated early in October 1688, William accused him of arbitrary .
 William marched cautiously to London, encouraged by defections from James' cause . William marched slowly to London in 1763 .
 Uprisings on Williams' behalf in several northern towns further isolated the king . The king was isolated after a series of revolts on his behalf .
 At the end of November, he promised to summon Parliament and allow William's supporters to sit . William’s supporters have been allowed to sit in Parliament .
 Parliament declared the throne vacant by abdication and invited William and Mary to occupy a double throne . Parliament, victorious again, declared the . throne vacant . William and William were invited to occupy the double throne by the British Parliament .
 This “Glorious Revolution"" of 1688, less dramatic than the English Civil War, was arguably of more lasting importance in the constitutional evolution of England . The Bill of Rights was arguably more important than the Civil War .
 Parliament passed a Bill of Rights in 1689 that ratified the Revolution of 1688, ending decades of constitutional battles . Parliament passed the Bill of Right in 1688 that ratified revolution .
 Accepted by William and Mary, it became a milestone in English history . Accepted and accepted by William, it was a major event in the history of the country .
 The Bill of Rights reaffirmed the rights of Parliament and of the accused to the rule of law . Property owners and the accused are entitled to selfgovernment and to self-government .
 It reasserts Parliament’s financial authority over government by enumerating what a monarch should not do . It also reduces royal control over the army .
 The Toleration Act stipulated Protestant Dissenters could hold public services in licensed meeting houses and could maintain preachers . Protestant Dissentingers could also hold services at licensed meetinghouses . The Act was passed in 1883 .
 Anglicanism, however, remained the Established Church of England, and only Anglicans could hold office . Anglicans were allowed to hold office in England . Anglicanism was the first Anglican to be elected to office .
 Catholics could not occupy the throne and, like Dissenters, they were excluded from government positions . Catholics were not allowed to be in government positions, and Catholics were banned from the throne . Catholics would not be allowed to occupy a throne .
 The Glorious Revolution pleased the English philosopher John Locke . John Locke was friend of some of the wealthy landowners who sent James II into exile . The Revolution pleased John Locke, friend of James II's exile .
 Locke was specific about the ways in which the power of monarchs ought to be limited . Locke was very specific about how to limit monarchs' power to power .
 Locke argued that the rights of individuals and, above all, the ownership of property found protection when Parliament’s rights limited monarchical prerogatives . Locke argues that the right to property was protected by Parliament's rights .
 Locke advocated religious toleration and the right of subjects to rise up against tyranny . The Glorious Revolution reaffirmed the political domination of the gentry, whose interests Parliament represented above all .
 English monarchs named nobles to hereditary seats in House of Lords . Wealthy landowners elected members to the House of Commons . Monarchies named nobles but wealthy landowners elected MPs .
 The gentry’s economic and social position was more secure than during inflationary years of the first half of the century . The social and economic position of the gentry is more secure now than in inflationary times .
 The elite of wealthy landowners, increasingly more open to newcomers than their continental counterparts, would continue to shape British political life in the 17th century .
 The English Civil War and the Glorious Revolution affirmed the principle of representation not only in England, but also in the North American colonies, an important legacy for the future .
 The Dutch Republic of the United Provinces (usually known today as the Netherlands) was the other European power (besides Map 6. The Netherlands, or sometimes simply—and erroneously—as Holland, its most populated and prosperous province, was the most prosperous province .
 The Dutch war of independence ended in 1648, with the northern United Provinces becoming the Dutch Republic . The southern provinces remained under Spain as the Spanish Netherlands . The Dutch Republic became the Spanish Republic after the war .
 Spain ruled the Netherlands from 1 5 16, when Charles V inherited the territories of the dukes of Burgundy . Holy Roman Emperor Charles V became king of Spain in Spain .
 The United Provinces, a confederation of republics, had been federalist in structure since the Union of Utrecht in 1579, when the provinces and cities of the Dutch Netherlands came together to form a defensive alliance against the advancing Spanish army .
 The Dutch Republic, from which William of Orange had launched his successful invasion of England in 1688, resisted the aspirations of the House of Orange for a centralized government dominated by a hereditary monarchy . William of the Dutch Republic was from the Netherlands .
 Dutch people identified with the arbitrary acts of the Catholic Spanish monarchy . Like their English counterparts, most people in the Netherlands did not want absolute rule, which they identified .
 The States General served as a federal legislative body of delegations from each of the seven provinces of the Dutch Republic . States General was a federal body of delegates from each province of the Netherlands .
 Each of the provinces held to traditions of autonomy, provincial sovereignty, and, since the Reformation, religious pluralism . Each province held to tradition of autonomy .
 Their economic and political role in the Republic was relatively weak, except in the agricultural eastern provinces . But their economic, political, political and political roles were relatively weak .
 The Dutch Republic was in some ways less a republic than an oligarchy of wealthy families who monopolized political power . The Netherlands was founded by wealthy families, but was not a republic .
 No republican ideology existed until at least at least the second half of the seventeenth century . The republican ideology was created in the 16th century .
 Dutch citizens enjoyed some basic rights unavailable in most other states at the time . But Dutch citizens were granted some rights unavailable to most other Dutch states .
 Provincial courts protected the Dutch against occasional arbitrary acts of both the central government and town governments . Provincial courts were used to protect the Dutch from arbitrary acts .
 Solid fiscal institutions generated international confidence, permitting the Republic to raise sizable loans as needed . The Republic's ability to borrow large amounts of money from international investors is key to its success .
 The princes of the House of Orange served as the stadholder of the Republic . The princes served as stadholders of the Dutch Republic .
 He was not a ruler, and could not declare war, legislate, or even participate in the important decisions of the Republic . He could not have declared war, or participate in important decisions .
 Many Orangist stadholders chafed under the restrictions on their authority . They dominated some high federal appointments and named the sons of nobles to important positions in the army and navy .
 The Orangist stadholders dreamed of establishing a powerful hereditary monarchy . Orangists wanted to establish a powerful monarchy .
 In 1650, William 11 , stadholder of five of the seven provinces, arrested six leaders of Holland and sent an army to besiege Amsterdam . William 11 sent a army to siege Amsterdam and arrested six .
 The Dutch economy developed more rapidly during the first two-thirds of the seventeenth century than did the economies of its competitors* England and France .
 The increased affluence brought by foreign trade helped the Dutch carry on the war against Spain . The increased wealth of the Dutch helped the Spanish to defeat Spain .
 In 1609* following the signing of a truce with Spain, the Amsterdam Public Bank opened its offices in the town hall . The Dutch town hall was built in 1609 following the peace agreement with Spain .
 The bank's principal function was to facilitate Amsterdam’s burgeoning foreign trade . It encouraged merchants to make payments in bills drawn on the bank .
 Foreign merchants attracted to Amsterdam* particularly after mid-century, when bills of exchange became acceptable as currency . Foreign merchants were attracted to the Dutch city after it became acceptable to exchange bills .
 Amsterdam's banking* credit* and warehousing facilities were soon unmatched in Europe . Amsterdam’s banking*Credit* and warehouse facilities soon became unmatched . Amsterdam is now one of the world's most successful cities .
 An ordinance in 1581 had included bankers among those occupations considered disreputable . They were excluded from receiving communion in the Dutch Reformed Church* bankers came to be respected by the early seventeenth century .
 Good credit allowed the United Provinces to raise loans by selling negotiable bonds at low interest rates . The U.S. Provvinces raised the funds through a series of low-interest bonds .
 Merchants had fixed places at the Stock Exchange where they met to arrange financial matters . Merchants would meet at Stock Exchange to arrange various financial matters. Merchants would have fixed places to arrange arrangements .
 These boats along the Spaarne at Haarlem carried goods to the port, where they were loaded for distant trade .
 The Dutch Republic expanded its agricultural resources during the first half of the seventeenth century . Dutch Republic was small in territory and population, but expanded its agriculture resources .
 Workers and horses reclaimed much of the country’s most fertile land from the sea . The land was reclaimed by workers and horses from sea .
 Increased productivity generated an agricultural surplus that was invested in commerce or manufacturing . Increased food supply sustained a larger population . Increased productivity was invested into commerce, manufacturing .
 Commercial livestock raising and capital-intensive farming became lucrative in the 1990s . The livestock raising industry has been booming in recent years .
 The Dutch Republic’s population rose by a third between 1550 and 1650, to almost 2 million people, which made it Europe's most densely populated country after several of Italy's Italian states .
 Amsterdam's population rose from about 50,000 in 1600 to about 200,000 by 1670 . Amsterdam became a major international port of trade and London’s primary rival .
 Construction of three large canals expanded Amsterdam’s area by almost four times in the seventeenth century . Amsterdam's area was expanded by three canals in the 16th century .
 Canals permitted boats to dock outside merchants’ warehouses, where they were loaded with goods, which they then carried to the large ships of the port . These canals were used to carry goods to large ships .
 Handsome townhouses reached skyward above new tree-lined streets along the canals . New townhouses were built along canals in the city .
 Dutch traders steadily expanded their range and the variety of goods they bartered . Dutch traders expanded their trade in the early 1800s and early 1900s .
 They specialized in bulk goods carried by specially designed long, flat vessels that could be cheaply built and operated . The ships were designed to carry bulk goods .
 The Dutch Republic’s merchant fleet tripled during the first half of the century .
 The Dutch Republic’s 2,500 ships in the 1630s accounted for about half of Europe's shipping . Dutch Republic's 2,000 ships accounted for half of the continent's shipping in 1630's era .
 Amsterdam became the principal supplier of grain and fish in Europe as the Dutch dominated the lucrative Baltic trade . Amsterdam was a major grain supplier and fish exporter .
 Dutch ships hauled most of the iron produced in Sweden, and carried wheat and rye from Poland and East Prussia, dropping off what was needed for local consumption and then carrying what was left .
 Dutch capital investment and shrewd knowledge of markets made the herring trade a crucial part of Dutch prosperity .
 Dutch fishing boats were omnipresent in the rich North Sea fishing grounds . Dutch boats are omnipresent throughout the North Sea .
 In 1602, a group of investors founded a private trading company, the Dutch East India Company, to which the government of the Dutch Republic granted a monopoly for trade in East Asia . The government granted the company a monopoly on trade in Asia .
 Thirty Years’ War and a Spanish embargo on Dutch commerce reduced continental trade . Dutch traders successfully developed trade overseas with India, Ceylon and Indonesia .
 The Dutch East India Company proved to be stiff competition for the English company of the same name . The Dutch company was founded in 1881 .
 The Dutch Republic remained a haven of toleration in an era of religious hatred . In contrast to England, where religious division led to civil war, the Dutch Republic was tolerant .
 Perhaps 60,000 Huguenots fled to the Dutch Republic to escape persecution in France and the Spanish Netherlands . Huguentots were persecuted by the French and Spanish .
 Most were immigrants from the German states, and they spoke Yiddish among themselves, as well as German and Dutch . Others had originally left persecution in Spain and Portugal .
 The municipal government rejected a request by Christian merchants that their Jewish competitors be restricted, as in many European cities, to a specific neighborhood, or ghetto . Christian merchants wanted to restrict their competitors' Jewish competitors to a neighborhood .
 Refugees from religious persecution in other countries contributed to the prosperity of the Dutch Republic . The Dutch Republic was founded in 1903 after a series of religious persecution .
 The Dutch Reformed Church, a strict Calvinist religion, did persecute and discriminate against some religious groups . Despite toleration generally accorded in the Dutch Republic, religious toleration was persecuted .
 Catholics, most of whom lived in the eastern provinces, also faced Calvinist hostility . Many had fought for Dutch independence, although many had fought against Dutch independence .
 Jews excluded from most guilds, and gypsies were routinely hounded and persecuted . Jews were excluded from the most common guilds . Gypsies, Jews and Jews were routinely persecuted .
 Tolerance seemed less divisive to the Dutch than intolerance, and it seemed to make economic sense as well . Overall, toleration seemed to be less divisive than intolerance .
 The Dutch in the middle decades of the seventeenth century reached a level of prosperity unmatched in Europe at the time . The Dutch were the most prosperous in Europe during the period .
 Real wages rose during the last half of the seventeenth century while falling elsewhere . Real wages were also rising during the same period of the 16th century .
 Dutch families enjoyed a relatively varied diet, consuming more meat and cheese than elsewhere in Europe . Dutch families consumed more meat, cheese and fish than other Europeans .
 Amsterdam's market offered a plethora of colonial goods, such as coffee, tea, cocoa, ginger, and other spices . Herring, dried and pickled herring and other fish were also available .
 Dutch manufacturers, with windmills providing power, found lucrative outlets for draperies, worsteds, papers, books and jewels .
 The Dutch Republic also had its poor, who lived in the narrow streets around the Bourse . The poor lived in poor farmhouses and farmhouses in the eastern flatlands .
 The urban poor occasionally rioted and sometimes stole to survive in order to survive . Urban poor rioted, sometimes stole, sometimes to survive to survive. Urban poor sometimes rioted or stole to make ends meet .
 The proliferation of charitable institutions demonstrated Dutch compassion but also the desire to confine vagrants and beggars, as well as a capacity to lash out in brutal repression when patience with the poor grew thin . Dutch compassion was shown to be compassion for the poor, but also a capacity for repression
 Beatings, floggings, branding, and even death remained common forms of punishment . Gallows stood at the main gates of large cities, and gallows were at main gates .
 Despite prosperity, a sense of precariousness and vulnerability permeated the Republic . Yet despite prosperity, there was still a sense that vulnerability permeating the Republic.
 Many Dutch people lived in fear of flooding brought by weather . Because so much land had been reclaimed from the sea, many of the Dutch lived in chronic fear of floods .
 A good part of the Dutch Netherlands would have been under water were it not for the famous dikes . The dikes were built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 A sense that disaster might be looming was reflected by the popularity in the Republic of novels and histories about disasters . A sense of disaster might have been reflected in the popularity of the Republic .
 This may explain the sense of solidarity and patriotic duty that brought people of various classes together against Spanish rule . This may also explain the solidarity that united people against Spain .
 Dutch painting in the golden age of the seventeenth century reflected the Republic s commercial wealth, but also its tolerance and openness to secular styles and subject matter .
 The Dutch press enjoyed relative freedom . Books were printed in the Republic that could not have been printed elsewhere . The Republic was founded in 1903 .
 The first English and French newspapers were published in 1620, not in London and Paris, but in Amsterdam, Amsterdam . The first newspaper was published in Amsterdam .
 Dutch writers and poets discovered their own language, translated Latin authors, and popularized Dutch accounts of the revolt against Spain . Dutch writers also discovered the language of their own .
 Like the artists of the Renaissance, Dutch painters depended on the patronage of people of means, particularly wealthy Amsterdam merchants .
 Amsterdam dominated the art market in the 1920s and 1930s . Delft and several other towns each claimed their own style . The city of Amsterdam was known for its style .
 In contrast, the princes of Orange and some nobles patronized French and other foreign artists whose work reflected baroque themes associated with the Catholic Reformation found in the Southern Netherlands .
 Flanders became a northern outpost of the Catholic Reformation, encouraging religious themes with emotional appeal . Flanders was an outpost of Flanders during the Reformation .
 In the Dutch Republic, ecclesiastical artistic patronage was generally absent . The Dutch Republic had ecclesiastical patronage generally absent of ecclesiastical art patronage .
 The Dutch Reformed Church ordered the removal of paintings from its churches .
 Dutch painters looked to picturesque urban and rural scenes within their own country for inspiration . The painters were inspired by the Dutch countryside .
 The Dutch school retained much of its cultural unity at least through the first half of the seventeenth century .
 Until 1650, the Republic remained relatively isolated from outside cultural influences, despite the arrival of refugees and immigrants .
 Very few Dutch artists and writers had the resources to travel as far as Italy or even France . Even those who earned a comfortable living showed little inclination to go abroad .
 Rembrandt van Rijn’s The Night Watch is a theatrically staged masterpiece presenting a group of city officials in uniform . The group paintings of merchants or regents and municipal governments were usually commissioned by the subjects themselves .
 Few artists have so successfully portrayed human emotions through the use of color, light, and shadow . Certainly, few artists have done so successfully .
 Rembrandt was a loner isolated from other painters in his own time . Despite his posthumous fame, he was an isolated loner in his early life .
 Rembrandt increasingly became his own favorite subject, and he did at least eighty self-portraits . Some of the portraits reveal a thinly disguised sadness, some of which reveal a hidden sadness .
 Jacob van Ruisdael (c. 1628-1682) mastered visual effects of light on figures, trees, and household objects .
 The remarkable ability of Delft-born Jan Vermeer to place simple scenes of ordinary people in astonishing light exemplifies the Golden Age of Dutch painting .
 Rembrandt frequently turned to the classical biblical themes that were so predominant in Flemish art . The Dutch school of the seventeenth century was dominated by the classical themes of the Bible .
 Seascapes and naval scenes proliferated in Dutch painting, but there were few canvases depicting battles . Battles were a favorite subject in absolute states, and those took their place on the walls of noble chateaux in the distant countryside .
 The Dutch considered the household a place of refuge and safety from the struggles of the outside world, as well as the basis of economic, social, and political order, and therefore worthy of artistic representation . The Dutch consider the household to be the basis for artistic representations .
 Frans Hals brought middle-class subjects and militia companies to life in remarkably composed individual and collective portraits . Hals' portraits include portraits of militia companies .
 Still lifes of platters of food became staples for Dutch artists, with titles such as Still Life with Herring and Jug still Life with Lobster .
 The banquet became a favorite subject, with all of its accoutrements, such as oak table and chairs, iron cooking pans, elegant plates and drinking vessels . The rituals, like the prayer, the careful carving of the meat, and rounds of toasts, were also a favorite
 The relationship between parents and children emerged as another familiar domestic theme . Parents and children were also a familiar topic in the book .
 Dutch painters also portrayed servants, furniture and other household goods, and domestic pets .
 Dutch women on Dutch canvases appear more equal to men than they were in reality . However, they appear to be more equal than they are in reality, according to Dutch women .
 The relative decline of Dutch power is perhaps not surprising, given the greater economic resources and populations of France and England . The Dutch Republic was founded in 1903 .
 The Dutch Republic tried to steer a course between England (its greatest commercial rival) and France, but this proved impossible . England is the country's biggest commercial rival, and France is its biggest rival .
 Wars against England in defense of Dutch commercial interests drained resources . Wars against the Dutch were costly for the Dutch to defend themselves .
 In 1667, France imposed damaging tariffs on Dutch goods and forced the Dutch out of the cinnamon-producing island of Ceylon in the Indian Ocean . The Dutch were forced to leave the island in 1667 .
 In Brazil, the Dutch West India Company failed to dislodge the Portuguese . The Portuguese were the first to arrive in Brazil .
 The Dutch colonial empire lagged behind those of England and Spain, but also behind that of France . Few Dutch demonstrated much enthusiasm for these distant places .
 With Spain weakened, Louis XIV coveted the Southern Netherlands, the conquest of which would place the Dutch in direct danger . The conquest of the southern Netherlands would be a direct threat to the Dutch .
 Antwerp's return to its former prosperity would be at Amsterdam’s expense . The Scheldt River was closed by the Spanish in 1585 with the goal of breaking the Dutch rebellion .
 French armies quickly occupied all of the Republic except for two provinces, one of which was Holland . Holland was one of the two provinces occupied by French armies .
 The Dutch successfully defended the Republic, defeating the English fleet and pushing back the French army . But the English defeated the Dutch and pushed back the army .
 William of Orange (King William III of England in 1688) forced the States General to name him stadholder in 1672 . The States General took advantage of the invasion .
 He ordered the dikes opened, literally flooding the French into retreat . The dikes flooded the French in retreat .
 Royalist mobs murdered the leading official of the Republic and several influential regents of Holland who had dedicated themselves to keeping the stadholders in place . Several influential Dutch regents were murdered .
 Supporters of the House of Orange eased into important political positions in the province of Orange Orange . The Orange Orange Party has been in touch with the province for decades .
 The Orangists controlled the Republic’s foreign policy until the end of the century, but they still could not impose a monarchy on the provinces . The Republic's foreign policy was largely dominated by the Orangist Party .
 After the Glorious Revolution in England in 1688, the United Provinces allied with England and Sweden, fearing that Louis XIV of France might again invade . After the revolution in England, the U.S. joined forces with Sweden and England .
 The alliance helped stave off the French threat in the last decades of the century . But at the same time it dragged the small country into a series of wars with France that lasted until the mid-eighteenth century, necessitating considerable spending on armies and fortifications .
 The relative decline of Dutch influence in Europe could be first seen by about 1670 or 1680 . Dutch influence could have been first seen in 1670-1680, 1680.
 Some luxury products, such as linen and Delft porcelain, continued to sell abroad . But Holland’s textile industry and shipbuilding failed to keep pace with those of its rivals .
 Higher production costs and a lack of technological innovation are at least partially to blame . Production costs and technological innovation were also to blame for the drop .
 The Dutch faced competition in the herring market from England, France, and Sweden . The Dutch face competition from England and France .
 The protectionist policies of Britain and Sweden protected their own fishermen while cutting off their domestic markets to Dutch herring . The protection policies of the UK and Sweden cut off their own herring markets .
 English warships destroyed Dutch ships in the wars fought between the two rivals . English and Dutch ships destroyed each other's ships during the wars .
 Some Dutch entrepreneurs lent money abroad or invested in the colonies, land, government stocks, and even in English manufacturing, not in Dutch businesses . Furthermore, some Dutch entrepreneurs invested in  the colonies or government stocks .
 Painters began looking abroad for inspiration and, by doing so, lost some originality . Painters now look abroad to find inspiration for their work, but have lost originality.
 Amsterdam's new town hall combines Italian classicism and Flemish baroque flamboyance . In the 1650s, the Amsterdam regents ignored the Dutch school when planning the construction and decoration .
 Some Dutch leaders now took pride in speaking French, believing it was the language of good taste . Some leaders believed it was a language of 'good taste'
 Although the French military invasion of 1672 failed, the cultural invasion succeeded . It was a cultural invasion of the Netherlands .
 There were fewer paintings of attentive and hardworking municipal and provincial officials .
 Dutch originality of Dutch political life waned with relative economic decline . Originality of political life also waned in the country's political life, according to the Dutch .
 The great merchant families maintained tight control over the position of regent and other influential posts . Great merchant families maintain tight control of the position .
 A form of municipal corruption allowed them to divide up or even purchase lucrative government positions . The mayor's office says it was a form of government corruption that allowed the government to buy lucrative positions .
 More regents were now major landowners and had little in common with merchants . Merchants had vital interests in government policies . Regents had little common common interests with merchants, who had important interests .
 Government became more rigid, more distant from the Dutch people, and less tolerant, persecuting religious dissenters and undertaking a witch hunt against homosexuals . The Dutch government became less tolerant and more rigid in the 1980s .
 Dutch Republics loss of vitality and economic primacy was accompanied by its decline in international affairs . The Dutch Republic's loss of economic vitality and vitality was also accompanied by a decline in its international role . The country's decline in economic and political power has led to its demise as a result
 At the dawn of the eighteenth century, England and the Netherlands remained non-absolutist states . Conclusion: At the start of the 17th century, both countries were non-abolutists .
 The victory of Parliament in the English Civil War, the Glorious Revolution of 1688, and the Bill of Rights of 1689, accepted by the monarchy, guaranteed the rights of Parliament and the rule of law . Parliament's victory in the Civil War ensured the right of Parliament to the
 Great Britain would remain a great power in the eighteenth century, enriched by commerce and empire . While the Netherlands entered a period of decline, as had Spain .
 The kings of Spain and the rulers of France, Prussia, Austria, Russia, and Sweden increased their authority over their subjects as continental Europe entered the age of absolutism . In the meantime, the kings of Germany, France and Prussia were kings .
 In 1662, the king chose the sun as his emblem; he declared himself nec pluribus impar —without equal . The sun was the king's emblem, and he chose it as his own .
 Louis XIV would frequently be depicted as Apollo, the Greek and Roman sun god . The French king would frequently depict him as the god of the sun .
 The rulers of continental Europe, including Louis XIV (ruled 16431715), relentlessly extended their power between 1650 and 1750 . Louis XIV, who ruled 1650-1750, was ruled by the French in 1650 .
 The sovereigns of France, Prussia, Russia, Austria, and Sweden became absolute rulers in principle above all challenge from within the state itself .
 To the east, the power of the Turkish sultan of the Ottoman Empire was itself already in principle absolute . To the west, it was already an absolute absolute power in the Middle Ages .
 Rulers extended their dynastic domains and prestige, making their personal rule absolute . Personal rule was based on loyalty to them as individuals, not to the state as an abstraction . The state of the state is an abstraction, not an abstraction.
 They helped lay the foundations for the modern centralized state . But at the same time, they also laid the foundations of the modern state . The state was founded by Napoleon III in the early 1900s .
 Absolute rulers asserted their supreme right to proclaim laws and levy taxes, appointing more officials to carry out the details of governance and multiplying fiscal demands on their subjects .
 Most of the long-standing privileges of towns, which had survived longer in Western Europe than in Eastern Europe, were ended . Towns were given freedom from taxation, or the right to maintain independent courts .
 The absolute state affected the lives of more people than ever before through taxation, military service, and the royal quest for religious orthodoxy . It affected many more people through taxation and military service .
 Absolute rule impinged directly on the lives of subjects, who felt the extended reach of state power through efficient tax collection . Absolute rule thus impinged on subjects, according to the laws of the state .
 Absolutism was at least in part an attempt to reassert public order and coercive state authority after almost seventy years of wars that had brought economic, social, and political chaos . It was a response to almost 70 years of war that brought economic and social chaos, but also brought
 England and Spain had been at war in the last decades of the sixteenth century . Spain and England were at war between the 15th and 16th century .
 Dutch war of independence against Spain against Spain began in 1566 and did not officially end until 1648 . The Dutch war against Spain was officially ended in 1648, although it was never officially ended .
 The tumultuous decade of the 1640s was particularly marked by political crises . The turbulent decade was marked by a series of political crises between 16 and 18 years .
 Wars had led to often dramatic increases in taxes, which quadrupled in Spain under Philip II . France's taxes jumped fivefold in France between 1609 and 1648 .
 In France, the period of mid-century rebellion known as the Fronde included a noble uprising against the crow n and determined, violent peasant resistance against increased taxation .
 The doctrine of absolutism originated with French jurists late in the sixteenth century . The doctrine was developed in France in the 16th century .
 The emergence of theories of absolutism reflected attempts to conceptualize the rise of larger territorial states whose rulers enjoyed more power than their predecessors .
 Bodin helped establish the political theory legitimizing French absolute rule . Bodin, who like many other people in France longed for peace and order, helped establish a political theory that legitimized absolute rule. Bodin's work helped establish political theory .
 Thomas Hobbes (1588— 1679) emerged as the thundering theorist of absolutism . Almost a century later, the political philosopher Hobbes emerged as a thundering theoretical theorist . Hobbes was a political philosopher and the founder of the Hobbes Society .
 Hobbes insisted that people would only obey when they were afraid of the consequences of not doing so . Hobbes said that people only obey people when they are afraid of consequences . People would obey Hobbes, he said, when they're afraid of being disobedient .
 England and then Great Britain remained an exception to the absolutist wave that swept across continental Europe .
 Hobbes: A ruler’s will became for Hobbes the almost sacred embodiment of the state . Hobbes' will thus became for him to be the most powerful ruler in the world, Hobbes said .
 In France, Jacques Bossuet , bishop and tutor to Louis XIV, postulated that kings ruled by “divine right” that is, by virtue of the will of God . In France he postulated kings rule by ‘divine rights’
 Bossuet held that the ruler’s authority stemmed from God alone . Hobbes's notion of authority based on a social contract was based on the social contract .
 Theory of absolutism recognized difference between absolute and arbitrary or despotic rule . Yet theorists of absotism recognized the difference from absolute to arbitrary rule .
 Inherent in their theories was the idea that the absolute ruler was responsible for looking after the needs of his people .
 Absolute states were characterized by strong, ambitious dynasties . Through advantageous marriages, inheritance, warfare, and treaties added their dynastic domains and prestige .
 Their states had nobilities that accepted monarchical authority in exchange for a guarantee of their status, ownership of land, and privileges within the state and over the peasantry . Whether peasants were legally free, as in Western Europe, or serfs as in Prussia, Austria, Poland,
 Unlike England and the Dutch United Provinces, these states had no representative institutions and few towns of sufficient importance to stand in the way of absolute rule . Unlike England, the Dutch and English states had few representative institutions to stand against absolute rule.
 Commonwealth of Poland-Lithuania was an exception and thus did not fit the Russian or Prussian model . The Commonwealth of Lithuania and Poland was not an exception to the Prussian or Russian model .
 The Commonwealth of Poland-Lithuania was created in 1569 by virtue of the Union of Lublin . The Commonwealth was created by the 15th century . Poland and Lithuania was one of the most powerful nations in Europe .
 The parliamentary system was founded in the fifteenth century . It protected the personal freedom of the citizens of the monarchy .
 Absolute monarchies created an unprecedented concentration of governing power in Western Europe .
 The Portuguese assembly of nobles did not meet at all during the eighteenth century . To take another example, the Portuguese Assembly of Nobility met not once .
 In each absolute state, the relationship between ruler and nobles determined the specific character of absolutism . Monarchs and Nobles determine the state's character . The relationship between monarchs and nobles determines absolutsism .
 Monarchs negotiated compromises with nobles, awarding titles and confirming privileges for obedience, or compliance . Monarchs negotiate titles and confirm privileges for compliance, or obedience .
 But emphatic assertions of royal authority reduced nobles to the role of junior ruling partners in governance, dominating state and local government .
 Nobles frightened by social and political turmoil that shook Europe during the first half of the century . Nobles now more willingly served rulers as royal officials and military commanders .
 Louis XIV of France asserted the right to monitor the legitimacy of all titles and even to confiscate noble estates . Louis XIV was able to monitor all titles . He was also able to seize noble estates and confiscate them .
 In 1668, he ordered the investigation of ‘false’ nobles holding dubious titles . The investigation was launched in 1668 by the King of England .
 These measures helped the king maintain the loyalty of nobles, some of whom resented those who held titles they considered suspect .
 The great noble families enjoyed an even greater monopoly over the most lucrative and prestigious royal and ecclesiastical posts . Great noble families thereafter enjoyed even greater .
 Using the augmented power of the state, rulers placated nobles by ending a turbulent period of peasant uprisings against taxes, obligations to lords, and the high price of grain .
 The gradual centralization of authority in Eastern Europe left nobles with even more autonomy than they had in the West . Russian lords, Polish nobles, and Prussian nobles had the possibility of further increasing their wealth and power through the extension of their estates .
 Beginning in the late sixteenth century, such seigneurs made fortunes shipping grain to the West, where prices of cereal and food had risen dramatically in response to population growth .
 Royal decrees in Prussia and Russia and assembly legislation in Poland progressively limited the right of peasants to move from the land they worked or even to inherit property .
 Peasant proprietors had to sell their land to nobles . Ravaged by hard times, peasant proprietors were forced to sell to nobles.
 peasants lost their personal freedom, a process most marked in Russia . Impoverished and virtually powerless to resist, peasants lost personal freedom . The process was marked by peasants who lost their freedom .
 The economic crises of the seventeenth century, including the Thirty Years’ War and the decline in Western demand for grain imported from the East, only made conditions of life harder for serfs .
 The sultan recognized no rights of property, so no hereditary nobility could challenge his authority . He granted landed estates to those who served him, but no hereditary nobility could challenge him .
 Towns in the overwhelmingly rural empire had neither autonomy nor rights . Towns in rural areas were not given autonomy or rights. Towns in overwhelmingly rural areas had neither rights nor autonomy nor autonomy .
 Absolute monarchs extended their authority within their territories by expanding the structure of the state .
 Renaissance city-states had created relatively efficient civil administrations and had set up the first permanent diplomatic corps . City-states of Italy had created the first diplomatic corps in the Renaissance .
 The apparatus of administration, taxation, and military conscription gradually became part of the structure of the absolute states, which were increasingly centralized . During the seventeenth century, the apparatus of . administration, . taxation and military . conscription . became . part of . the structure .
 In Europe as a whole, the number of government officials grew about fourfold . The number of officials in Europe grew fourfold in the 1990s .
 To fill the most prestigious offices, monarchs chose nobles for their influence more than for their competence . Monarchies chose noblemen for influence, not competence, more for influence .
 Some absolute rulers began to employ commoners as officials to collect vital information . Commoners were used to project revenues or anticipate the number of soldiers available for war .
 Tripling of tax revenues between 1520 and 1670 in France and Spain, and in England as well . One result of these expanding ranks of officials was the tripling of taxes .
 To raise money, absolute rulers sold monopolies (which permitted only the holder of the monopoly to produce and sell particular goods) on the production of salt, tobacco, and other commodities .
 The rulers of France, Spain, and Austria also filled the state coffers by selling hereditary offices . The rulers sold hereditary offices in order to raise money .
 James 1 of England doubled the number of knights during the first four months of his reign . James 1 doubled the numbers of knights in four months .
 Queen Christina of Sweden doubled the number of noble families in ten years . Queen Christina doubled the size of the Swedish royal family in the last decade .
 As royal power and prestige rose, monarchs more easily found wealthy families to loan them money, usually in exchange for tax exemptions, titles, or other privileges . In addition to the money, the monarchs often found rich families to lend them money .
 The regular collection of taxes and the expansion of sources of revenue increased the capacity of absolute rulers to maintain standing armies and fortifications, and wage war .
 The Size of European Armies, 1690-1814 . Britain 70,000 75,000 200,000 40,000* 250,000 France 400,000 350,000 330,000 180,000 600,000 . Habsburg Emp. of the Habs
 Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers , 99. deployment of a large standing army capable of maintaining order at home and maintaining or expanding dynastic interests and territories . 99. deploy of a standing army .
 Absolutist statemaking and warfare had direct and indirect consequences for most of the European population . The result of absolutism and warfare was the result of most of Europe's population . It was a period of European history that saw the rise of statematism and warfare
 Kings no longer depended on troops provided by nobles or military contractors, thereby avoiding the risk that private armies might challenge royal power . Kings now rely on private armies instead of relying on military contractors .
 During the 1500s, the peacetime armies of the continental powers had included about 10,000 to 20,000 soldiers . By the 1690s, they had reached about 150,000 troops .
 For the first time, uniforms became standard equipment for every soldier . Uniforms are now standard equipment . The U.S. Army is the largest military force in the world .
 England and the Dutch Republic, two non-absolutist powers, had relatively small armies, and, as sea powers, both depended on their navies . The Dutch Republic had a relatively small army, and England had small armies .
 As absolute monarchs consolidated their power, the reasons for waging international wars changed . The reasons for the wars changed.
 The wars of the previous century had been fought, in principle, over the rivalry between the Catholic and Protestant religions, even if dynastic interests were never far from the surface . The wars were fought over religious differences .
 Religious rivalries still constituted an important factor in international conflict . “reasons of state” became a prevalent justification for the rulers of France, Prussia, and Russia to make war on their neighbors .
 Warfare both encouraged and drew upon the development of credit institutions . Warfare both encourage and encourage development of the credit industry .
 A state did not have to be absolutist to marshal sufficient resources to fight sustained wars . But as the British and Dutch cases demonstrated, the state must marshal resources to defeat wars .
 The crown’s reputation for repayment facilitated raising money through loans at home and abroad . The crown's reputation for rewarding received reputation for repayment .
 Amsterdam's stature as a great banking center contributed to the ability of the Dutch government to fight extended wars . Amsterdam’s stature as well as the ability to fight long wars contributed to Amsterdam's success .
 The French monarchy lacked the confidence of wary investors, and despite the sale of privileges found itself in an increasingly perilous financial situation . In contrast, the French royal family lacked confidence of investors .
 French monarchy often had to pay higher rates of interest than private investors because it was a bad credit risk . The French monarchy was often forced to pay more interest than those of private investors .
 Military expenditures now take up almost half of the budget of the European state . Even in peacetime, military expenditures now took up almost . half the budget .
 By the end of the sixteenth century, Philip II of Spain had allocated three-quarters of state expenditures to pay for past wars or to wage new ones . Philip II had allocated the majority of the state's budget to fund past wars, or new ones, or to fund new ones
 The bureau in Prussia that would oversee tax collection itself evolved from the General War Office . The close connection between the extraction of state revenue and the waging of dynastic wars was made explicit .
 Inevitably, there came a point even in absolute states when noble and other wealthy families began to grumble . Wealthy families on which monarchies depended for financial support began to complain .
 An alliance with established churches helped monarchs achieve and maintain absolute rule . The monarchs were able to achieve absolute rule through alliance with the churches .
 Absolute monarchs lent their authority and prestige to the established churches, the support of which, in turn, seemed to legitimize absolute monarchical power . The support of the churches seemed to be a legitimization of absolute monarchs .
 In Catholic states in particular, the quest for uniformity of belief and practice went hand in hand with the absolutist monarch’s desire to eliminate challenges to his authority .
 The Church helped create an image of the king as a sacred figure who must be obeyed because he served God’s interests on earth . The Church created an image . The image of a king was created by the Church .
 In turn, absolute monarchs obliged the Church by persecuting religious minorities . The Church obliged monarchs to protect religious minorities from persecution . The Catholic Church was forced to convert to Christianity .
 Church owned as much as two-thirds of the land in Portugal, at least one-tenth of land in Spain, Austria, and France . Church also had holdings in every Italian state, including Italy, Spain and Austria .
 The Church claimed the right to the tithe, a tax of 10 percent on annual resources . The Church also claimed to be able to pay a 10 percent tax on the annual resources of its resources .
 absolute monarchs maintained authority over ecclesiastical appointments, creating national churches, much to the consternation of the papacy in Rome . Absolute monarchs also maintained power over the appointment of ecclesiastical officials .
 Signs of the victory of absolute rulers over the Catholic Church included eliminating the Inquisition in France and Spain, closing monasteries and expelling religious orders in France, Austria and Austria .
 In France, the existence of the French, or Gallican Church, defied papal claims to complete authority over the Church . The very existence of a French church defied Papal claims that he had complete authority in France .
 By the Concordat of Bologna in 1516, the pope had given the kings of France virtual control (subject to papal confirmation) over the appointment of bishops in France and the right to overrule ecclesiastical courts .
 French clergy recognized only the authority of the pope “beyond the mountains,"" that is, over the Alps in distant Rome . This irritated French “ultramontane"" clergy .
 Provincial parlements, or noble law courts, remained defiantly Gallican . The provincial parlements were the provinces' most important courts .
 Gallican Church itself was far more likely to remain loyal to the monarchy that defended its prerogatives . Gallicans themselves insisted that the pope and bishops retain spiritual authority, with the king having only temporal power .
 The Turkish Ottoman Empire remained a theocracy . Recognizing no distinction between church and state, the Ottoman Empire was a theocratic .
 The Muslim religious hierarchy, which included judges, theologians, and teachers, provided officials for the imperial administration . The Islamic religious hierarchy provided officials .
 The supreme religious dignitary occasionally invoked religious law, which he was the main interpreter, to counter orders of the sultan . The sultan’s political authority remained absolute .
 The expansion of the Ottoman Empire had been based upon the concept of the crusading “Holy War" against infidels, that is, non-Muslims . The expansion was based on the idea of the 'Holy War' against infids .
 As the Turks destroyed the Byzantine Empire, capturing Constantinople in 1453, they confiscated many of the resources of the Orthodox Church and other Christian denominations .
 Ottoman Turks enslaved prisoners of war, purchased slaves abroad, and imposed slave levies on Christians of the empire . The Ottoman Turks also imposed slave taxes on Christian Christians .
 Christian children had been trained as officials or soldiers and had converted to Islam . Many Christian children were trained as soldiers or officials . Many of the children were Christian children who had converted .
 The empire also depended on the contributions of nonslave Christians, including skilled Greek sailors . Turkish galleys feared in the Mediterranean .
 Some joined the “janissary’s infantry, a military corps that assumed police duties in periods of peace . Some of the ‘janissaries’ were also known as “Janissary - infantry .
 As long as nonMuslims did not resist Turkish authority, they were free to practice their religion and to become officials within the empire . Non-Muslims were free as long as they were not resisting Turkish authority .
 In Albania and Bosnia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, many people, including some nobles, converted to the Muslim faith . In Albania alone conversions seemed to have been forced .
 Young Christians captured by Turkish fleets could convert to Islam to escape a life chained to benches as galley slaves . Young Christians were captured as slaves in Turkish fleets .
 Muslims captured by Christian powers remained galley slaves, even if they converted . In contrast, Christians captured by Muslim powers remained a galley slave .
 Absolute monarchs utilized the extravagant emotional appeal of monumental architecture . Monumentalism in Architecture and Art is a form of art .
 They designed their capitals to reflect the imperatives of monarchical authority . They were designed to reflect monarchial authority .
 Madrid, Berlin, Saint Petersburg, and Versailles were planned, shaped, and invested with symbols of absolute rule . Madrid and Berlin were planned and shaped, shaped by the French capital . Paris, Paris, Saint-Germain, Paris and Paris were planned for absolute rule by
 In contrast to the narrow, winding streets of cities that had evolved organically from medieval times, straight, wide boulevards were created in one fell swoop . The boulevard was created in the same way as the narrow streets of medieval times .
 These symmetrical boulevards symbolized the organized and farreaching power of absolutism and the growth of the modern state . They symbolize the organized, far reaching power of the state .
 Royal armies paraded down boulevards to squares or royal palaces, around which grouped government buildings and noble residences . Around the square, the royal residences and government buildings were grouped around government buildings .
 Barracks housing standing armies also became a prominent feature of the new urban landscape . Barracks were built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Monarchs paid artists and architects to combine baroque elements with a more restrained, balanced classicism . Monarchs were influenced by the early sixteenth-century Roman style of the High Renaissance . The Monarchs are said to have paid artists to combine their talents with the Baroque
 The facade of the Louvre palace in Paris, the work of Gianlorenzo Bernini, drew on the architectural style of Roman temples, thereby linking Louis to the glories of Caesar .
 France became the strongest state in early modern Europe . Absolutism in France was the most successful state in Europe .
 Louis XIlI's invaluable minister Cardinal Richelieu had used provincial “intendants” to centralize and further extend monarchical authority . Louis XI lI's "intendants" were used in the 17th century to centralise and extend monarchial authority .
 Upon Louis XIlI’s death in 1643, the stage was set for Louis XIV to rule as a divine-right king of an absolute state . Louis XIV ruled as the king of France .
 France would first experience the regency of his mother and the revolt known as the Fronde . But before the young Louis could take control of the government, France would also experience the Regency .
 Louis XIV was four years old at the time of his accession to the throne . Taming “Overmighty Subjects "" was Louis XIV's attempt to tame his subjects .
 Mazarin always dressed in the finest red silk and was well known for his love of money . Mazarin was a worldly, charming, and witty Italian, always dressed .
 A master of intrigue, rumor had it that he and Anne had secretly married .
 Most nobles, with much to lose from civil disturbances, remained loyal to the monarchy . Most nobles with much of their own wealth remained loyal .
 Mazarin's prolongation of the victorious struggle against Spain generated a political crisis . Mazarin’s prolongation . of the struggle generated a . political crisis. But Mazarin .
 Resistance to royal authority culminated in a revolt that shook the Bourbon monarchy at mid-century . The Bourbon monarchy was overthrown by the French Revolution in 1903 .
 Ordinary people entered the fray, demanding lower taxes because of deteriorating economic conditions . Ordinary citizens are demanding lower tax rates .
 The revolt became known as the Fronde—named for a slingshot boys in Paris used to hurl rocks . The revolt was the first of its kind in France and the second in France .
 Mazarin, whom many nobles considered a ‘foreign plotter’ and an outsider like Anne of Austria, had borrowed money for the state from financiers . Mazarin was considered a "foreign plotter" and a “foreign prophet”
 He did so against expected revenue from new taxes or the sale of offices . He did not want to raise taxes or sell offices in the state .
 They complained bitterly that since the wars had ended supplementary impositions were needless . But now they complained bitterly bitterly that such imposions were needless.
 Some of the oldest noble families had claimed for some time that they had been systematically excluded from the highest and most lucrative and prestigious offices . Furthermore, some of the most prominent and most prestigious offices were closed .
 King feared the power of disloyal ‘overmighty subjects,” preferring lesser nobles for military offices and skilled bureaucrats for some civil posts . In fact, there was some truth in this claim .
 nobles of the sword denounced Mazarin, his system of patronage, and his financier friends, some of whom had made fortunes supplying the royal armies . Some of the king's supporters were some of the wealthiest men in France .
 Mazarin attempted to secure the approval of the Parlement of Paris for increased taxes in 1648 . Mazarin tried to get the approval for the increase of taxes in France .
 The Parlement of Paris, the chief law court in France, was made up of nobles who had purchased their positions from the crown . It was the first of its kind in France and was the most important court in Europe .
 The Parlement of Paris defied the Regency by calling for an assembly of the four sovereign courts of Paris to consider the financial crisis . Wanting to safeguard their privileges and power, the Parlement called for a financial crisis to be considered .
 The assembly proposed that the courts elect delegates to consider financial reforms in the realm . Meeting without royal permission, the assembly proposes that the court elect delegates .
 The provincial parlements joined the protest against what seemed to be unchecked royal authority . Provincial parlements join the protest . The protest was held in response to the protests .
 Financiers who had earlier purchased titles from the crown now refused to loan the state any more money . Finansciers now refuse to lend the state more money to the state .
 barricades went up in Paris in support of the parlement in August 1648 . When Mazarin ordered the arrest of some of the defiant members of the . parlement .
 From inside the Louvre palace, Louis XIV, now nine years of age, heard the angry shouts of the crowds . Louis XIV was nine years old when he was assassinated in Paris in 1716 .
 Popular discontent forced the royal court to flee Paris in January 1649 . The royal court was forced to flee the city in 1649 after 1649.
 The role of the prince of Conde, head of the junior branch of the Bourbon family, was crucial in the Fronde . The role was crucial to the success of the 18th century .
 Mazarin had met Conde s demands for money and offices, but the latter remained loyal to the young king . Mazarin marched to Paris with his army to defend him in 1648 . Conde had demanded money, offices and offices from Mazarin .
 Major uprisings against taxes, which had doubled in two decades, broke out in several provinces . Richelieu and Mazarin had raised money to wage war .
 Relatively poor nobles, who resented that wealthy commoners were able to purchase titles, led other revolts . Poor nobles led revolts against the wealthy .
 Anne and Mazarin found noble allies against Conde and early in 1650 ordered him imprisoned . Fearing Conde influence, a Spanish invasion, and further insurrections, Anne found allies against him .
 Conde’s arrest further mobilized opposition to Mazarin, whose enemies forced the minister to flee the country early the next year . Conde was arrested in March 2013, and Mazarin was forced to leave the country .
 A year later, Conde was released from prison at the demand of the Parlement of Paris . Conde, who was jailed for 17 years, was released a year later at the request of Parisian authorities .
 Conde fled to Spain after finding insufficient support from the parlement, the municipal government, or ordinary Parisians, Conde . Conde found insufficient support in Paris, but fled the country to Spain .
 Louis XIV restored monarchical authority by ending the nobles’ rebellion and putting down peasant resistance against taxation . Louis XIV put down peasants’s resistance against taxes .
 Louis made clear that henceforth the Parlement of Paris could not meddle in the king’s business . The Parlement was made clear of the king's business . Louis made it clear that it was impossible to meddle with the king .
 The king deprived the twelve parlements of their right to issue remonstrances before registering an edict . And in 1673, the king deprived them of the right to say objections to the registration of new royal ordinances .
 The king disbanded the private armies of headstrong nobles and tightened royal control over provincial governors . The king also disbanded private armies and tightened control of provincial governors.
 Unlike the English Parliament’s successful rebellion against the crown in defense of constitutional rule , royal victory in the Fronde broke French noble resistance to absolute rule . Unlike English Parliament's successful rebellion, royal victory broke noble resistance .
 The king's predecessors had frequently consulted with prominent nobles about important matters . The king’s predecessors had often consulted with . prominent nobles .
 Fronde demonstrated that the crown had to rule more subtly with respect to noble interests . Yet the Fronde also demonstrated that . The Fronde .
 Following Mazarin’s death in 1661, Louis XIV assumed more personal responsibility . Louis XIV, now twenty-two years old, assumed more responsibility for his actions .
 Jean-Baptiste Colbert was controller-general of the realm . He directed administration, taxation, and public works . Colbert was responsible for the state's financial stability .
 Colbert endured the hostility of the old noble families . The grandson of a provincial merchant of modest standing, Colbert endured hostility . Colbert endured .
 He employed surveyors and mapmakers to assess the economic resources of the provinces . Surveyors, mapmakers used to assess economic resources in provinces .
 As much as fourfifths of what was collected poured into the royal treasury . Whereas formerly only about a quarter of revenues reached the royal coffers .
 Mercantilism underlay the economy of absolutist France, as it did royal economic policies in Europe . Mercantillism underwrote the French monarchy's economic policies .
 Mercantilists posited that all resources should be put into the service of the state . A state’s wealth was measured by its ability to import more gold and silver than it exported, they said .
 Colbert became the chief proponent of French mercantilist policies, which emphasized economic self-sufficiency . Jealous of English and Dutch prosperity, Colbert was the main proponent of France mercantillist policies .
 Louis XIV established Gobelins tapestry manufacture on the edge of Paris . He encouraged the textile industry and the manufacture of other goods that could be exported .
 He oversaw the extension of France s network of canals, including the Languedoc Canal . He improved roads and oversaw the expansion of France's canals . He also oversaw the creation of the Garonne Canal, which links the Mediterranean to the Mediterranean .
 The French East India Company was established by Colbert in 1664 . It could not effectively compete with Dutch and English rivals in the quest for global trade .
 The monarchy had to bail out the company and later took away its trading monopoly . The monarchy was forced to take action after the company's trading monopoly collapsed .
 Trade within France remained hamstrung by a bewildering variety of restrictions and internal tariffs . In some places, the hodgepodge of French states was not much different from those that characterized German states . France's trade within France was hamstracked by restrictions and tariffs that in some
 The king was a master of extracting revenue from his subjects . But his greatest talent was for emptying the royal coffers with dizzying speed .
 Louis XIV and his successors plunged the monarchy into an everdeepening and eventually disastrous financial crisis . Louis XIV's reign plunged the French monarchy into a financial crisis in the 17th century . The French monarchy was plunged into financial turmoil by Louis XIV .
 As Louis XIV grew into manhood, he looked the part of a great king and played it superbly . The Absolute Louis XIV: The Absolute .
 The king's love of gambling, hunting, and women sometimes took precedence over matters of state .
 Although a spendthrift, he closely monitored the accounts of his realm . But he also supervised the work of the high council of his prominent officials . He closely monitored his realm's accounts .
 The king became a shrewd judge of character, surrounding himself with men of talent . The king surrounded himself with people of talent, including talent .
 Louis XIII avoided being dependent on any single person, the way Louis XIII had been on Richelieu, or his mother on Mazarin . He consciously avoided being dependable, like his mother, Mazarin.
 During a visit to the chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte, Louis was served with solid gold tableware and viewed large pools filled with seawater and even saltwater fish .
 The king promptly ordered Fouquet arrested and took the magnificent chateau for himself . Fouquet was arrested and taken into custody by the king .
 Louis dissolved any remaining pretensions of autonomy held by the elites in the major provincial towns . Having affirmed his authority over Paris, Louis reaffirmed his authority in Paris .
 One result of the Fronde was that the monarchy expanded the narrow social base on which state power had previously rested . The Fronde expanded the social base of the state to a wider social base .
 St. Louis selected governors, intendants, and bishops who would be loyal to him . He selected governors and intendants in order to be loyal .
 Mayors became officials of the state who had to purchase their titles in exchange for fidelity to the king . Mayors had to buy their titles from the king to be able to become officials .
 Wealthy merchants now preferred to seek ennoblement rather than try to maintain municipal privileges that seemed increasingly archaic . Wealthy businessmen now prefer ennobling rather than trying to maintain such privileges .
 In 1667, Louis appointed a lieutenant-general of police for Paris . He was given extensive authority ranging from powers of arrest to responsibility for street cleaning and fire fighting . Louis took another important step in affirming his authority .
 Paris soon had street lighting—thousands of glass-enclosed candles—during the early evening hours . Paris soon became a major city of lights .
 Louis XIV portrayed himself as Gods representative, charged with maintaining earthly order . Louis XIV presented himself as God's representative in France .
 The royal propaganda machine provided ideological legitimacy by cranking out images of the king as a glorious monarch . The propaganda machine was used to provide ideological legitimacy for the king .
 Royal censors suppressed publications, prohibited imported books, and limited the number of printers . At the same time, royal censors also restricted imported books .
 The goal of censorship was to protect the honor and reputation of the king and religion . The goal was to keep the king's reputation and religion from being censored .
 Louis XIV created the first French ministry of war and shaped it into an effective bureaucracy . Louis XIV shaped the ministry into a powerful bureaucracy . The ministry was the first of its kind in France .
 The king and his ministers brought the nobledominated officer corps under royal control, making seniority the determinant of rank . Wealthy nobles charged handsome sums for commanding their own regiments or companies .
 The ministry of war ordered the construction of military academies, barracks, and drilling grounds, and ordered the brilliant military engineer Sebastien le Prestre de Vauban (16331707) to fortify key border towns . The Ministry of War ordered the . construction of the .
 Nobles insisted more than ever that institutionalized noble privileges were necessary to counter the excesses of absolute authority . Nobles still insisted more . than ever, though more quietly than at the time of the Fronde .
 They benefited from the economic development the monarchy encouraged, such as the construction of better roads and networks of canals . The monarchy was largely underwritten by the state .
 Since the time of Henry IV, offices had effectively become forms of hereditary property . Since Henry IV of Henry II, offices were effectively forms of inheritance property .
 Louis XIV s lavish sale of offices and titles expanded the nobility . 500 titles were sold with a single edict in 1696 . Louis XIV sold 500 titles with the sale of office and titles .
 Few noble families now could trace their titles back more than several generations . Few noble houses now have titles dating back to several generations of generations .
 The nobles of the sword dominated court life, but the king did not hesitate to dip into the ranks of commoners to find efficient, loyal officials . The king exempted them from taxation and provided lucrative posts for their offspring .
 A noble of the sword denounced the ‘reign of the vile bourgeoisie,” that is . nobles of recent title and other relative upstarts he viewed as unworthy of prominent posts . The noble denounced the "reign" of the . bourgeoisie .
 Louis XIV never forgot hearing the howling Parisian mob from his room in the royal palace . Louis XIV was at Versailles at the time of the French Revolution .
 He visited Paris only four times during the seventy-two years of his reign . Resolving to move his court to Versailles, twelve miles west of Paris, he visited Paris four times .
 Louis XIV and his successors worked to assure the sufficient provisioning of the capital . Realizing that an adequately fed population would be less likely to riot, Louis XIV wanted to prevent riots .
 Versailles was the staging ground for royal ceremonies . It was surrounded by geometrically arranged formal gardens, interspersed by 1,400 fountains supplied by the largest hydraulic pumps in the world .
 Sculptures in the gardens made clear the identification of Louis XIV with the Greek and Roman sun god Apollo .
 The royal dining room was so far from the kitchen that food often arrived at his table cold . During one particularly cold winter, the wine froze before Louis could taste it .
 The chateau’s corridors were so long that some nobles used them as urinals, instead of continuing the lengthy trek to a more appropriate place . Some nobles used the long corridors to urinals instead of urinals .
 More than 10,000 nobles, officials, and servants lived in or near the chateau .
 Each day began with the elaborate routine of dressing the king in the company of the richest and most powerful nobles .
 The ultimate reward for a loyal noble was to be named to a post within the royal household . Loyalty was rewarded by being named to be a royal household post .
 Louis XIV allowed the nobles to form cabals and conspire, but only against each other . Louis XIV ruled that the nobles could not conspire to form a cabal .
 For nobles at Versailles there was little else to do except eat, drink, hunt, hunt and chase around each other's wives and mistresses .
 Nobles attended expensive theatrical and operatic productions put on at royal expense . Nobles also attended the expensive theatrical productions .
 Jean Racine drew themes from the classical Greek poets . These included the works of Jean-Baptiste Moliere . Moliere and Racine were master of the tragic dramatic style . Racine's works included works by Moliere, Racine and Moliere.
 The son of an upholsterer, the playwright started a traveling theatrical company before settling in Paris . He is the son of a upholisterer .
 The lonely, unhappy Moliere poked fun at the pretensions of aristocratic and ecclesiastical society . Moliere depicted the private, cruel dramas of upper-class family life .
 His popular works helped reaffirm the boundaries between social classes . But his popular works also help reaffirm social class .
 He ridiculed burghers, whose wealth could purchase titles but not teach them how to behave as nobles . Burghers could not be taught to behave like nobles .
 In The Bourgeois Gentilhomme, the parvenu gives himself away with a social gaffe . The film is set in Paris, France, at the end of the year .
 Moliere detested hypocrisy, which he depicted in Tartuffe . Moliere also detested the effects of unrestrained religious enthusiasm on a family . The playwright's work included a tale of the unfortunate effects of religious enthusiasm .
 Tartuffe brought Moliere the wrath of the Church, but he had an even more powerful protector in the king . Moliere's work brought him to the end of the war with the Church .
 Louis XIV believed that his court stood as the center and apex of civilization . Louis XIV's court was considered the center of civilization by Louis XIV .
 French arts and literature had an enormous influence in Europe . Indeed, French art and culture had a huge influence in European culture .
 Foreign monarchs, nobles, and writers still considered French the language of high culture . French is considered French by many in France .
 The duke of Saxony rebuilt his capital of Dresden along neoclassical lines . Dresden was built in neoclassic style . The city was the birthplace of Dresden .
 The chateau of Versailles also served as a model for noble estates and townhouses built in the classical style . The classical style chateaux were built in 18th century France .
 One of the most salient results of the victory of absolute rule in Catholic states was the persecution of religious minorities . Louis XlV’s Persecution of Religious Minorities was one of the key results of absolute power .
 Such campaigns in part served to placate the papacy and the Church hierarchy in each Catholic state . Such campaigns were often seen as a means of placating Catholics in each state .
 Louis XIV had little interest in theology, although he was relatively pious . Louis XIV was relatively religious, but he was not religious enough .
 This caricature shows Louis XIV, the Sun King, as the exterminator of Protestantism . of extremely devout advisers, and into his bedroom a fervently religious mistress .
 Louis XIV launched a vigorous campaign of persecution against Huguenots . Reversing the tolerant policies of Henry IV and Louis XIII, he closed most Protestant churches .
 In 1685, he revoked the Edict of Nantes, by which Henry IV in 1598 had extended religious tolerance to Protestants . Henry IV revoked the edict in 1685 . In 1698, Henry IV had extended tolerance to Protestant Protestants .
 This pleased the provincial estates in regions where Protestants were a forceful minority and memories of the wars of religion were still fresh . The provincial estates were in areas where Protestant was a strong minority .
 200,000 Huguenots emigrated to France during the next forty years . Many merchants and skilled craftsmen were among those who emigrated . The king forbade Huguensots from leaving France .
 Many went to England, Prussia, the Dutch United Provinces, and even South Africa . Many of the boys went to South Africa, England and Prussia .
 Louis XIV also persecuted Jansenists in his quest for religious orthodoxy . With the motto “one king, one law, one faith,’s motto was ‘one king’ Louis XIV .
 Jansenists were followers of Cornelis Jansen, bishop of Ypres, who died in 1638 . Followers of Jansen's death were followers . Jansenism was a group of followers of the Dutch bishop of the Ypres .
 They could be found in France, the Netherlands, Austria, and several Italian states . They were found in several countries .
 Jansenists emphasized the role of faith and divine grace in the pursuit of salvation . They sought reforms within the Church .
 Jansenists came close to accepting a Calvinist doctrine of predestination . Believed mankind to be fallen and hapless, incapable of understanding the will of God .
 Jansenists believed that one should withdraw from the world, given the certainty of sin and mankind's ignorance of God’s will . However, Jansenist believed one should completely withdraw from world, and not the world .
 The pope had condemned Jansenism in 1653, perhaps at the insistence of the Jesuits, the Jansenists’ most determined enemy .
 Louis XIV began to persecute them in the name of “one faith” in 1709; he ordered the Jansenist community at Port-Royal outside of Paris evicted and its abbey burned to the ground . Louis XIV also ordered the community to be evicted
 He convinced Pope Clement XI to issue a papal bull, Unigenitus, which condemned Jansenism . He convinced him to issue the bull, which was issued by Clement XI .
 St. Louis was still trying to force compliance two years later when he died . Louis was trying to enforce compliance with the law .
 The king's attempt to impose religious orthodoxy in France fell short, indicating that absolute rule had its limits . The king s attempt to establish a religious orthodoxy fell short .
 France was far from being a nation-state in which most people thought of themselves as French, as well as or instead of Norman, Breton, or Provencal . The Limits of French Absolutism is published in France's first published book, The French Revolution .
 Inadequate roads isolated mountain regions, limiting the effective reach of absolute rule . Poor roads in mountain regions limit the effectiveness of the rule .
 The absolute monarchy stood at the top of a complex network of patronage based on personal ties that reached into every province and every town . It is believed that the absolute monarchy was based on a network of personal ties .
 Louis XIV s intendants still had to take local networks of influence into consideration . They used intimidation, cajoling, and negotiation to gain their ends in France .
 The king played off against one another the jurisdictions and interests of the Estates, parlements, and other provincial institutions dominated by nobles . King played off with one another in the provinces .
 The provincial Estates were assemblies of nobles of the pays d'etat . Estates represented each province, including Brittany, Provence, Burgundy, and Languedoc . Provincial Estates represent the provinces of France's provinces .
 Estates oversaw the collection of taxes and tended to the details of provincial administration and spending . Estates were responsible for the collection and administration of the province . The Estates are responsible for tax collection, spending and administration .
 They met annually amid great pageantry and carefully orchestrated ceremony that, like those at Versailles, reaffirmed social hierarchy . The French monarchs met annually in Paris, France, Paris, Paris and Paris .
 In principle, the Estates could refuse to provide the crown with the annual “free grant” - which was hardly ‘free,” since the king informed the king of the amount of money he wanted . The Estates were able to refuse to give the crown the
 Louis XIV abolished the custom of allowing the Estates to express grievances before voting the amount of their ‘gift” to the monarchy . The Estates were allowed to express their grievances and then voted on the amount .
 The interests of the nobles also prevailed in the parlements, the sovereign law courts that registered, publicized, and carried out royal laws . The parlements were the courts which registered and publicized the royal laws.
 The parlements claimed to speak for their province in legal matters . They asserted the right to issue binding commands in cases of emergencies . Most of their members were nobles, most of whom were nobles .
 No national representative political institution existed in France . But, unlike the English Parliament, no national representative political institution existent .
 Even the king of France was not as omnipotent or omniscient as he would have liked to think . The king was not always omnipotent as he thought .
 Jean Bodin had expressed his view that a ruler would be wise to avoid exercising full power . Bodin said a ruler should not exercise full power to avoid interfering with his subjects’ property .
 Even the powerful Bourbons were bound by the socalled fundamental laws of the realm, as well as by those they believed God had established . The Bourbons believed God was the only God who had established the law .
 The Balance of Power between states gradually took hold in many of the courts of Europe . During the century beginning about 1650, the concept of a balance of power between states .
 The emergence of the concept arose in part out of the decline of religious antagonisms as a dominant cause of warfare . Like the evolving European state system itself, the state system evolved in part from religious antagonism .
 The quest of absolute rulers to add to their dynastic territories and the growing global commercial rivalry between the great powers increasingly shaped European warfare . European warfare was the focus of European warfare in 17th century .
 A diplomatic concept dating from the time of the Renaissance city-states of fifteenth-century Italy, the balance of power principle held that great powers should be in equilibrium, and that one power should not be allowed to become too powerful . Balance of power is a concept dating back to the
 The decline of one power could threaten the balance of power if, as a result, another power considerably enhanced its strength . The decline could also threaten the stability of the world .
 The main threat to peace ceased to be religious division but rather the power of Louis XIV of France . Now the main threat was to peace was the threat of religious division rather than religious division .
 Horrified by the Thirty Years’ War, two northern European political theorists systematically analyzed questions of international relations, drawing on the recent history of Europe . The Origins of International Law is published by John Defterios on October 31, 2013 .
 Hugo Grotius sought to establish the foundations of international law in 1625 . He argued that laws to which nations were subject followed from nature and not from God . Grotus argued that God's laws should not be followed by nations .
 Samuel von Pufendorf was caught up in the war between Sweden and Denmark . He was arrested for eight months during the war .
 Pufendorf’s Of the Law of Nature and Nations postulated legal principles for times of peace and times of war . He argued they should be the natural state of war and should be peace .
 He claimed only a defensive war was justified, pending international arbitration to resolve crises . He claimed that only a . defensive war is justified .
 Voltaire dismissed the Holy Roman Empire as having ceased to be holy, Roman, or an empire . The Habsburg Monarchy was a powerful protector of the papacy . The French Enlightenment philosopher Voltaire only somewhat exaggerated when he dismissed the Roman Empire .
 In 1648, eight electors selected the Holy Roman emperor, invariably the Habsburg ruler . Seven, and then eight electors, selected the emperor in 1648 .
 The Holy Roman Empire was an anomaly in Europe dominated by absolute monarchs . But in a Europe increasingly dominated by monarchs, it seemed to be an anomaly . The Roman Empire ruled for more than 100 years .
 The Holy Roman emperor still commanded the allegiance of the states of the empire . In principle, the Holy Roman Emperor still commands the allegiance .
 Austria, Bavaria, and Saxony had elaborate courts, standing armies and standing armies . They paid for all this by levying taxes on their subjects and customs duties and tolls .
 The Holy Roman Empire included many small principalities, duchies, and archbishoprics barely extending beyond the walls of towns like Mainz and Trier . The Empire was also known as the Roman Empire .
 The empire had increasingly only a shadow existence, despite its mystique as the defender of Catholicism . But in reality the empire was increasingly only an only shadow existence .
 The Treaty of Westphalia reflected the inability of the Holy Roman Empire to enforce its will, conduct foreign policy, or effectively maintain an army . The Thirty Years’ War (see Chapter 4) was concluded by the Thirty Years' War .
 During the long war, some German princes with powerful allies outside the empire had gone their own way . Some German princes had gone his own way during the war .
 Treaty of Westphalia empowered each member state to carry out its own foreign policy . Treaty was specifically empowered each country's foreign policy in order to make its own own decisions .
 The imperial Assembly of the Holy Roman Empire had virtually no authority to conduct foreign policy with other states . The Assembly had no power over foreign relations with other countries .
 The imperial army was too small and difficult to mobilize to be effective, and the imperial court of law was powerless to enforce its decisions, depending entirely on the good will of the individual states . The imperial court was powerless .
 The strongest state within the Holy Roman Empire, Habsburg Austria, extended beyond the boundaries of the empire itself . Austria was one of the strongest states in the world, along with Austria and Austria .
 The Habsburgs had ruled Austria without interruption since the thirteenth century . Austria was ruled without interruption by the Habsenburgs until the end of the 17th century .
 Successful marriages brought the dynasty the wealthy territories of Burgundy and the Netherlands in the fifteenth century .
 Charles V, who became Holy Roman emperor in 1519, added Hungary and Bohemia to his throne . Charles V added Hungary, Bohemia and Hungary to the Holy Roman empire in 1520 .
 Counting Spain and its far-flung possessions, he reigned over perhaps a quarter of the population of the European continent, as well as the Spanish Empire in the Americas . Counting the Spanish empire, he ruled over perhaps one quarter of Europe's population . Counted Spain and
 His brother Ferdinand 1 inherited the Austrian Habsburg lands and succeeded him as the elected Holy Roman emperor . He succeeded him in the election of Ferdinand 1 as the Holy Roman Emperor . Ferdinand 1 died in 1783 .
 His empire included the Netherlands, dependencies in Italy, and colonies in the Americas . He also ruled the Dutch, Italy and the Netherlands .
 The Spanish and Austrian branches of the Habsburgs were henceforth two separate dynasties . The interests of both as Catholic states and dynastic rivals of France sometimes converged .
 The Austrian Habsburg monarchy exercised foreign policy and directed the army, but had less effective authority within its territories than the kings of France had within their realm . The Austrians had less power within their territories than those of France .
 When confronted with threats to their traditional prerogatives, nobles put aside differences, such as those between the great landowners and the lower nobility, to preserve their privileges against monarchical erosion .
 Austria was only power able to exercise its influence equally in both Western and Eastern Europe . Austria was the only power to exercise influence equally between the two sides of the continent .
 The Austrian Habsburgs successfully implemented an effective state administration, expanded educational opportunities for the upper classes, and brought resistant or even rebellious nobles under dynastic control . The Austrian state of the 17th century was the result of a successful dynasty .
 Throughout the sixteenth century and during the first half of the seventeenth century, the Habsburgs had been almost constantly preoccupied with politics within the German states . The Habsburys had been constantly preoccupying politics within Germany .
 During the Thirty Years’ War, the Habsburgs were unable to expand their domination throughout Central Europe . The Thirty Years' War ended in a draw-down .
 The Habsburgs remained vulnerable to French expansionism and to Turkish incursions, forcing the monarchy to address threats on two fronts . The French and Turkish expansionism was a major factor in the Habsenburgs .
 That the Habsburg empire contained territories of different nationalities was a source of weakness . That the empire had territories that were shared by nationalities . That was a weakness in the empire .
 The Hungarian and Croatian provincial diets, or noble Estates, impeded Habsburg absolutism . The Hungarian, Croatian and Croatian provinces, were the provinces of Hungary and Croatia . The Estates of Hungary, Croatia, Croatia and Croatia were the most important provinces of Habs
 Hungarians resented Habsburg armies stationed in Hungary to protect the empire from the Turks . Hungarians also resented German-speaking administrators and tax collectors, as well as the Habsberg armies stationed there .
 In Bohemia, the scars of the religious conflicts between Catholics and Protestants during the Thirty Years’ War healed slowly . The scars of religious conflicts in Bohemia healed very slowly .
 Bohemia and Moravia remained centers of Protestant intellectual ferment, despite Catholic domination . Bohemia, Moravia and Bohemia were centers of Protestants' intellectual ferment .
 Bohemian nobles resented the fact that a decree in 1627 had abolished the elective monarchy, made the Bohemian crown a hereditary Habsburg possession, and brought the confiscation of their lands .
 Hungary had been part of the Habsburg domains since the sixteenth century . Hungary was part of Hungary from the sixth century to the 16th century .
 Unlike their Austrian counterparts, most of the Hungarian, or Magyar, Hungarian, nobles had become Protestant during the Reformation . Most of the Hungarian nobility had become Protestant .
 Habsburg persecution of Hungarian Protestants helped spark an insurrection in 1679 . The insurrection spread into Moravia, Slavonia, and Silesia . The uprising was the result of persecution of the Hungarian Protestants .
 Leopold promised the Hungarian Estates to restore some privileges of landowners that had been suppressed . This led to the restoration of some of the privileges of some landowners that were suppressed .
 Protestants called for Turkish assistance at a time when the Turks were preparing to attack Habsburg territories . But dissatisfied Protestants then called for help from the Turks .
 Austrians, Germans, and Poles helped by a combined relief army . King John Sobieski was the Catholic ruler of Poland . It was saved after two months .
 Pope Innocent XI succeeded in convincing Emperor Leopold I to lead a ‘Holy League’ in 1684 against the Ottoman Turks . Emperor saw himself as a prince of the Catholic Reformation, saw himself .
 In the War of the Holy League, Habsburg armies recaptured most of Hungary and the eastern province of Transylvania from the Turks, as well as Map 7 . Map 7.
 The Holy Roman Empire was a polyglot state . It was made up of territories of different nationalities . The Empire was made of territories made of nationalities and territories .
 Ottoman garrisons remained in Belgrade and Turkish galleys still roamed the Mediterranean . The Ottoman threat to Central Europe had passed in the early 1900s .
 The Habsburg victory over the Turks consolidated the dynasty’s authority over Hungary . The victory in Hungary consolidates the dynasty's authority in Hungary .
 In 1687, the Hungarian Estates were forced to declare that the Hungarian throne (the crown of Saint Stephen, named after Hungary’s patron saint) would henceforth be a hereditary possession of the Habsburgs and no longer elective .
 Leopold failed to impose centralized rule on Hungary . Although he consolidated Habsburg authority within the dynasty’s domains, he did not impose central rule .
 Hungary's special position within the monarchy revealed the limits of Habsburg absolutism and Austrian power . Hungary’s special position in the monarchy reveals the limits .
 The Habsburg monarchy, the least absolute of Europe’s absolute states, was less successful than France in maintaining its power .
 France’s defeat in the War of the Spanish Succession enabled the Austrian Habsburgs to pick up some of the remaining pieces of the decimated Spanish Empire in Europe . The War was fought to determine who would inherit the Spanish territories . Austria's defeat of France in the
 Austria ceded its preeminence in Central Europe to Prussia in the 17th century . However, during the 18th century Austria was less influential in the region than Prussia .
 Austrian defeats in Thirty Years’ War and vulnerability to French and Turkish challenges left the way open for a rival to emerge among the German states .
 Bavaria and Saxony were not strong claimants for primacy among the German states, with weak nobilities and lacking effective bureaucracies or large armies . Bavaria, Saxony was not a strong claimant for primancy among German states .
 Saxony was often turned away from German affairs eastward toward the volatile world of Polish politics . The attention of Saxony, subject to Swedish influence, often turned .
 The Rise of Prussia, 1648-1720 . Territories acquired by BrandenburgPrussia. Territories acquired in Brandenburg .
 Brandenburg-Prussia stretches across sandy marshes between the Elbe and Oder Rivers . It seemed an unlikely candidate to rival Austria and to grow into a powerful absolute state .
 Brandenburg-Prussia lacked defensible frontiers and a network of prosperous trading towns of other states in Germany . Consisting of three diverse, noncontiguous realms, Brandenburg was not particularly well-defensible .
 During the Thirty Years' War, Swedish and Austrian armies took turns ravaging Prussia . Swedish and Austalian armies took part in the Thirty years' War .
 Prussia absorbed much of Pomerania on the coast of the Baltic Sea . With the Treaty of Westphalia, Prussia took control of the region .
 Prussian nobles accepted Hohenzollem authority as a guarantee of their privileges . In one of the typical trade-offs that built absolute states in early modern Europe, the Prussian nobility accepted authority from the Hohenzellem .
 At the same time that Junkers were securing their privileges, Prussian peasants were losing their freedom, including their rights to free movement and often even inheritance .
 During the late fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries, they became serfs, legally bound to a lord's estate, and could be sold with the land on which they worked . Serfs were legal bound to the estate of a lord and could sell the land they worked on .
 Burghers, including merchants and skilled craftsmen, also stood powerless before nobles . The middle class in England and the Dutch United Provinces presented an imposing obstacle to absolutism .
 Frederick William initially had neither a standing army nor the resources to raise one . Frederick William was the “Great Elector’ of Brandenburg . He had the right to cast a ballot in the election of the Holy Roman emperor .
 Prussian nobles at first resisted the creation of a standing army, fearful that it might aid Frederick William in reducing their privileges . Frederick William's son Frederick William died in 1881 .
 In 1653, Frederick William convinced the Junkers to grant him funds with which to build an army in exchange for confirmation of their privileges over the peasantry and their right to import goods without paying duties . The Junkers were granted permission to build their own army in 1653 .
 The king agreed to consult the nobles on matters of foreign policy . Furthermore, the king agreed that the nobles should consult the king .
 Frederick William turned to the business of augmenting state authority in his three fragmented territories . Frederick William became the first president of the United States .
 He extracted concessions from each of them, including more taxes and the right to recruit soldiers, he says . He extracted more taxes, the rights to recruit troops and more soldiers .
 The Hohenzollern family owned more than half of East Prussia . The family provided considerable state revenue for the state . The state was founded in 1881 .
 The Great Elector established a centralized administrative bureaucracy in Europe . It was arguably the first modern efficient civil service in Europe. It is arguably the most modern efficient administrative bureaucracy .
 Prussian towns, which paid a disproportionate percentage of taxes, lost their representation in the provincial Estates . The towns were represented in the Estates of Prussian provinces .
 Frederick William I succeeded Frederick III as elector of Brandenburg and king in Prussia . Frederick William was the grandson of the Great Elector . He was the son of Frederick III, who died in 1881 .
 As a boy Frederick William could not count to ten without his tutor’s assistance . Frederick William continued the centralizing policies of his grandfather and father . As a child, Frederick William was able to count to 10 without assistance .
 The bad-tempered ‘Sergeant-King’ wore his officer’s uniform around the house . He turned the royal gardens into a military training ground . The bad tempers of the ‘Sgt. King’ was known for his temper .
 Frederick William 1 was known for fits of screaming rage, calling everyone in sight “blockhead” and sometimes beating officials with a stick . He knocked out the teeth of several judges whose sentences displeased him .
 Officials known as ‘fiscals’ went around to ensure that the king’s representatives served him well . The king's representatives were kept in good health .
 The king was astute enough to break with tradition by employing some commoners . Many of whom served with uncommon loyalty and efficiency .
 He engaged only tall soldiers for his royal guard, those standing more than six feet in height, virtual giants at the time . Only tall soldiers were allowed to enter the royal guard .
 One of his first royal acts was to abolish the luxury industries in Berlin, Berlin, that catered to court and nobles, and to replace them with workshops that turned out military uniforms .
 The king ordered all young men in Prussia to register for military service . Prussia organized a procedure by which each regiment was assigned a specific region to recruit or conscript soldiers .
 Prussia had far more men in Prussia experienced military life than any other country . This meant that far more Prussian men were involved in military life . Prussia was one of the most successful countries in the world .
 Two other empires rose in eastern and northern Europe . The Russian and Swedish Empires rose in Russia and Sweden .
 It stood vulnerable to invasions by the Mongols, who had conquered what is now Russia in the thirteenth century, the Tatars of Crimea and the kingdom of Poland-Lithuania . The Mongols had conquered the region in the 13th century, and the Crimean Tat
 The kingdom and grand duchy had been joined in an enormous confederation in 1386, becoming the Commonwealth of Poland-Lithuania in 1569 . Warsaw became the capital in 1595, with Warsaw becoming the capital of the Commonwealth in 1596 .
 Twice the size of France, the confederation had only about 8 million inhabitants . Twice as large as France, it was once the world's largest confederation of people .
 Muscovy, where Orthodox Christianity had taken hold, emerged as the strongest of the states of Russia . It absorbed Novgorod and other rivals and principalities in the fifteenth century .
 In 1500 and again twelve years later, Ivan brazenly attacked Poland-Lithuania, capturing the fortress town of Smolensk, which guarded the upper Dnieper River . Ivan captured the fortress in 14th century .
 The rise of Russia as an absolute state and empire began with the expansion of Muscovy in the late sixteenth century . Russia's rise of the Russian Empire began in the mid-sixteenth century with the help of the Russians .
 Tsar Ivan IV (ruled 1533-1584) became in 1547 the first to be crowned tsar of Russia . Ivan IV was the first tsar to rule Russia in Russia .
 Muscovy conquered the Volga basin, drove back the nomadic Muslim Tatars, conquered the Don and Volga river basins to the south before they could be taken by either the Ottoman Empire or the Safavid rulers of Iran . absorbed parts of the Mongol states to the east
 Muscovy annexed the steppe khanates of Astrakhan and Kazan at mid-century, reaching the borderlands of China . The steppe region was the steppest steppe steppeland of Russia .
 Ivan IV truly earned his sobriquet “the Terrible/' He was raised in a world of violence marked by the bloody feuds of the Muscovite nobles . Ivan IV was poisoned by his mother when he was eight years old .
 Ivan ordered a noble ripped apart by fierce dogs; as an adult, he had an archbishop sewn into a bearskin and thrown to hungry wolves . As a child, Ivan had a noble sewn in a bear-sewn armband and eaten by wolves . Ivan ordered
 Muscovite nobles, boyars held their estates in exchange for agreeing to serve in an administrative or military capacity, thus receiving protection against peasant insurrections or other nobles . His means was to create a “service state” in which nobles, the boyars, held
 Ivan decimated noble families he viewed as too powerful or too slow to obey . Allying with a group of military retainers, Ivan attacked families he saw as too slow or too powerful to obey. Allied with a military retuning force, Ivan led the armies to victory .
 Ivan alternated between moods of religious fervor, drunken passion, and stormy brutality . Ivan was born Ivan Ivan Ivan, the son of Ivan Ivan and his wife . Ivan died at the end of his life at the age of 50 .
 After being defeated in Lithuania in 1564, Ivan subjected his people to an eight-year reign of terror . Ivan subjected them to eight years of terror after his defeat in the 1564 .
 He killed his own son with a massive blow to the skull and routinely ordered anyone who displeased him tortured to death . He killed himself and ordered anyone displeased to death to be tortured .
 Ivan's death in 1584 led, almost unimaginably, to an even worse period for Muscovy . Ivan died in 1684, leading to a disastrous period for the country .
 Weak successors allowed nobles to regain control of the now-spoiled country . Weak successors let nobles regain control over the country .
 The next two tsars restored order, regaining some of the lands lost to Poland-Lithuania and Sweden . Sweden and Poland regained some of their lands .
 For most peasants, life itself was an endless ‘time of troubles” in the face of state taxation and brutalization at the hands of their lords . For most of the peasants, their life was an endlessly ‘troubled’
 Revolts seemed endemic, some led by men who claimed to be the “true tsar who would restore justice” The Russian Revolution was the result of a series of revolts in Russia .
 One of the latter led a huge force of peasants, which captured several cities before being decimated in 1670 . The peasants were led by one of the peasants, who led the peasants to capture cities .
 The resulting chronic shortage of rural labor led the state in 1649 officially to establish serfdom . Serfdom had already become widespread in the late sixteenth century . The resulting shortage of labor and the need to provide landed estates to loyal nobles led to the establishment .
 The chronically indebted Russian peasants gave up their freedom in exchange for loans from the crown and from landlords . The chronically indebted peasant pleasiers gave up freedom to give up their freedom to the crown .
 The Orthodox Church, a major landowner, also contributed to the expansion of serfdom . Serfdom was a major factor in the development of the Orthodox Church .
 Nearly 90 percent of peasants in Russia were now bound to the land, assuring the state and nobles of a relatively immobile labor supply . The land is now an important labor supply supply for the state, and the nobles .
 Russian nobles, like their counterparts in Prussia, pledged their service to the state . In exchange for the tsar’s support of this system, Russian nobles pledged service to state .
 The Commonwealth of Poland and Lithuania to the west, Swedish territories to the north, and the Ottoman Turks to the south blocked Russia’s further expansion . In the meantime, the Commonwealth of . Poland, Lithuania and . Lithuania to . Lithuania, . Sweden, and . the . Ottoman
 The northern port of Archangel on the White Sea, its harbor frozen solid much of the year, offered Muscovy its only access to the sea . It was the only port of the northern part of the Russian city on the Black Sea . The port is now located in Moscow, Russia
 Ukrainian peasants were, like Russians, Orthodox Christians and spoke a language similar to Russian . Most Ukrainian peasants spoke similar to Russians .
 Peasant revolts rocked Ukraine in the late 1640s, and, after an uprising that drove back the Polish army, Ukraine accepted Russian sovereignty in 1654 .
 Under the Treaty of Andrussovo, Russia absorbed Ukraine east of the Dnieper River . Under the treaty, Ukraine was absorbed by Russia under the treaty . Ukraine was annexed by Russia after a war with Poland .
 Several peoples resisted incorporation into Russia as well as into Poland-Lithuania . To the south, several peoples resisted annexation into Russia .
 These included Turks, Crimean Tatars and Cossacks, a warrior people living on the steppes of southern Russia and Ukraine .
 In the 1640s and 1650s, Swedish kings added to their dynastic holdings the regions of Denmark and Norway, Estonia and Lithuania, and West Pomerania in northern Germany . The Rival Swedish Empire was founded in the 16th century .
 Swedish, Finnish, Latvian, Estonian, and German, the language of administration . Like the Habsburg empire, Sweden had a farraginous set of languages .
 Queen Christina raised money by selling almost two-thirds of the royal lands . Swedish nobles became the main beneficiaries of the sale .
 Swedish peasants, who had their own Estate in the Swedish Diet, demanded in vain the return of all alienated lands to the throne .
 King Charles XI established absolute rule in Sweden in 1680s . Charles XI ruled absolute rule of Sweden until his death in 1683 .
 He overcame the resistance of the wealthiest nobles by winning the support of their jealous colleagues of lesser means . The burghers, clergy, and peasants sought royal protection against the most powerful nobles .
 He snatched the crown during his coronation and placed it on his own head, and never convoked the Estates . He snatched it from the crown, and put it on himself .
 Swedish president was instructed only in warfare as a youth . He acted by impulse not reflection, relying on military force to achieve Swedish ends .
 Sweden spent five years campaigning against Russia . His quest took him into the Ottoman Empire, where he sought assistance against Russia.
 Charles Xll’s reign added to its wealth by reclaiming land that had been sold to nobles in the previous decades . The crown added to it wealth by . reclaiming . land .
 The Swedish monarchy established a bureaucracy and increased state revenue . Gradually the Swedish monarchy became a powerful institution .
 Charles XII was killed in a war in Norway, leaving no heir, the Swedish nobility succeeded in imposing a parliamentary regime based on the prerogatives of the Estates . Charles XII died in 1903, leaving Sweden with no heir to the throne . The Swedish nobility imposed a parliamentary system based
 In 1772, Gustavus III overthrew the parliamentary system, supported by some nobles, and reimposed absolute rule . The new constitution that reduced the power of the Senate and the Diet was reduced the Senate .
 Gustavus Gustavus’s aristocratic enemies organized his assassination in 1792 . Gustavus's empire was a fading memory and his empire was fading memory . By then, however, Gustavus was dead .
 Louis XIV sent a letter to a tsar who had been dead for twelve years . Little was known about “barbaric” Russia . Peter the Great turns westward in Europe .
 Peter the Great first imposed order on a state torn by bloody uprisings . Then he created an enormous inland Russian Empire . Peter's first order was to order the state .
 Russia expanded its frontiers at a rapid pace between the 1620s and 1740s . No European state more dramatically increased its territory than Russia .
 During the seventeenth century, Russian territory increased from 2.2 million square miles to 5.5 million . During that period, Russia's territory in north Asia included little more than a series of trade routes . Russian territory now covers 5.6 million sq.m.
 As a boy growing up in the violent world of Russian court politics, Peter was schooled in all manner of guns, ballistics, and fortifications . Peter was fascinated by sailing and was fascinated with guns and ballistics .
 The tsar became tsar at the age of ten after a bloody struggle, which he witnessed firsthand, between the clans of his father’s two widow's . Wearing a military uniform, he was seen in military uniform . He witnessed firsthand the struggle between his father's two
 Seven years later, Peter killed members of his own family w'hom he perceived to be a threat to his rule . Peter killed his family members seven years after killing them .
 Tsar Peter suffered from chronic back problems compounded by frenetic energy . He wore shabby clothes, worn-out boots, socks, and very long hair .
 Facial tics became most apparent when he was anxious or angry, which seemed to be most of the time . He lashed out with clubs or fists, as he lashed out at people with facial tics .
 On several occasions he carried out public executions himself with an axe . The executioner was known to carry out his own executions .
 When he was twenty-five, Peter visited Western Europe incognito, dressed as a humble, giant workman . Peter visited Europe in the early years of his life, dressing as a workman, he says .
 He preferred the company of ordinary people . Enjoyed wood turning and fire fighting, and was most comfortable in simple Russian wooden houses .
 In the West, he shocked statesmen and nobles with his dress and coarse manners . He snatches meat from dining tables, snatching meat from diners' tables .
 Peter borrowed Western technical knowledge as he sought to copy absolutism . Peter was not an uncritical admirer of the West, but he borrowed Western knowledge . He borrowed Western technology as he tried to replicate absolutsism .
 In London he became fascinated by the use of mathematics in shipbuilding, and four months on the Dutch docks taught him ship carpentry .
 Peter emulated the military strength and administrative efficiency of the Western powers . He emulated w hat he considered to be more “rational” organization .
 His turn toward the West represented a monumental cultural change that was secular in character . His turn to the West was a massive cultural change . He was a major cultural change in the West .
 He ordered nobles to become educated, told guards and officials to shave off their beards . He encouraged the use of glasses, bowls, and napkins at meals, and ordered a Western book of etiquette translated into Russian .
 He ordered nobles to build Western-style palaces, and he demanded that women wear bonnets, petticoats, and skirts . Furthermore, he ordered noble houses to be built in Western style .
 Peter began the collection that would later become the renowned Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg . Purchasing German and Italian paintings and statues was Peter's first purchase of art .
 He created the Russian Academy of Science and the Moscow' School of Mathematics and Navigation . He also created the Moscow school of mathematics and navigation .
 Peter retained a marked ambivalence about the role of tsar, maintaining a “Drunken Assembly/’ a kind of mock parallel government of people he trusted with strange statutes and rituals . Peter maintained a ‘drunken assembly’
 The “All Jesting Assembly’ undertook boisterous, bawdy farces that mocked religious ceremonies . Presided over by a pretend “prince-pope/’’ The ‘Jestest’ was led by a ‘pr
 Peter the Great’s reforms reflected the influence of Western absolutism on the Russian state . Yet Peter's reforms reflect the influence on Western absolsations on the state, he says .
 He believed that it was his role to help his people achieve the best living conditions possible . He said he believed that he was helping them achieve the most possible living conditions .
 He came to a conception of the common good that he closely identified with Russian patriotism . He thus came to an conception of a common good, he said .
 At the time Peter became tsar, only three books considering nonreligious themes had been translated into Russian . Only three books, including a grammar book, law code, and a military manual, were translated .
 Peter’s instigation . Translations of Western books follow'ed at Peter's instigation, including w orks by John Locke .
 The tsar sent Russian students abroad to learn and, in doing so, helped move Russia away from a uniquely religious culture .
 Fearing the military superiority of his rivals, Sweden and PolandLithuania, Peter now raised the first Russian standing army . The first standing army was gradually replacing Western mercenary soldiers with Russian troops .
 One recruit—w ; ho would serve for life—had to be provided for every twenty peasant households . Thereafter, one recruit . would serve life . One recruit . had to provide for every 20 peasant households. The recruit .
 Peter brought in Western commanders to train his army . He provided soldiers with uniforms and Western flintlock muskets with socket bayonets . Peter's son Peter died in 1881 .
 Russian craftsmen were sent abroad to learn new skills . Skilled workers from Prussia and Dutch Republic were hired to build warships .
 Russians replaced Western Europeans as designers, builders, and ship commanders . Russians gradually replaced Europeans in design, construction and shipbuilding .
 Even in peacetime, at least two-thirds of state revenue went to the army and navy . The U.S. Army and Navy is the largest in the country's history .
 Peter Peter forced nobles to send their sons to new military and engineering schools by decreeing they could not marry unless they did so . Peter also ordered nobles to marry their sons before sending them to military schools .
 He established state monopolies on the production and sale of salt, oil, tobacco, rhubarb, and even dice . He awarded the profitable right to collect these revenues to his favorite nobles .
 The acquisition of new territories helped increase state tax revenues by three times . State tax revenues increased by more than three times in the past decade .
 Peter oversaw the exploitation of mines and the establishment of a metal industry in the Ural Mountains . Hoped to expand Russian industry and attract gold and silver payments from abroad .
 Even absolute authority could not overcome a primitive transportation system, the lack of capital, and the absence of a sizable merchant class, the author says .
 Peter was the first tsar to distinguish between his person as ruler and the state itself . While remaining an autocrat, Peter was nonetheless the first to distinguish himself from himself .
 He made officials take oaths, one to him and one to the state whose power he enhanced, he says . He says officials took oaths to protect themselves and those of the state . The oaths were oaths made by the president of the United States .
 Tsar Peter reorganized the civil administration, dividing his domains into fifty administrative districts . The effective reach of the state over such vast lands remained quite weak .
 He created a Senate, an administrative body charged with ruling in his absence during wartime and with overseeing state administration in times of peace . He created the Senate, which is charged with overseeing the state during wartime .
 He experimented with councils, or committees, whose members could—if they dared—give him advice, representing the equivalent of government ministries . The president experimented with council councils, which he experimented with .
 The tsar also put towns under the direct control of provincial governors . Towns retained some measure of self-government, but retained some measures of autonomy .
 In Moscow nobles sought places on the boyar council, which met in the throne room of the palace . Thus, the nobility also became an instrument of the state .
 The tsar's turn toward the West angered the old noble families of Moscow and the traditional Orthodox Church leaders . Peter himself remained quite pious, despite the fact that Peter himself was quite pious .
 They opposed Greek and Byzantine liturgical forms, as well as the influence of baroque art and religious architecture imported to Russia from Central Europe . They also opposed the growing influence of the baroques and religious art .
 They considered such reforms, which constituted a ‘Russian reformation,” sacrilegious . The Russians considered such reform reforms, they considered them sacrilege .
 Russians believed beards the tsar had ordered shaved had distinguished Russians from people in the West .
 Peter placed the Orthodox Church fully under state control, first by not naming a new patriarch upon the death of the incumbent in 1700 . Later by simply abolishing the patriarchate, he placed the church fully in state control .
 Peter overcame four uprisings and several conspiracies directed against him . Peter overcame 4 uprisitions and 4 conspiracies . Peter overcomes four conspiracies and overcame four insurrections .
 In 1716-1718, he suspected his son Alexei, who was influenced by churchmen and boyars, of being involved in a plot with the Habsburg monarchy against him .
 Peter ordered him tortured to reveal his accomplices, who were executed, and Alexei died in a prison cell . Peter ordered Alexei's accomplices to be executed . Alexei was killed in prison .
 The state of Muscovy was expanded through the acquisitions of Ivan III, Ivan IV, and Peter the Great . The expansion of Russia began in Russia in 17th century .
 Peter dreamed of conquering the Turkish capital of Constantinople, which would give him control over its straits . The straits are the crucial passage between Europe and Asia leading to the Black Sea . Peter wanted to conquer the capital of the city of Constantinople to gain control of the straits leading to
 Peter’s new fleet sailed down the Don River in 1696, taking the Turkish port of Azov . The port gives access to the Black Sea, which gives the Russians access to Russia's Black Sea .
 He was forced to surrender Azov back to the Turks after an unsuccessful war against them . However, he remained without access to the Black Sea . He surrendered Azov to Turks after unsuccessful war .
 Russia’s role in European affairs had remained minimal, despite its participation, with Habsburg Austria, Poland, and Venice, in the long series of wars against the Turks in the last decades of the seventeenth century .
 Peter Peter’s goal was to win a ‘window on the Baltic Sea’ at Sweden’�s expense . Peter: “I’m going to be in a position that I’ve never been before, and I hope to win it .
 Swedes turned back the assault of a much larger Russian army at Narva in Estonia . The Swedes were able to turn the assault around Narva, Estonia .
 The Russian army conquered the mouth of the Neva River in 1703 . Charles Xll of Sweden passed up the opportunity to pursue the Russian army in order to invade Poland and Saxony .
 Peter ordered the construction of a new capital city, where he forced nobles and wealthy merchants to build elegant townhouses . Peter forced nobles to build townhouses, forcing wealthy merchants and rich to build them .
 Saint Petersburg reflected architectural ideas borrowed from the West, particularly Amsterdam . Built on coastal marshlands, the city reflected ideas from Amsterdam . The city was built on marshlands and is now a tourist destination .
 State offices, including army and military headquarters, occupied the centrally located islands . State offices were occupied by the strategically located islands.
 Symmetrical facades rose along the Neva Rivers south bank, near the shipyards, admiralty, and fortresses . The Neva River is one of the largest rivers in the world .
 Unlike Moscow, churches did not dominate the skyline of Saint Petersburg . St. Petersburg was once a city of its own .
 Geometrically arranged boulevards, squares, gardens, and baroque palaces completed the tsars capital . The capital itself became a reflection of absolute rule .
 In 1709 at the Battle of Poltava, Peters army turned back an invading Swedish army in Ukraine . The battle marked the end of Sweden’s status as a great power and its domination of northern Europe, allowing Peter to annex eastern Ukraine .
 Treaty of Nystadt confirmed Russian primacy in the Baltic region . It added Estonia and Livonia to Peter s empire and brought Russia ever closer to Europe .
 By the time Peters death in 1725, the territory controlled by absolutist Russia had increased sixfold since the time of Ivan the Terrible .
 The Russian Empire, thirty times bigger than France, had joined the European state system . The Empire was thirty times larger than France .
 Russia, Sweden, Prussia, Austria, Turkey, and France sought to expand their territories . Dynastic interests determined the choice of allies in Louis XIV's wars .
 Strong states are likely to switch sides to gain the most beneficial terms from new allies . Strong states also likely to change sides, but not necessarily all of them, say experts .
 France needed an alliance with either Austria or Prussia in order to expand its influence in Central Europe . France needed to expand influence in the region .
 The other German power is forced to look for allies against France . But inevitably such a coalition pushed Germany into opposition, forcing it to seek allies .
 Following the conclusion of hostilities that reworked borders, alliances frequently shifted, as rulers anticipated their next opportunity to conquer .
 France was the continent s richest, strongest, and most populous state . France is the continent's richest and strongest state .
 The king of France sought to expand his kingdom's borders to w'hat he considered to be France’s ‘natural’ frontiers, that is the Pyrenees Mountains to the south and the Rhine River to the east . The king wanted to expand France's
 Louis XIV sough to expand his dynastic territories through wars fought between 1643 and 1715 . Louis XIV expanded France's Frontiers under Louis XIV .
 Sweden confronted a Danish threat to its control of the Balti< Sea . T< the north, Sweden confronted the Danish threat of its control .
 In Central Europe, the Austrian Habsburgs confronted other Germai princes, as well as threats from Poland-Lithuania and the Turks . In Central . Europe, they confronted other . Germai . princes, including those of the Turks, and other . nations .
 Louis XIV’s ‘grand strategy’ was to contain the two Habsburg powers Spain and Austria, by initiating a series of wars . Louis XIV's "grand strategy" was aimed at containing the two countries by initiating wars .
 The Treaty of the Pyrenees ended essentially a quarter of a century of hostilities with Spain . The treaty established the lasting frontier between the two states and confirmed France s status as the preeminent European power .
 St. Louis wanted to annex Spains French-speaking Franche-Comte to the east and the Spanish Netherlands to the north . The Spanish Netherlands was to be annexed to the south .
 When French armies invaded the Spanish Netherlands, England joined the Dutch Republic, Sweden, and Spain to turn back Louis XIV s armies . Flanders and its Channel ports would fall to France .
 By the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668, France annexed Lille and part of Flanders . Lille was annexed by France by the end of the 1668 .
 France absorbed Franche-Comte and tiny parcels of the Southern Netherlands . After several more years of indecisive fighting and negotiations, France took over the Netherlands .
 Louis XIV ordered the invasion of the Palatinate, intending to secure the Rhine River . Despite the opposition of a wary alliance of Habsburg Austria, Spain, Sweden, and Saxony, the invasion was successful .
 England and the Dutch Republic (an alliance solidified by the fact William III of Orange now was king of England) and a number of other German states joined the coalition against France .
 Louis made a foolish attempt to invade England in 1692 . After hesitating, he made an attempt to take over the country .
 Dutch and English ships drove the French fleet onto rocks off the coast of Normandy . The two sea powers then enforced an economic blockade of France .
 Louis XIV turned French privateers loose on his enemies' ships . Louis XIV retaliated by turning privateers onto his enemies ships .
 French defeats and rising opposition to the cost of the war forced both sides to negotiate . French defeats as well as rising opposition in the Dutch Republic and England . The war was the first of its kind .
 The Treaty of Ryswick of 1697 confirmed French gains in Alsace, but also made clear that the other European powers would ally again if necessary to keep France from further territorial acquisitions in the Southern Netherlands .
 The question of the succession to the throne of Spain soon presented Louis XIV with the greatest temptation of all . Louis XIV's greatest temptation was to try and win the Spanish throne .
 Louis opposed the candidacy of the Habsburg archduke Charles of Austria . Louis was hoping to end the virtual encirclement of France by Habsberg powers . Louis opposed Charles' candidacy .
 Louis XIV, whose wife was the daughter of the late Philip IV of Spain, put forth his own claim to the throne . Louis XIV was the son of Philip IV, who died in France in 1777 .
 When Charles II died in 1700, he left a will expressing his desire that his diminished empire remain intact, and that his grandson Philip of Anjou succeed him, but renounce any claim to the throne of France .
 The Austrian Habsburg ruler Leopold I refused to accept Charles Il*s will as valid and invaded the Italian territories of the Spanish Habsbiirgs . The Austrian ruler refused to take Charles' will and invaded Italy .
 Louis XIV refused to rule Philip V out of the line of succession to the French throne . If Philip's elder brother, the duke of Bourgogne, died without male issue, Philip would inherit the throne of France . The kingdoms of France and Spain would be joined .
 The matter became pressing in 1712, when smallpox struck the French royal family, leaving only Bourgogne’s youngest son as heir to the French throne . The matter was pressing in the 1712 when the smallpox hit the royal family .
 If the future Louis XV had died then, Philip would have become heir to both the French and Spanish monarchs .
 The French king’s obvious interest in the possibility of the two thrones being brought together drew Great Britain into the war . Great Britain was drawn into the conflict by the French king .
 The Dutch Republic again had reason to fear French occupation of the Spanish Netherlands . Dutch Republic had reason for fear of French occupation .
 If the French opened up the Scheldt River to trade, Antwerp would reemerge as a commercial rival to Amsterdam . The French would open up the river to trade in the Schelde River .
 This vital link to the English Channel had been closed since the Dutch formally received independence from Spain in 1648 . Antwerp was closed since 1648, thus preventing ships from reaching the Dutch port . The Channel was closed by the end of the 16th century, preventing ships reaching Ant
 The alliance against France also included Austria, Prussia, and Portugal . Austria and Prussia were also involved in the alliance .
 The War of the Spanish Succession reflected the fact that European wars were taking on a global dimension . The powers fought for markets as well as prestige, as they fought for the markets and prestige .
 As in the War of the League of Augsburg, British and French forces also battled in North America .
 The Rock of Gibraltar was captured by the English fleet during the War of Spanish Succession . The Rock was captured during the 16th century .
 The English commander, the duke of Marlborough, raised an army of English, Dutch, and mercenary troops . The duke's army of troops was the largest in the world .
 In 1704, allied armies aided by Habsburg Austrian troops crushed a combined French and Bavarian force at Blenheim in southern Germany .
 Allied armies drove the French out of the Spanish Netherlands in 1708 and 1709 . The allied armies also drove out the French from the Spanish Dutch and out of Italy .
 The English fleet captured Gibraltar in 17th century . Gibraltar guards the entrance to the Mediterranean Sea . Gibraltar is one of the world's most important ports .
 During the terrible winter of 1709-1710, France suffered military defeat and famine . During that winter, the French suffered from military defeat .
 Charles might one day become king of Spain, reviving the dynastic union that had made the Habsburg dynasty Europe’s strongest power during the first half of the seventeenth century . Should France and Philip V of Spain be defeated, the British and Dutch now confronted the possibility
 It was now in the interests of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic to bring the war to an honorable conclusion . It was in Britain's interests of bringing the conflict to an end, he said .
 Louis XIV was weakened by age and illness and suffering the financial burdens of the war, agreed to negotiate . Louis XIV died in 17th century at age of 50 .
 Spain had now lost all of its European possessions beyond the Pyrenees Mountains . The decline of Spain continued unabated .
 In North America, France ceded Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and Hudson Bay to Great Britain . Great Britain took Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to Canada in 1877 .
 Louis XIV had reigned so long that on his death in 1715 the throne passed to his great-grandson, young Louis XV . affairs of state in the hands of a regent . Louis XV was the first monarch to hold the throne .
 Philip V kept the throne of Spain, but the monarchies of Spain and France would remain separate . Philip V. kept the Spanish throne, but kept the French throne of France . France and Spain remained separate .
 Louis XIV was defeated by more than powerful alliances mounted against him . Louis XIV died in 17th century at age of 50 .
 Britain proved better able to sustain long wars; its more developed commerce and manufactures provided greater tax revenues . Britain had proved better than ever been able to maintain long wars .
 The non-absolutist British state collected taxes more efficiently than the absolute monarchy of France . France's absolute monarchy kept part of the take from the British state .
 Britain's interests remained overseas, dominated by lucrative commercial concerns that were protected by the Royal Navy . Britain’s interest remained overseas .
 France had been the preeminent power in Europe at the time of the accession of Louis XIV . This was no longer true at his death at the age of his death .
 Louis XIV tried to burn his memoirs shortly before his Map 7 Map 7 . Perhaps a lingering sense of failure explains why he tried to destroy his memoir .
 As they established absolute rule, the sovereigns of continental Europe constructed the modern state . Louis confessed with uncharacteristic insight that perhaps he had “loved glory too much’
 While extending authority over their subjects and expanding their dynastic territories, they developed state bureaucracies and established large standing armies . They developed state bureaucracy and established standing armies.
 They broke noble resistance to absolute rule, confirming their privileges in exchange for loyalty to the throne . They confirmed their privileges to the royal family in return for loyalty .
 The relationship between rulers and nobles was essential to the functioning of most European states in the eighteenth century . This relationship remained essential to many European states .
 The structure of Western European society then began to change as the European economy entered a remarkable period of dynamic growth, particularly during the second half of the eighteenth century .
 Agricultural techniques, population growth, and a boom in manufacturing combined to begin the Industrial Revolution . This was the case above all in Britain, where capital-intensive agricultural techniques and population growth led to the expansion of capital intensive techniques .
 The changing structure of society, in turn, would affect states by encouraging demands for political reform that began in the 1760s and 1770s and challenged the monopoly on political power by oligarchs .
 The methodology and discoveries of the Scientific Revolution helped create modern science . The methodology, discoveries, and culture of the scientific revolution helped make modern science.
 Rejecting the weight of tradition, men and women of science developed the scientific method . The scientific method is a means of understanding based on systematic observation of natural phenomena .
 Enlightenment thinkers believed their role was to bring progress to the world through the application of reason to their reflections on the nature of mankind . Their successors, the philosophes, were the thinkers and writers of the Enlightenment . The Enlightenment was an attempt to make progress by applying reason to the application
 The philosophes espoused views of nature, mankind, society, and government that challenged some of the fundamental tenets most Europeans shared . Influenced by growing religious skepticism and increased knowledge of the New World brought through overseas trade .
 During this exciting period, Europe entered a remarkable time of economic and social change . During this time, Europe also entered an exciting period of economic . change .
 Increased agricultural productivity supported a larger population that, in turn, raised the demand for food and permitted the development of large-scale manufacturing in and around northern English towns . In turn, increased agricultural productivity led to the growth of manufacturing in northern England .
 The public political sphere was transformed by the emergence of newspapers and learned associations, which facilitated political interest and discussion . Newspapers, learned associations and associations enabled political interest to be discussed .
 Reform-minded people began to denounce unwarranted privilege and “despotism” Reformers celebrated the British model of constitutional monarchy . They celebrated the successful rebellion of the American colonists against British rule .
 In a time of economic and social change, new cultural and political innovations began to transform Europe .
 Giordano Bruno was burned along with his books in Rome . Bruno was a Dominican friar accused of heresy who loudly proclaimed the virtues of scientific investigation . Bruno's books were burned in Rome in the first year of the new century .
 Galileo espoused an atomistic theory of matter that seemed to challenge the Catholic Church's view that during communion bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ . Many Church fathers vehemently objected to Galileo's work on physics, for he, like Bruno, espoused a theory of atomistic
 The Church opposed Galileo s contention that the earth revolves around the sun . The Church also opposed Galileo's contention that it was the sun's sun .
 Protestant armies had recaptured some of the lands in which the Catholic Reformation had appeared victorious . Protestant armies were able to recapture some of those lands .
 The papacy, its influence weakened by the Protestant Reformation and eclipsed by powerful dynastic rulers, could ill afford another defeat . Pope Francis, Pope Francis and Pope Paul VI died in 2012 .
 Pope Urban VIII accused the astronomer only of supporting the views of the Polish scientist Copernicus, not of heresy . Urban VIII, who before his elevation to the pontificate had been Galileo’s friend, had been a friend of Galileo .
 This would save Galileo from death but might also put the pope in a bad light for protecting the scientist . Galileo's death would save him from death, but could also put pope in bad light .
 Galileo agreed to renounce these "errors" as heresies in order to avoid a death sentence in 1633 . Galileo was still sentenced to a lifetime of house arrest .
 In several different corners of Europe, a few people struggled to understand the workings of the cosmos in a new way .
 Their own observations of the skies seemed to contradict explanations of the universe that had originated with Aristotle in the fourth century B.c. and, having acquired the authority of the Church, had been passed down for centuries .
 What we now know as the Scientific Revolution owed its impact less to new technology and inventions than to new ways of thinking about the universe . The Scientific Revolution was the birth of the scientific revolution in science .
 The writings of the Greek philosopher Aristotle dominated European science for centuries . Aristotle's work on the theory of the universe has led to a series of scientific discoveries .
 Copernicus concluded that ancient and medieval science could not explain what he saw with his own eyes . Then, in the sixteenth century, the Polish astronomer observed the heavens and concluded that he saw what he had observed .
 Later in the century, his successors made systematic mathematical calculations to explain celestial motion . Galileo's successors—above all, Galileo—made systematic math calculations .
 In doing so, they created scientific methodology, which would also be applied to reach an understanding of the workings of the human body .
 Aristotle believed that the earth was located at or near the center of the universe . Ancient and Medieval Science is based on Aristotle's theory .
 He envisioned a hierarchical order of the cosmos comprised of a series of spheres that became progressively purer . The cosmos was created by a group of spheres, spheres that would become progressively pure .
 Aristotle believed terrestrial bodies naturally moved toward the earth, the center of the universe, unless they were propelled in another direction . Aristotle also believed that terrestrial bodies normally move toward the Earth .
 In this view, impetus imparted motion through contact with an object; when contact ceased, the object simply stopped moving or fell back to earth . This view is based on the theory that the object stopped moving after contact .
 The natural tendency of all matter, then, was toward rest, regarded as a nobler state than motion . Rest was regarded as nobler State than motion. Rest was thought to be the most noble state of motion, not motion .
 All motion had to be explained, a “mover” was found for every motion . Because all motion had been explained, all motion was explained by the author .
 In the second centuryd.d., Claudius Ptolemy published a massive work that became known as Almagest (from the Arabic for “greatest”) The work summarized the conclusions of Greek astronomers and presented his own theories .
 He described instruments such as the quadrant, invented by the Arabs, with which he tried to measure the orbits of the sun, moon, and planets in the sky .
 Ptolemy accepted Aristotle’s contentions, asserting that the earth was encased by a series of clear spheres revolving around it . The earth was surrounded by about eighty spheres, he says .
 The most distant sphere contained the farthest stars, which he believed were fixed points of light . He believed they contained the most distant stars .
 Within those spheres, the moon was closest to the earth; next came the planets Mars, Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn . The moon was the closest to Earth; Mars was closest .
 Church savants never raised the possibility that mankind could, with understanding, alter or master nature, alter nature . The Church Savants never said they could master nature .
 Aristotle’s belief that the heavens and earth displayed two different kinds of motion . This fit the medieval Church's view that the universe consisted of good and evil . The medieval Church believed the universe was the center of evil, but also of evil .
 The earth, standing at the center, was heavy, corrupted not only by its weight but also by original sin and earthly misdeeds . The earth was heavy and corrupted, and was corrupted by sin .
 Angels therefore placed far off in weightless existence in Heaven . Angels therefore were placed far away in a weightless life in Heaven, according to the Bible .
 The goal of human beings was to achieve the lightness of Heaven, God’s domain, on the exterior edge of the universe . The goal is to achieve lightness, God's domain, in the light of Heaven .
 The writings of the medieval poet Dante reflected the prevailing influence of Aristotle’s physics and Ptolemy's astronomy . Dante's writings reflected the influence of the physics and astronomy of his poetry .
 Dante held that the universe comprised ten spheres surrounding the spherical, motionless earth . Dante's creation of the universe was based on the idea of ten spheres around the world . Dante described the universe as a 'sphere'
 Dante and Virgil travel to the core of the earth, then climb out to the other side, the Southern Hemisphere, where they find Purgatory . In his Inferno y Dante and the Roman poet Virgil traveled to the southern hemisphere, where Purgatory awaits .
 Hell lay at the earth’s center, with Heaven in the distant tenth sphere . Hell was at the center of the earth's center, according to the Bible .
 Some medieval thinkers took significant steps toward modern science by embracing the study of natural phenomena and revering the Virgil, Cicero, and the Three Giants in the Lost Circle .
 Medieval scientists made lasting contributions in such fields as optics, biology and biology . Medieval scientists contributed to the development of eyeglasses and medicine .
 They espoused experimentation based on scientific procedures and the use of mathematics to verify theories . They classified objects for study and espoused experiments based on mathematical procedures .
 Even the most brilliant medieval thinkers remained only in the realm of theory . Even the contributions of the greatest medieval thinkers were only in theory .
 Renaissance drew on discovery of classical prose, poetry, art, and architecture . Italian scholars of the period also turned to classical Greek scientific texts that had been recovered and edited .
 Arabs had come into contact with classical learning centuries earlier, when they conquered the eastern reaches of the Byzantine Empire .
 Arab scholars preserved many ancient Greek and Roman texts, translating them into Arabic . Arab scholars also made significant original contributions in astronomy, mathematics, and medicine .
 Some of the manuscripts brought by Greek scholars to the West from Constantinople suggested that mathematics could be applied in the quest for knowledge about the universe .
 Arab scholars had raised troubling questions challenging age-old views of the earth as they observed and even began to measure the heavenly phenomena they beheld .
 In this way, the texts of Ptolemy became subjects of renewed interest and study . The texts of the texts have been subject to renewed interest, study .
 Ptolemy's view of the cosmos reflected the domination of Aristotle’s theory of motion . The theory was based on the theory of the universe, which is thought to have been formed by the Bible .
 Archimedes challenged Aristotle’s contention that rest was a natural state for all objects . Only the presence of an ‘active mover’ could generate motion, he said .
 This view was picked up again in the fourteenth century by thinkers at Paris and Oxford Universities . This view of the 14th century was later picked up in France and Oxford .
 Scientists observed that falling bodies move at an accelerating speed and that the accompanying presence of a “mover’s” simply could not be observed .
 A few scholars also rejected Aristotle’s explanation that air itself served as a natural propellant . Aristotle's explanation was rejected .
 They observed that an arrow shot from a bow clearly was not continually propelled by air or anything else, but sooner or later simply fell to earth . The arrow was shot from the bow, but later fell to the earth .
 The gradual development of a theory of motion, based on an understanding of the role of the mass of the moving object, along with the advances in the field of mathematics itself, provided the basis for new discoveries in astronomy .
 Copernicus Challenges the Aristotelian View of the Universe . The revolution in scientific thinking moved forward because of a cleric who kept his eyes toward the heavens, not necessarily in pious contemplation .
 Nicolaus Copernicus launched the strongest attack yet on the Aristotelian view of the universe . Copernic was the first scientist to discover that the universe was not created by the gods .
 Copernicus’s uncle assumed responsibility for his education after the death of his father . Copernic was educated by his uncle after his father died .
 Also trained as a doctor and portrait painter, he devoted his life to observation and discovery . Also trained in medicine and portrait painting, he dedicated himself to observation .
 Copernicus’s Concerning the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres was not published until he lay dying in 1 543 . The work of Archimedes was first translated into Latin in the same year the work of the work was translated .
 Copernicus dedicated his study to the pope . Paradoxically, in view of the intense theological debate it would generate, it was dedicated to Pope Francis .
 Ptolemy had assigned the planets to spherical orbits . But they didn't seem to be in the spherical orbits he had assigned them . Nor did they seem to appear in spherical orbits Ptolemans .
 What Copernicus observed, in short, contradicted the fundamental assumptions of the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic universe . The discovery of the universe contradicts the assumptions made by the two sides .
 Even before Copernicus, some thinkers questioned Aristotelian physics and the Ptolemaic cosmos . They generally did not venture out of the realm of mere speculation .
 Nicholas of Cusa, a German bishop and theologian, believed the earth might be in motion . Neither he nor anyone else in the period tried to make mathematical calculations that might prove this .
 He suggested that the sun stands at the center of the universe and, by implication, that the universe is infinite and nonhierarchical in nature, unlimited by Aristotelian layers of spheres .
 Leonardo da Vinci called wisdom “the daughter of experiment,” had also suggested that the earth might move around the sun . The extraordinary Renaissance artist and humanist called wisdom "the daughter"
 Copernicus's postulation was, like his critique of some of Ptolemy’s conclusions, not totally original . The postulation is, like some of his criticisms, was like that of some others, not original .
 Researchers suggested that mathematics could verify astronomical theories . They also suggested that math could verify theories of the universe .
 The notion that the earth was just one of many planets rotating in circular orbit around the sun raised shocking questions about the earth’s status . The earth was believed to be one of the most powerful planets in the solar system .
 This perplexed and angered Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish theologians by seeming to reduce the standing of mankind . This perplexes and angered Catholics, Protestants and Jews .
 It seemed unbelievable that mere mortals peering into the heavens were themselves moving rapidly through the universe . The universe seemed to be moving rapidly in the direction of the heavens .
 He could not explain why there was no constant wind from the east, which might have been expected based on the assumption that the earth moved in that direction around the sun .
 Copernicus sometimes sought to answer his own doubts by turning to the teachings of the ancients . He did not completely abandon the system of celestial spheres postulated by Ptolemy .
 Copernicus continued to accept the notion that the spherical universe was finite, and that it perhaps was limited by the stars fixed in the heavens . He also accepted that the universe was limited to the stars .
 The Universal Laws of the Human Body . Some scholars began to question old assumptions about the human body . Scientists chart movements in the heavens .
 They contended it was subject to the same universal laws that govern celestial and terrestrial motion . They contended that it is subject to same laws as those of terrestrial and celestial .
 Most assumptions about how the body works had been passed down for centuries from the ancient world . Most assumptions were passed down from centuries from ancient world.
 Galen, a Greek contemporary of Ptolemy, was the first person to develop theories about medicine based on scientific experiments . Galen developed theories about science based on experiments .
 Galen believed that disease followed from an imbalance in the four bodily humors—blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile . Like Aristotle, Galen thought that an imbalance of the four humors would lead to disease .
 Vesalius was the founder of modern biological science . He dissected and studied cadavers and assembled human skeletons . In the Middle Ages, the Church had considered this to be sinful .
 The English scientist William Harvey largely solved the riddle of how blood circulates . William Harvey was the first person to discover how blood circulated .
 Harvey's accomplishment was in the realm of thought and owed virtually nothing to prior inventions . Harvey’s accomplishment was thought, not thought .
 He made his discoveries before the invention of the microscope, and he referred only twice in his experiments to a magnifying glass . Indeed, he made discoveries before he invented the microscope .
 Harvey’s theory of blood circulation pictured the heart and its valves functioning as a mechanical pump . Harvey's theory was based on the heart's valves working as a pump .
 Harvey, like medieval thinkers, retained a belief that ‘vital spirits” were to be found in the blood .
 Harvey’s work helped establish a basis for the development of modern biology and medicine in later centuries . The long-term consequence of Vesalius work was to undermine further Aristotelian philosophy and medieval science .
 Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler carried the search for an understanding of the way the universe works to a new stage of scientific knowledge . Brahe was a Danish astronomer and Kepler's assistant .
 Brahe built an astronomical observatory on a Danish island after losing part of his nose in a duel . He had replaced it with a construction of silver and gold alloy perched above his handlebar moustache .
 Brahe rejected Copernicus’s contention that the earth rotated around the sun . Brahe said the earth was not rotating around the solar system .
 He claimed that if this were true, a cannonball fired from west to east would travel farther in that direction . A weight dropped from a tall tower would strike earth to the west of the tower because of the earth’s movement .
 This and a comet sighted five years later irrevocably compromised the Aristotelian view of the universe as unchanging . The discovery of a comet five years after the discovery of the first planet in the universe made it impossible to believe the universe had changed .
 Brahe used mathematics to locate the position of the planets and stars . Brahe compiled extensive data based upon his own observations of the planet's orbits .
 His rejection of Copernican view that the sun was the center of the universe and his calculations were often inaccurate remind us that the Scientific Revolution did not develop in a linear fashion . At the same time, he rejected Copernicans' view of the sun as the center .
 Four years later, he was forced to leave a teaching position in Austria because he refused to convert from Lutheranism to Catholicism . He was forced out of a teaching job in Austria four years after refusing to convert .
 On his deathbed, Brahe implored Kepler to complete his observation tables . Kepler's observation tables were completed by Brahe on the deathbed .
 Holy Roman Emperor Rudolph 11, whose interest in science outweighed any concern Tycho Brahes system of planetary rotation, about 1560, .
 Kepler shared Copernicus’s belief that observers on earth were moving while the sun stood still . Kepler believed observers on Earth were moving when the sun was still .
 Kepler concluded that the orbits of the planets were “imperfect’''—not circular, but rather elliptical . After carefully plotting the orbit of Mars, Kepler concluded the orbits were 'imperfect'''
 He concluded that the planets were affected by some sort of force emanating from the sun . He also concluded that some of the planets are affected by a force from the Sun .
 William Gilbert published a book on the magnet in 1600, the first study written by a university scholar and informed by laboratory experimentation . William Gilbert had published the book in 1600 .
 Gilbert's investigations of magnetic force provided a model for the development of a modern theory of gravitation . Gilbert investigated magnetic force in the 1930s and 1930s . His theory of gravity was later developed into a theory of relativity .
 Kepler now decided that it was perhaps magnetic force that attracted the earth and sun to each other . Kepler now believes magnetic force was the reason for the Earth and the sun to attract each other.
 He determined tides were the result of the magnetic attraction of the earth and the moon . He also determined that tides were result of magnetic attraction .
 Kepler postulated three laws of planetary motion based on the power of the sun . Kepler assumed the laws were determined by the power, or specific magnetic attraction, of the solar system . Kepler's theory was based on his mathematical calculations .
 He used observation and mathematical calculations to prove that planets were a separate grouping with different properties from those of the fixed stars . Aristotle’s crystalline spheres simply did not exist, he said .
 Kepler’s discoveries, blows to Aristotelian and medieval science, also suggested that the hand of the prime mover—God—was not required to govern the movement of the planets . Kepler's discoveries suggested that God's hand was not required, according to Kepler . Kepler
 Kepler’s conclusions challenged the theological assumptions of the Catholic Church . Copernicus placed the sun at the center of the universe . Kepler's conclusions challenged theological assumptions made by the Church .
 The Scientific Revolution still occurred within the system of Christian belief . Nonetheless, the Scientific Revolution was within the Christian system .
 Kepler sought to glorify God by demonstrating the consistency, harmony, and order of divine creation as expressed in the working of the universe . Kepler himself sought to show God's order in the universe as expressed by Kepler .
 Sir Francis Bacon launched a frontal assault on ancient and medieval metaphysics and science . Bacon was a lawyer, statesman, and philosopher . Bacon's work was published in 17th Century and 18th Century .
 Bacon called himself “a bellringer who’s first up to call others to church” Bacon helped detach science from philosophy . Bacon's work was published in 17th century and 17th Century . Bacon died in 18th century .
 Medieval scholasticism had focused on abstract problems without practical consequences, he argued . Scholasticists were concerned about how many angels could stand on the head of a pin, he said .
 The truths of the universe would be revealed by discovery and scientific experiment, not by religion, says author . Through inductive reasoning, science would reveal the truth, not religion, he says .
 Bacon’s renown helped create interest in science in England, although for the moment this was limited to a small number of people . Bacon served for three years as King James 1 of England's Lord Chancellor (before being dismissed for accepting bribes) Bacon's renown .
 Galileo emerged as the dominant figure of the early stage of the Scientific Revolution . Galileo and Science on Trial on the Italian peninsula . Galileo was dominant figure in the early stages of the scientific revolution in Italy .
 That Padua was under the protection of Venice, which was hostile to the pope, facilitated its university’s precocious role in the development of scientific methodology . Padua's university was under Venice's protection .
 The debate hinged on whether scientific investigation could be independent of the Catholic Church . The Catholic Church considered revealed religion the only source of true knowledge .
 New ways of thinking about the heavens, systematic observation, and scientific measurement had played a more significant role in the early stages of the Scientific Revolution than did new technology .
 Galileo constructed his own “spy glass’s” after learning a man in the Netherlands invented a ‘spy’ glass that magnifies objects many times . Galileo constructed one of his own in 1609 .
 This telescope enabled him to study Jupiter's moons, Saturn’s spectacular rings, some of the innumerable stars of the Milky Way, and craters on the moon . This telescope provided him with a unique insight into Jupiter and Saturn's rings .
 Galileo's observation of spots that seemed to move on the surface of the sun led him to conclude that the sun, too, rotated . Galileo's observations of spots on the sun's surface led to his discovery of solar spots .
 That sunspots seemed to change challenged the traditional view of the static nature of the universe . Sunspots also challenged the view of a static universe .
 He demonstrated that the earth was in perpetual rotation and that balls of varying weights will pick up speed at the same rate as they fall . So therefore their speed is not determined by their mass, he said .
 He demonstrated that air and clouds move with the earth as it rotates around the sun . Air and clouds appear immobile to an observer, while appearing immobile .
 The rooms in his house that he set aside for experimentation served as the first university laboratory . The rooms were used as a laboratory for experimentation .
 Galileo did not disdain seeking practical information from craftsmen and artisans . Galileo sought practical advice from artisans in order to learn more about his work . Galileo was fascinated by the art of artisans and science .
 He consulted workers who built cannons, soldiers who fired them, and people who made compasses, astrolabes, quadrants, and other scientific instruments for navigation . He consulted people who built cannon cannonies, compasses and quadrants .
 He began to investigate water pumps and other means of regulating rivers . He also planned the construction of stronger military fortresses .
 Galileo did not care whether or not his discoveries reached ordinary people . Galileo's discoveries did not reach ordinary people, but he did care for his discoveries . Galileo was born in the same place as Galileo in the 16th century .
 He claimed that “the mobility of the earth is a proposition far beyond the comprehension of the common people’s . Moreover, he claimed that the mobility . of the . earth is “far beyond the . comprehension of . the . common people. Moreover, the mobility of
 Galileo tried to reconcile his findings with those of Copernicus with early Church texts . At first, Galileo thought his findings were Copernic, but they were later reconciled by the Church . Galileo's findings were published in Galileo's first edition of The Galileo Letters .
 Galileo’s insistence that the universe was mathematical in its very structure and subject to laws of mechanics that could be discovered left him open to attacks by ecclesiastical authorities .
 In 1616, the pope condemned Galileos proposition that the sun is the center of the universe . Pope warned Galileos not to teach it and condemned it .
 Galileo published his Dialogue Concerning Two World Systems—Ptolemaic and Co'pernican . He presented a lengthy dialogue between those espousing the respective systems of Ptolemy and Copernicus .
 A certain Simplicio took the side of Ptolemy in the dialogues . The character’s very name outraged the Church by . intimating that a farcical character symbolized the pope . The Church was outraged by the character's name .
 Galileo was under house arrest in his villa in the hills above Florence . Galileo continued to observe, experiment, and write, publishing his texts in the Netherlands . Galileo died in 1783 at the hands of a doctor at the age of 40 .
 When he went blind in 1638, the pope refused to allow him to go to Florence to see a doctor . Pope refused to let him go to the city to visit a doctor when he was blind . The pope died in 1639 .
 Despite his blindness, he continued his scientific investigations until his death four years later .
 Two brilliant thinkers accepted Galileo’s revision of classical and medieval systems of knowledge . One French and the other English thinkers, one French and one English, accepted Galileo's revised system of knowledge.
 Descartes sought to discover the truth through deductive reasoning . He sought to find out the truth using deductive thinking .
 Isaac Newton followed his countryman Bacon’s insistence that the way to knowledge was through scientific experiment . Newton followed Bacon's insistence that scientific experiment was the key to knowledge .
 One amazing discovery after another added to the foundations of the ‘new philosophy’ of science . One of the most amazing discoveries in the world has been made by scientists .
 The reclusive French philosopher Rene Descartes shared Bacon's and Galileo’s critiques of ancient and medieval learning . Descarte and Galileo were both critical of ancient learning .
 He espoused a different methodology for understanding the universe, espousing deductive reasoning, not from scientific observation . But he offered a different method of thinking for the universe .
 In this deeply personal account, he discussed his rejection of the scientific teaching he had encountered as a young man . He also discussed the rejection of scientific teaching .
 Too much of what he had learned had been handed down from tradition without critical commentary, he says . He says too much of the history was handed down without critical analysis .
 Each problem has to be separated into “as many parts as may be necessary for its adequate solution,” he said . Then each problem must be separated from the simplest idea to the most difficult, he added .
 Matter is defined as an infinite number of particles that fill all space, leaving neither void nor vacuum . Matter could be discovered and described mathematically, as could the laws of motion . Matter was discovered by scientists in the 1970s .
 Descartes argued that the existence of the material universe and God could be deduced . He argued that God and material universe were deduced from the material world's existence .
 Materialist approach to knowledge left little or no room for ancient or medieval learning . Materialist approaches to knowledge leave little room for medieval or ancient learning, says historian .
 Descartes published his works in French, identifying Latin with scholasticism and ecclesiastical doctrine . As a sign of this break, Descarte's works were published in French as a sign that he was breaking away from Latin .
 Descartes viewed God as a benevolent, infinitely powerful clockmaker who created the universe according to rules that the human mind could discover with proper reasoning . Like Kepler, Descarte saw God as an infinite, benevolent clockmaker, who made the universe .
 God then stepped back, according to this view, forever absent from the actual workings of what He had created . God then steps back, he said, to be forever absent . God stepped back .
 Descartes subordinated experimentation to reason in the quest for truth . Descarte subverted experimentation with reason to reason .
 Newton’s Principia, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, was the first synthesis of scientific principles . Newton‘Principia’ was the . Mathematical . Principles of . Natural Philosophy .
 Newton synthesized the empiricism of Galileo and others with the theoretical rigor and logic of Descartes . He laid the foundations for modern science, which is based on both theory and experimentation .
 Newton conducted some of his experiments while living on his prosperous family’s farm . Newton conducted his experiments during his time on the farm .
 Newton observed a falling apple, which led him to recognize that the force that caused objects to fall to earth was related to planetary motion . Newton was sitting under a tree, ruminating about celestial motion, when he observed the falling apple .
 Newton demonstrated that earthly and celestial motion are subject to laws that could be described by mathematical formulas, the science of mechanics . Newton demonstrated how celestial motion can be described in mathematical formulas .
 Newton postulated a theory of universal gravitation, the existence of forces of attraction and repulsion operating between objects . Going beyond Kepler’s three laws of planetary motion, he postulated the theory .
 Newton concluded Kepler’s laws of planetary motion would be correct if planets were being pulled toward the sun by a force whose strength was in inverse proportion to their distance from it . Newton concluded that the planets would be pulled toward their sun by an inverse force .
 The moon, too, seemed to be drawn to the earth in the same way, while the pull that it exerted determined the ocean tides . The pull of the moon also determined the tides of the ocean .
 Newton concluded that every particle of matter attracts every other particle with a force proportional to the product of the two masses, and inversely proportional to square of the distance that separates them . Newton: "Every particle of . matter, Newton concluded, attracts every . other particle of the matter with
 Newton combined the insights of his predecessors with his own brilliant discoveries . Newton combined his discoveries with his insights of the past and his own discoveries .
 He correctly calculated that the average density of the earth is about five and a half times that of water . He also calculated that electrical messages activate the nervous system, and anticipated some of the ideas that two centuries later would form the basis of thermodynamics and quantum theory .
 Newton was the first to understand that all colors are composed of a mixture of the primary colors of the spectrum . Newton was also the first person to say that all primary colors were created by the color spectrum .
 In the late 1660s, he also constructed the first reflecting telescope (previous Sir Isaac Newton) In the 17th century, he built a telescope that was first to be found in existence .
 Newton’s first paper on optics, published in 1671, proposed that light could be mathematically described and analyzed . Newton's first paper, published by 1671 in 1670, was published in New York City .
 Scientists still consider this paper as the beginning of theoretical physics . Some scientists still consider it as the first theoretical physics paper .
 Newton became wealthy and a hero in his own time . Unlike his predecessors in the development of science, he became wealthy . Newton became a hero and hero of his time .
 Newton published his discoveries with reluctance and initially only when it seemed that rivals might first take the credit for a discovery . Newton remained a remote, chaste, humorless figure who published his discovery with reluctance . Newton was a remote and chaste figure .
 He brazenly accused those working on similar problems of copying him, and was ungenerous in acknowledging what he had learned from others .
 Newton’s fame marked the victory of the scientific method, however, over ancient and medieval thought . Newton's fame marks the victory over medieval thought, however .
 Newton was given a state funeral and buried in London’s Westminster Abbey . Newton was buried in Westminster Abbey, London .
 Newtonian synthesis of scientific thinking and discovery spread rapidly from England to the continent . Newton’s synthesis of science and discoveries spread rapidly to Europe . Newton's discovery spread from the continent to Europe in the early years .
 Newton's followers clashed with Cartesians, the followers of Descartes . Newton’s followers clashed over Cartesian followers . Newton and Cartes' followers clashed in the 17th century .
 Newton rejected Descartes’s materialism, at least partially because it seemed to leave open the possibility that the world was made up totally of matter and that God did not exist, although the French philosopher never made such an assertion . Newton's materialism was rejected by Descart
 Newton believed that God had to intervene from time to keep the clock of creation running . Newton believed God needed to intervene to keep creation running, lest it run down .
 Newton believed there seemed to be no necessary contradiction between science and religious faith . Newton continued to produce manuscripts on theological questions in his own belief .
 Newton insisted on the explanatory power of abstract reasoning . Like Descartes, Newton insisted that abstract reasoning had to be explained .
 Newton sought to confirm theories that could not be proved by the scientific method . Newton's description of gravity as a force that operates between two objects in space . Newton wanted to confirm his theories experimentally .
 Until at least 1720, some tension remained between the English and Cartesian groups . French and German Cartesian counterparts .
 This was a creative tension, based on a common acceptance of the primacy of scientific inquiry . Yet this was a tension, with a common belief that scientific inquiry is paramount .
 Cartesians believed that thought and matter formed the two categories of reality . The Cartesian believed that matter and thought were the only category of reality in the world .
 While making his living grinding lenses for glasses, he found both a philosopher’s introspective isolation and stimulation from the new physics . He argued that human understanding advances through inner reflection .
 The northern German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz agreed with Descartes . He rejected Newton’s suggestion that God had to intervene from time to time in the operations of the universe .
 The bodies of humans and animals ran like clocks, set in motion, like the universe itself, by God . The bodies were set to run like clocks by God, the author says .
 Leibniz's popularity helped perpetuate the Cartesian challenge to Newton, notably in France . The philosopher's popularity in France helped perpetuate his challenge .
 A ‘culture of science’ developed in Western Europe and gradually spread eastward . The Culture of Science developed in Europe and spread throughout the world .
 By the 1660s, letters, newsletters, and periodicals linked Europeans interested in science . Letters, periodicals, magazines linked Europeans to science .
 A "republic of science" took shape, spawning meetings, lectures, visits by traveling scholars, correspondence, book purchases, personal libraries, and public experiments . Gradually a ‘republic’ of science took shape .
 The formation of learned associations provided a focal point for the exchange of scientific information and debates over methodology and findings, expanding the ranks of people interested in science .
 Louis XIV of France and Charles II of England granted patronage to institutions founded to propagate scientific learning . Only a few decades after Galileo’s condemnation, Louis XIV gave patronage to scientific institutions .
 rulers realized that science could be put to use in the interest of their states . They were attracted by scientific discoveries that could be used to help their state .
 The Diffusion of the Scientific Method . Savants of science traveled widely seeking to exchange ideas and learn from each other .
 Czech scholar Comenius (Jan Komensky, 1592-1670) left his native Moravia in the wake of religious persecution during the Thirty Years’ War .
 After more than a decade in Poland, he began to visit scholars in many countries . He began to travel around the world to meet scholars in countries such as Poland .
 For seven years, he traveled in the German states, the Netherlands, England, Sweden, and Hungary . He traveled in seven countries .
 He proposed that scientific knowledge should be brought together in a collaborative form . Publishing hundreds of works, he proposed that one day scientific knowledge was brought together .
 Learned associations and scientific societies had already begun to appear in a number of cities, including Rome and Paris, in the 1620s . Learned associations, scientific societies and societies were already appearing in cities such as Rome .
 In Paris, Marin Mersenne was a monk who translated Galileo’s writings into French . He stood at the center of a network of vigorous scientific exchange that cut across national boundaries .
 He organized informal gatherings, attended by, among others, Blaise Pascal . Pascal was a gloomy young physicist and mathematician who originated, probability .
 In England, above all, the culture of science became part of public life during the period from 1640 to 1660 . The vocabulary of science joined the discourse of the English upper classes .
 Exchanges, debates, and even acrimonious disputes reached an ever wider scholarly audience . Exchanges and debates were often acrimony-freezing .
 In England, pamphlets and books on scientific subjects were published in unprecedented numbers . Pamphlets, books and pamphlets were published on the subject of science .
 The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge was formed in 1662 under the patronage of Charles 11 . The society was formed by Charles 11, the Patron of the Royal Society .
 Its diverse membership, which included merchants, naval officers, and craftsmen, reflected the growing interest in science in England .
 Members included Edmund Halley, John Locke, Christopher Wren and John Wren . They included the philosopher John Locke and mathematician and astronomer .
 The Royal Society’s hundred original members doubled in number by 1670 . Its weekly meetings attracted visiting scholars .
 The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society published some of the most important work of members and foreign correspondents, especially in the field of mathematics . The Transactions were published by members and correspondents of the Society .
 Margaret Cavendish participated in debates about matter and motion, the vacuum, magnetism, and the components of color and fire . The natural philosopher was the duchess of Newcastle . She was the natural philosopher of the Victorian era .
 Cavendish also hosted the “Newcastle circle,” an informal gathering of distinguished scientists that received Descartes . The author of books on natural philosophy, as well as a number of plays and poems, Cavendish was also a prolific writer .
 She attributed not only to the fact that she was shy, but to her sex . But she worked in isolation, which she attributed to her shyness, and to sex .
 Margaret Cavendish accepted, at least in her early years, the contemporary assumptions that women had smaller brains than men . She accepted that women were somehow unfit for science and philosophy . Margaret accepted that she had smaller and softer brains .
 Descartes’s belief that thought transcended gender differences was a bold statement . Women should be recognized as their equals, he wrote, and women should be their equals .
 Women were formally banned from the Royal Society, this would last until 1945 . Cavendish was permitted to attend one session . Women were excluded from English universities and women were banned from Royal Society .
 As interest in scientific theories and discoveries became influential among the educated upper classes, women also wanted to be informed about science . Yet as an interest in science became influential, women wanted to know more about science, they wanted to learn more .
 In Italy, it was more common for women to participate in the scientific life of their cities . Women were more common in Italy's scientific life in their cities than in France .
 Laura Bassi remained an active participant in the scientific community . Bassi was an active member of the science community in the 1980s .
 In 1666, the French Royal Academy of Science held its first formal meeting in Paris .
 Like the English Royal Society, the French Academy enjoyed the patronage of the monarchy . The monarchy even provided the Academy with an astronomical observatory .
 French Academy members spend much time eating and drinking . One complained that too much time was wasted at fancy dinners that preceded scholarly discussion .
 Language barriers became a greater obstacle to the diffusion of ideas and research . Some writers deliberately had used Latin because they believed knowledge ought to remain the preserve of the educated few .
 Galileo had written in Italian to attract a wider audience among the elite, but also to remove science from Latin, the language of religious discourse . Galileo's work was intended to attract wider audience, but was also removed from Latin by writing in Italian .
 Newton wrote Principia in Latin in part because only then could his work be read by continental scholars . Newton's work was only then read by most continental scholars in Latin .
 Newton s Optics y by contrast, appeared first in English, then in Latin and French translations . Newton soptics y first appeared in English before being translated into Latin, French .
 Each country’s vernacular became the language of its scientists . Gradually during the eighteenth century, each country's .vernacular . became the . language of their scientists .
 The further east one went in Europe, the weaker was the impact of the Scientific Revolution . But the further east a went, the stronger the impact was seen on the continent .
 Scientific inquiry lagged in Poland in part because of the success of the Catholic Reformation, which restricted the free flow of scholarly thought . Scientific inquiry in Poland has lagged since the Reformation .
 Several printing houses in Gdansk owned by Protestants began publishing scientific works in the second half of the seventeenth century . The printing houses published works by Protestants .
 Leibniz enjoyed popularity in the Habsburg domains . His contagious optimism and belief that God had preordained harmony found resonance in the diverse and scattered kingdom .
 theological and devotional literature still dominated the shelves of university, monastic, and imperial libraries . Nonetheless, theological and . devotional . literature still dominate the shelves .
 Some savants in the East did become aware of the debates in the West on the scientific method . The scientific method is a key part of the West's debate on the method .
 Protestant thinkers in Hungary and Silesia were exposed to the ideas of Bacon and Descartes by traveling scholars from Western Europe . A few Hungarians learned of the new ideas by visiting Dutch universities .
 Some Bohemian and Polish nobles began to include books on the new science in their private libraries . One of which eventually comprised over 300,000 volumes and 10,000 manuscripts .
 Theoretical and practical astronomical work spread in the Habsburg lands, carried on in some cases by Jesuits . Some Jesuits were involved in the work .
 Mathematics, optics, and problems of atmospheric pressure, too, were the focus of debate . Maths, optics and atmospheric pressure were also discussed .
 Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand HI studied military geometry, constructing arithmetic toys for his children . Ferdinand HI constructed arithmetic toys from his children's arithmetic toys .
 Russia's isolation from Western culture was compounded by the Orthodox Church's antipathy toward the West and opposition to scientific experimentation . Russia’s isolation from the West has been compounded by its opposition to experimentation .
 There was acceptance of some practical knowledge from the West, for example relating to the military, mining, or metallurgy, which largely arrived with foreign merchants .
 Seventeenth-century Russia had no gifted scientists and no scientific societies . Russia's lack of scientific knowledge in the 17th century was a problem .
 Until the reign of Peter the Great, virtually all books published in Russia were devotional in character, and Russian culture was essentially that of a monastery .
 Foreign books began to appear at court only after about 1650, many arriving from Poland and Ukraine . Foreign books arrived at court in 1650 .
 The Orthodox Church, having suffered a schism, launched another campaign against Western ideas . At that point, however, the Orthodox Church denounced secular knowledge as heresy and science as the work of the Antichrist .
 Some nobles began to be exposed to ideas from the natural sciences . But gradually some nobles were exposed to these ideas from natural sciences.
 The Russian nobles were dissatisfied with Church learning and eager to know more about the geography of their own expanding state .
 The Uses of Science is a look at the 17th century's Scientific Revolution . The seventeenth-century Scientific Revolution was above all a revolution in thought .
 Technological inventions that would change the way people lived lay for the most part in the future . The inventions of the future lay in the hands of the world's first generation .
 During the second half of the seventeenth century, scientific experimentation led to the practical application of some of the discoveries .
 Newton's longitude could now be easily established and ocean tides accurately charted . Newton's discovery of longitude helped chart the ocean's tides .
 Voyages of discovery, commerce, and conquest to the Americas increased the demand for new navigational instruments . The instruments were used in the early 1800s .
 Dutch scientists and craftsmen led the way in producing telescopes, microscopes, binoculars, and other scientific instruments .
 Physicians, engineers, mariners, instrument makers, opticians, pharmacists, and surveyors, many of them self-educated, began to apply the new discoveries .
 Robert Hooke, another member of the Royal Society, improved the barometer, which measures atmospheric pressure, and augmented the power of the microscope by adding multiple lenses . Hooke added multiple lenses to the microscope .
 Biologists began to collect, categorize, dissect, and describe fossils, birds, and exotic fish . They added to contemporary understanding of the richness and complexity of the world around them .
 Governments began to tap science in the service of the state . As Francis Bacon had predicted, governments began tapping science in service of state . Francis Bacon predicted, as Francis Bacon did .
 Absolute monarchs on the continent sought out scientists to produce inventions that would give them commercial and military advantages over rivals .
 In France, Jean-Baptiste Colbert sought to steer the Royal Academy of Science toward the study of useful subjects that might benefit French commerce and industry . Colbert commissioned people to make reliable maps of the provinces and colonies .
 English government officials also began to apply statistics to administrative and social problems . English officials also applied statistics to social problems in the 1930s . Statistics were also applied to administrative problems .
 Tsar Peter the Great was convinced by his trip to Western Europe that Russia would have to borrow from the West . Tsar the Great convinced Russia would not be able to rely on the West again .
 He corresponded with Leibniz, who convinced him that empirical science, along with the creation of a system of education, would bring progress . He said empirical science and an education system would make progress .
 Peter s campaign of westernization, which included opening his country to Western scientific ideas, made Russia a great power . Peter's campaign included opening Russia to Western science ideas .
 Peter Peter established the Russian Academy of Sciences and the Moscow School of Mathematics and Navigation . Peter was the founder of the first generation of Russian explorers, cartographers, and astronomers . Peter also established the first school in Moscow .
 This was particularly the case with the Catholic and Orthodox Churches . This was especially true with the Catholics and Orthodox Christians .
 There seemed to be a close association between Protestant countries and advances in science, given the precocious role of England and, to a lesser extent, the Netherlands . England and the Netherlands in the emergence of a culture of science .
 This contributed to the debate over whether Protestantism itself was more conducive to scientific inquiry .
 Universities contributed relatively little to diffusion of the scientific method . Universities contributed little to the diffusion of scientific method, scientists say .
 During the seventeenth century as a whole, their enrollments declined as the European population stagnated . The enrollments of the 16th century as well as the seventteenth century declined .
 In Catholic countries, canon law and in Protestant states, civil law predominated in universities, which trained Church and state officials, respectively . In Catholic states, universities trained Church officials and trained officials in law .
 The number of German universities more than doubled to about forty during the seventeenth century . About forty German universities were studied in Germany .
 The impetus for their creation came from Lutheranism and Calvinism, however, not from an interest in science . They were created by Calvinists and Lutherans, not scientists .
 Experimental physics as well as botany and chemistry were absent from university study throughout Europe . Experimental physics and botany were absent in Europe throughout the 1930s .
 Protestants in the diffusion of scientific method reflected differences between the theological stance of the Catholic Church and the more liberal ethos of the Protestant Reformation .
 Catholic theologians left little room for innovation or experimentation . Catholic theology left little space for innovation, experimentation .
 Protestant belief that individual should seek truth and salvation in his or her own religious experience through personal interpretation of the Bible encouraged skepticism about doctrinal theology . The Protestant belief was that individuals should seek salvation in their own experience .
 The emphasis on individual discovery seemed to lead naturally to empiricism . The emphasis of individual discovery led naturally to empiricalism .
 Scientists in Catholic states confronted by ecclesiastical denunciations or by reports of miracles that seemed to fly in the face of logic, found support in Protestant lands . Scientists in . Catholic states, confronted by . ecclesiastical . denuncials or reports of . miracles that . seemed . to
 The Protestant Dutch Republic, fighting a long civil war against Spanish rule, emerged as a center of toleration . Most books could be published in the Dutch Republic .
 Descartes fled France for the Netherlands, where he published Discourse on Method . He fled France after learning of the condemnation of Galileo’s work .
 Francis Bacon had been among the first to associate the Scientific Revolution with the Protestant Reformation . Bacon was one of the first people to associate Scientific Revolution and the Protestant Reform .
 Protestants believed that scientific discovery would lead to a better world . The wonders of nature were there to be discovered and to give greater glory to God .
 Jesuits protected Kepler from persecution from Protestant theologians . Jesuits in Bohemia protected Kepler, provided he limited himself to speculation about astronomy and mathematics .
 The development of a scientific view of the world in England may be better understood in the context of decades of social, intellectual, and political crisis during the mid-seventeenth century . The development may be best understood in context of the decades of political and social crisis in England .
 Many who considered the Catholic Church an obstacle to scientific inquiry opposed Charles I . Charles I sought a climate of freedom as they sought to establish scientific inquiry .
 The reformers’ triumph in the English Civil War may have emboldened Newton . Newton and other proponents of the new philosophy may have been emboldened . Newton’s new philosophy was inspired by the success of the English civil war .
 Moderate Anglicans, like the Puritans before them, insisted that science could bring progress . Moderate . Anglicans insisted that progress could be made by science .
 Newton and other members of the Royal Society almost unanimously supported the exile of the Catholic King James 11 to France and the Glorious Revolution of 1688 . Newton and others supported the exiled King James to France .
 Censorship was relatively rare in England, where political and ecclesiastical authority was not so centralized . The censors were rare in the country, especially in England .
 Each manuscript had to be submitted to a royal office for authorization to be published . Thereafter, each new manuscript was submitted to the royal office .
 Ecclesiastics had veto power over books treating religious subjects . Six years later, separate offices were established for literature, science, and politics .
 Not all churchmen in France adamantly waged a war on science . Yet, to be sure, not all churches in France are against science .
 The Scientific Revolution seemed to push theology into the background . The scientific revolution pushed theology to the background of theology .
 The idea that mankind might one day master nature shocked many Church officials . Even though the earliest exponents of scientific method never doubted Consequences of the Scientific Revolution .
 Descartes’s materialism seemed to suggest that humanity could live independently of God . The materialism was a form of materialism in the works of the Cartes .
 English poet John Donne had already come to the same conclusion in 1612 . The English poet had already concluded that the best solution to the problem was to be solved .
 The men and women of science espoused the application of the scientific method to the study of nature and the universe .
 "It was but a short step to subject society, government, and political thought to similar critical scrutiny," he said . "It's but a small step," he added .
 John Locke claimed that society was, as much as astronomy, was subject to the rigors of the scientific method . The English philosopher John Locke said society was as much of a discipline as astronomy . John Locke: Society is subject to scientific method.
 The Scientific Revolution would ultimately help call absolutism into doubt by influencing the philosophes, the thinkers and writers of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment . Moreover, the Scientific Revolution ultimately helped to question absolotism .
 The philosophes’ belief in the intrinsic value of freedom and their assertion that people should be ruled by law, not rulers, would challenge the very foundations of absolutism .
 Have the courage to make use of your own understanding,” as exciting a challenge today as in the eighteenth century. “Make use of the own understanding," she said .
 Enlightenment thinkers espoused intellectual freedom and the use of reason in the search for progress . Enlightenment was a period of contagious intellectual energy and enthusiastic quest for knowledge .
 Scientists wanted their ideas to reach the general reading public . Unlike most scientists of the preceding period, they wanted ideas to be seen by the public .
 Their approach to education was not limited to formal schooling, but instead took in the development of the individual and the continued application of critical inquiry throughout one’s life . They were not only concerned with formal schooling .
 The Enlightenment began in Paris but extended to much of Western Europe, including the German states, the Dutch Republic, Great Britain, and as far as North America .
 Orthodox Christian intellectuals carried the Enlightenment’s celebration of science and humanism into the Balkans . The Enlightenment celebrated science, humanism and humanistism in Europe .
 The philosophes’ writings helped confirm French as the language of high culture in eighteenth-century Europe . French was a popular language of culture in Europe .
 In Italy, those influenced by the new thinking used the ideas of the philosophes to attack clerical and particularly papal influence in political life . Those influenced by these ideas attacked clerical influence in politics in Italy .
 This final stage also features new ideas relating the concept of freedom to the working of economies, best represented by the thought of Adam Smith . The final stage of the project also features ideas relating to the idea of freedom .
 Several monarchs applied the philosophies’ principle that rulers should work for the good of their subjects . At this time, too, several monarchs apply the principle .
 The experiments in “enlightened absolutism’ were most noteworthy for rulers’ organizing their states more effectively, further enhancing their authority . The experiments were most notable for rulers organizing their state more effectively .
 This third period also brought the popular diffusion of the lesser works of would-be philosophes seeking to capitalize on an expanding literary market . The third period of the 19th century saw the rise of the French Enlightenment .
 These works, too, were influential in undermining respect for the authority of the monarchy of France and thus indirectly contributed to the French Revolution . These works were influential .
 The philosophes espoused views of nature, mankind, society, government, and the intrinsic value of freedom . They challenged some of the most fundamental tenets Europeans had held for centuries .
 Enlightenment thought argued that progress had been constrained by social and political institutions that did not reflect humanity’s natural goodness and capacity for material and moral improvement . Enlightenment thought was revolutionary .
 Many philosophes saw no or little incompatibility between science and religion . They were skeptical of received truths passed down from generation to generation . They saw no incompatibility with science or religion .
 They challenged the doctrinal authority of the established churches and launched a crusade for the secularization of political institutions . Thus, they challenged the doctrine of the establishment churches .
 The consequences of modern views of sovereignty, political rights, and organization of states would be seen in the French Revolution and the era of liberalism in the nineteenth century .
 Like all intellectual and cultural movements, the Enlightenment did not emerge spontaneously . The Enlightenment is not a movement that emerged spontaneously . It is a movement of thought and culture .
 The philosophes reflected the influence of the Scientific Revolution, which espoused the scientific method in the study of nature and the universe . David Hume called ‘the science of man’s’
 Locke claimed that philosophy was, as much as astronomy, a discipline subject to the rigors of the scientific method and critical inquiry . Locke claimed philosophy was as much like astronomy, as well as philosophy .
 Locke was the son of a landowner and a member of the British Royal Society . Locke maintained a strong interest in medicine . Locke was born in London, England, and died in 1903 .
 Locke believed that the scientific method could be applied to the study of society . Locke's work was first published in 17th century . Locke was the founder of the Society of England .
 Locke postulated that each individual is a tabula rasa rasa, or blank slate, at birth . Locke's theory is that each person is a blank slate at birth, or a blank blank slate . Locke: "Each individual is an individual that is unique and unique to be
 John Locke denied the existence of John Locke and Georges-Louis Buffon . John Locke believed that all knowledge is sensory, Locke denied existence of Locke .
 He anticipated that the discovery of more laws of nature would be the basis of secular laws on which society should be based . He predicted that more laws would be revealed to society .
 He was confident that humanity might thereby be able to improve social conditions . He said humanity might also improve the social conditions of people .
 He argued monarchies were based on a social contract between rulers and the ruled . He argued that monarchies are based on the social contract .
 People had to relinquish some of their liberty in exchange for security . People were forced to give up some liberty in order to get security, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Locke insisted that mankind’s liberty and rights stemmed from the laws of nature . Hobbes famously believed that individuals should surrender their rights to the absolute state of unlimited sovereignty in exchange for protection .
 He became a leading proponent of educational reform, freedom of the press, religious toleration, and the separation of political powers .
 Locke’s interest in the relationship between nature and the social order led him to consider issues of gender . Locke's interest in nature and social order leads him to think about gender issues .
 The assumption that the king ruled his nation as a husband and father ruled his wife and children had been prominent in early modern political theory . It was only briefly challenged by radicals during the English Civil War in the mid-16th century .
 He denied the appropriateness of the analogy between the family and the state as patriarchal institutions . He said it was not the appropriate use of the family as state institutions .
 Rejects the contemporary view that Adam held supremacy over Eve, he viewed marriage, like government, to be organized by social contract .
 Locke went no further than that, and his espousal of equality within marriage remained only an ideal . Locke's views on equality in marriage remained an ideal, but he did not go further .
 Locke’s analysis of the family as an institution helped stimulate intellectual interest in the social role of women, he says . Locke's analysis of family as a family as institution nonetheless helped stimulate interest in women's role .
 Georges-Louis Buffon linked the Scientific Revolution to the Enlightenment . The Enlightenment was a precursor to the scientific revolution .
 Buffon's initial presentation to the French Royal Academy of Science was a study of probability theory applied to gambling on hopscotch . Buffon became the curator of the Royal Gardens .
 Surrounded by monkeys and badgers in his laboratory, he carried out experiments . Some of which worked, such as his study of the burning effect of the sun through glass, and some of which did not .
 Buffon’s experiments with cooling metals led him to build a large forge near his home in Burgundy . Buffon built the forge in his home town of Burgundy, France .
 The philosophes acknowledged their debt to the late-seventeenth-century proponents of the scientific method .
 Many philosophes, reflecting the influence of the Scientific Revolution, considered religion to be a social phenomenon, like any other to be studied scientifically .
 Hume blasted away at the idea of religious truths revealed through the Bible . Hume argued that religious truths should be revealed in the Bible.
 The very universality of their principles led some of the philosophes to suggest that a sense of morality might vary across cultures because it emerged from the nature of mankind, not from religious teaching .
 Denis Diderot, influenced by Locke, argued that sensory stimulation shapes individual moral responses, and that moral principles for a blind man might be somewhat different from those of a person who could see .
 He described the people of distant Tahiti as forming a rational social order without the benefit of any ecclesiastical doctrine .
 Hume called for a ‘science of morals’ to serve the interests of Christians . Hume called the science of morals to serve Christian interests . Hume calls for a 'science of morality'
 The Republic of Ideas is the work of philosophers and philosophers who sought to reform the world of ideas . The republic of ideas was founded in France in 17th century . It was founded by Napoleon III and Napoleon III .
 Their pens and pencils were their only weapons as they sought to change the way people thought . They were the only weapons they had to fight back .
 They communicated ideas in letters, unpublished manuscripts, manuscripts, books, pamphlets, brochures, and through writing novels, poetry, drama, literary and art criticism, and political philosophy .
 The philosophes glorified the collegiality and interdependence of writers within the “republic of letters” The men and women of the Enlightenment sometimes called the informal international community of philosophers . The Enlightenment was an informal community of writers .
 Voltaire claimed with some exaggeration that the professional writer stood at the top of the social summit . By the mid-eighteenth century, Voltaire had claimed with exaggeration that he stood at top of social summit.
 He, Montesquieu, and Diderot accepted election to the prestigious French Royal Academy . They attacked the monarchy that they attacked, however subtly, in their work .
 The most famous of the philosophes gained money as well as prestige . Voltaire and Montesquieu were among the few who could support themselves by writing .
 The philosophes may have shared the fundamental ideas of the Enlightenment, but significant differences existed among them . The Enlightenment was a formative period of philosophy and philosophy .
 They often disagreed, like people in any republic, arguing in person, by letter, and in published work . And they often disagreed in person and by letter .
 The ideal state was an enlightened, benevolent monarchy, balanced by a parliamentary body representing the nobility, or a kind of direct democracy . They could not agree on the ideal state's ideal state, for example .
 Montesquieu inherited a feudal chateau near Bordeaux and a small income upon the death of his father . The French Revolution was the French state of France .
 He inherited the title of baron de Montesquieu and presidency of the noble parlement, or provincial law court, seated at Bordeaux . He later inherited from a wealthy relative and inherited more property and more property .
 Persian visitors to Paris sent home reports sent home by two Persian visitors . His work detailed the political and social injustices of life in the West .
 By casting this critique of eighteenth-century France in the form of a travelogue, Montesquieu was able to dodge royal censorship . The book was published in 17th century France and published in 18th century .
 Persians reported that the king of France was the most powerful of European potentates . As for the king, the Persians also reported that he was “the most powerful” of Europe .
 Montesquieu was arguing that nature reveals a universal standard of justice that applies for all people in all places at all times, in Islamic Persia as in Christian France . But beneath the satire of the Persian Letters he was arguing the point of justice .
 Montesquieu’s ideas reflected the increased contact between Europeans and much of the rest of the world . His ideas reflected an increased contact with the world, he says .
 Merchants, soldiers, missionaries, and colonists had followed the first European explorers to, among other places, to the Americas and Asia .
 Published accounts of travel stirred the imagination of upper-class Europeans who were interested in societies that lay on the fringes of or beyond their continent .
 America and China, particular, fascinated Europeans who had read about them . Europe's fascination with China and America fascinated Europeans .
 He offered the first critical examination of the institution of slavery by a philosophe . He also offered an examination of slavery .
 Montesquieu applied the principles of observation, experimentation, and analysis, which lie at the heart of scientific inquiry, to the social and political foundations of states . The French Revolution was founded in France in 17th century .
 He described the relationship between climate, religion, and tradition, and the historical evolution of a nation’s political life . He also described the history of the country's political evolution .
 Laws, he argued, are subject to critical inquiry and historical study because they develop over time . Laws are subject, he said, to historical study and critical inquiry .
 Montesquieu spent two years in England in 17th century . He spent most of his time in the country . Montsquieu was fascinated by the British political system .
 He was impressed by the historical role of Parliament, despite the similarity of their names . Parliament is a representative body unlike French parlements, despite their similarities . He said he was impressed with Parliament's historical role .
 The English Parliament prevented Britain from becoming either a monarchical despotism or a republic, which Montesquieu identified with chaos . The English parliament seemed an “intermediate power” that had during the English Civil War prevented Britain becoming a monarch .
 His point was that each political system and legal tradition evolved differently . Each political system has evolved differently, he said .
 He feared that the French monarchy was showing signs of becoming despotic because it lacked the separation of powers found in England . The king feared that it lacked separation of power in France .
 Only constitutionalism could combine the guarantees of order with those of freedom . Constitutionists say only constitutionalism can combine order with freedom . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the U.N. should not be bound to the Constitution .
 Montesquieu believed that noble rights and municipal privileges, which had been eroded by royal absolutism in France, could stave off monarchical despotism .
 Montesquieu held that the sovereignty of the king came not from God, but from the people . The sovereignty of a king came from the king, not God, according to the people, Montsquieu .
 He was the son of a notary who had enhanced his family’s position through a favorable marriage . He was born into a family that had enhanced their position through marriage .
 Voltaire's parents wanted him to be a lawyer, sent him to Paris to be educated by the Jesuits . Voltaire’s parents, who wanted to be lawyers, wanted him educated by Jesuits. Voltaire was born in 17th century .
 Brash, ambitious young man made a name for himself as a dramatist and poet . Many of these early works are quite forgettable .
 Everything he ever wrote was forbidden in Spain . Some of his early works were banned in France . Everything he wrote was also banned in Spain.
 Voltaire reflected the Anglophilia of the philosophes of the early and high Enlightenment . Like Montesquieu, Voltaire was fascinated by the English language .
 He extolled Britain, its commercial empire, relative religious toleration, and freedom of the press .
 Voltaire believed that the only representative body that might guarantee the natural rights of the king’s subjects in France would be the equivalent of the British House of Commons . Voltaire thought that a representative body of the French people would guarantee the king's rights .
 Voltaire counted on enlightened monarchs of centralized states to protect their people against the self-interest of nobles . Montesquieu looked to the nobility to protect people from monarchical despotism .
 Voltaire claimed that the political organization of each state was at least partially determined by its specific history and circumstances . Voltaire said that each state's political organization was determined by the state's specific history, circumstances .
 As science should study the world of nature, so should the philosophe trace the separate development of nations, he traces the history of nations to the creation of nations . The philosopher's view is that nations should not be divided into nations .
 This line of reasoning convinced him that Montesquieu was wrong to think that the British political system could be successfully transplanted to France, he says .
 Voltaire reserved his most scathing attacks for the Church, an institution, like the parlements, which seemed to block the development of freedom in his own country . Voltaire's most scathing attack was on the Church .
 His attacks were clever and devastating; for example, his pithy description of the Chinese as having “an admirable religion free from superstition and the rage to persecute” was read by virtually everyone as suggesting that in France the opposite was true .
 Voltaire believed that God created the universe and then let it operate according to scientific laws . Voltaire thought that God made the universe into a universe that operates according to laws .
 Voltaire intended Candide to be an indictment of fanaticism and superstition . Voltaire's Candide was intended to be a satire on fanaticism, superstition and fanaticism .
 In the short tale, the cheerful optimist Candide bumbles from disaster to disaster . Candide is a short tale of the optimistic optimist .
 Voltaire confronts the seeming contradiction between the goodness of God and the evil in the world . Voltaire confronted the contradiction between God and evil in his work .
 Thousands of people died in the earthquake that ravaged Lisbon in 1755, killing thousands of people and destroying much of the Portuguese capital . The earthquake was the largest earthquake in the history of Portuguese cities .
 Voltaire believed that religion was beneficial because it offered people hope, and therefore made their lives more bearable . Voltaire said religion offered hope because it made people's lives bearable, but also offered them hope .
 Voltaire's fame spread when he took up the cause of a man who seemed wrongly accused of murder . Voltaire’s fame spread after he fought for the accused accused of being wrongly accused .
 In 1761, Jean Calas, a Protestant from Toulouse, stood accused of killing his son, who had been found hanging in the family basement . The Protestant was accused of hanging his son in 1761 .
 The father was tortured to death, though it seemed likely that his son had committed suicide . Convicted by the Parlement of Toulouse, the father of the son was tortured .
 Several years later, the parlement reversed its earlier decision—too late, alas, for Jean Calas . The parlement later reversed its decision .
 The Calas Affair helped put the philosophies’ critique of religious intolerance into the limelight of public opinion .
 Voltaire’s energetic interest in the Calas Affair reflected his insistence that progress was somehow inevitable without human action . Voltaire: Progress is somehow inevitable but human action is necessary in order to progress .
 Can dide concludes with the famous, though seemingly ambiguous, advice that “one must cultivate one’s own garden,” as he did at his rural retreat . He concludes .
 Voltaire was counseling anything but a withdrawal into the sanctuary of introspection . Voltaire advised anyone to withdraw from the sanctuary, but Voltaire's advice was anything else .
 He called for each person to follow the path of light and do battle with those institutions that seemed to stand in the way of humanity’s potential .
 Enlightenment has gradually spread so widely that it will burst into full light at the first right opportunity, and then there will be a fine uproar . Enlightenment has spread so far that it is gradually spreading so widely, he says .
 Denis Diderot’s monumental Encyclopedia best reflected the collaborative nature of the Enlightenment, as well as its wide influence . The Encyclopedia reflects the Enlightenment's collaborative nature and influence .
 Diderot (1713-1784), the son of an artisan, was something of a jack-of-all-trades . He wrote plays, art criticism, history, theology, and philosophy .
 Educated by the Jesuits, he flirted with the idea of becoming a priest . For a time supported himself by writing sermons for bishops, he supported himself .
 He penned a pornographic novel to earn enough to indulge the fancies of his mistress . He penned it to indulge his mistress's fancies .
 He questioned how, through centuries of male domination, women were considered inferior to men . But he also questioned how women, despite their capacity for reproduction, had come to be considered inferior . He said that women's ability to reproduce should not have been seen as inferior .
 Diderot claimed that laws that limited the rights of women were counter to nature . He said laws limiting women's rights were counter-to-nature .
 The Encyclopedia f on which Diderot worked for twenty-five years and to which he contributed 5,000 articles, stands as the greatest monument of the Enlightenment . The Encyclopedia is the most important work of the French Enlightenment .
 At the heart of the project lay the philosophies’ insistence that knowledge is rational and that it follows the laws of nature . The project is based on the philosophy’s belief that knowledge should be rational .
 Social and political institutions should be submitted to standards of rationality . Social institutions should submit to standard of rationality, says David Cameron . The world's most powerful institutions must be subjected to rationality, he says .
 Published over a period of more than twenty years beginning in 1751, it consisted of 60,000 articles and 2,885 illustrations in 28 volumes . It was published over a twenty-year period of over 20 years .
 Its authors insisted that by learning more about the universe, men and women could improve the world . The book was published by the University of Cambridge .
 This marked a departure from the assumption that mankind’s ability to penetrate the secrets of the universe was limited . This is the first time mankind has been able to find out more about the universe, scientists say .
 Montesquieu contributed sections on artistic taste, Rousseau on music, Voltaire on literature, and Buffon on nature . Voltaire also contributed to sections on art, music and literature .
 Diderot gave particular credit to the everyday contributions of artisans by describing how and why ingeniously simple tools and machines could make tasks easier .
 The Encyclopedia generated sufficient excitement that advance sales alone financed its publication . Advance sales alone funded the publication of the Encyclopedia .
 After the first edition, subsequent editions with less expensive paper and fewer illustrations became available at about a sixth of the original price .
 Lawyers, officials, and rentiers were more likely to own a copy than merchants or manufacturers, who could afford the volumes but seemed less interested .
 The philosophes wanted the Encyclopedia to carry the Enlightenment far beyond the borders of France . The Encyclopedia was published in 1883 .
 Subscriptions to Diderot’s Encyclopedia throughout Europe throughout Europe . Diffusion of the Encyclopedia in Europe . Subscriptionions to the Encyclopedia .
 The Encyclopedias prospectus and booksellers’ advertisements assured potential buyers that ownership would proclaim one’s standing as a person of knowledge, a philosophe. The Encyclopcyclopaedia was published in the 1920s and 1930s .
 A few copies of the book reached African settlements, including the Cape of Good Hope . The book was published in Africa's first edition .
 Thomas Jefferson helped promote the Encyclopedia in America, finding several subscribers, among them Benjamin Franklin . Benjamin Franklin was a subscriber .
 In Spain, Inquisition censorship frightened booksellers and buyers alike . In Portugal only a few copies got by the police . However, in Spain only a handful of copies of the book were censored .
 Rousseau wrote enthusiastically about representative government and popular sovereignty . Rousseau came close to espousing a republic, but was not a republic .
 Diderot, whose first serious philosophical work had been burned by the public executioner, was briefly imprisoned . The work was burned in the executioner's executioner .
 In the 1770s, the French state again tolerated the Encyclopedia f which it now treated more as a commodity than as an ideological threat to monarchy or Church . The Encyclopedia f was treated more like a commodity .
 The small skirmishes fought over the volumes had more to do with rivalries between publishers, between those privileged with favor and those without .
 Diderot’s grand project symbolized the ongoing political struggles within the French monarchy itself . In this way, the project symbolizes the ongoing struggle within the royal family .
 The place of Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the Enlightenment is far more ambiguous than that of Diderot and his Encyclopedia . Rousseau's place in Enlightenment is much more ambiguous, says historian .
 Rousseau idealized emotion, instinct, and spontaneity, which he believed to be essential parts of human nature . Rousseau embraced human freedom, but more than any other of the . philosophes, he believed emotion and instinct to be, along with reason, essential .
 Rousseau was the son of a Geneva watchmaker . He went to Paris as a young man in the hope of becoming a composer . Rousseau, a Protestant, was born in Geneva .
 The arrogant, selfrighteous Rousseau received an introduction into several aristocratic Parisian salons, where he became friendly with Diderot . Rousseau became friends with the aristocratic, self-righteous philosopher .
 In 1749, the Academy of Dijon sponsored an essay contest on the question of whether the progress of science had strengthened or weakened morality . The essay contest was sponsored by the academy, an academy in France, which was a regular gathering of people to discuss ideas .
 Rousseau’s first-prize essay concluded that primitive or natural humanity had embodied the essential goodness of mankind . For humanity to be happy, new social and political institutions would be necessary, he wrote . Rousseau concluded that for humanity to live happy, it was necessary .
 He abandoned his children in an orphanage as his father had abandoned him . Following the condemnation of his writings there in the early 1770s, he set off to visit England .
 Rousseau remained a contentious loner, quarreling with other philosophes . Rousseau was a contentious quarreller who quarreled with other philosophers .
 He assumed that when his former friends disagreed with his ideas, they knew that he was right but simply refused to admit it . He assumed they knew he was wrong, but refused to say it .
 In his Confessions (the first volume of which appeared in 1782), he appealed to future generations to see how contemporary thinkers had misinterpreted or misrepresented him . In 1782, the first volume appeared in his first volume, the Confessions .
 In Discourse on the Arts and Sciences, Rousseau argued that civilization had corrupted the natural goodness of man . Rousseau called it the “fundamental principle” of political thought .
 The intemperate quest for property had disrupted the harmony that had once characterized mankind in its primitive state by creating a hierarchy of wealth . Wealth created by the quest for wealth has disrupted harmony, says the author .
 Rousseau's idealization of relatively primitive, uncomplicated social and political groupings led him to believe that a republic, such as his own Geneva, alone offered its citizens the possibility of freedom . Rousseau s idealized the idea of a relatively primitive state of society in Geneva .
 As free people in primitive societies joined together for mutual protection, enlightened people could associate for their mutual development in a kind of direct democracy . As a result of this, primitive societies join together for protection .
 Rousseau remained suspicious of representative government, believing that people might ultimately vote themselves into slavery by electing unworthy representatives . Rousseau believed that people may ultimately vote itself into slavery .
 Rousseau tried to resolve the question of how people could join together in society to find protection and justice and yet remain free individuals . Rousseau's The Social Contract was published in The Social Social Contract .
 Locke described the relationship between a ruler and his people as a contractual one . Locke had described a ruler's relationship with the people as contractual one. Locke described it as a 'contractual one'
 Hobbes argued that individuals could find refuge from the brutality of the state of nature only by surrendering their rights to an absolute ruler in exchange for safety . Hobbes, in contrast, had argued individuals could only be protected by an absolute monarch . The Hobbes case was based on the
 Rousseau imagined a social contract in which the individual surrenders his or her natural rights to the ‘general will’ in order to find order and security . Rousseau’s social contract was a model for a social order in order for order . The social contract is
 By “general will,” Rousseau meant the consensus of a community of citizens with equal political rights . Rousseau used the term "general will" to refer to a consensus of people with equal rights .
 Citizens would live in peace because they would be ruled by other citizens, not by dynastic rulers eager to expand their territorial holdings . Citizens would not be ruled out of control by rulers, but by citizens of other citizens .
 Rousseau insisted that sovereignty comes not from kings or oligarchies, or even from God, but from the collective search for freedom . Rousseau summed up his thinking with the stirring assertion that “men are born free yet everywhere they are in chains/'
 Rousseau helped shape the final period of the Enlightenment, which anticipated nineteenth-century romanticism by giving emotion more free play . Rousseau's work was published in 18th-century France .
 Emile is exposed by his tutor to nature during walks to explore brooks and mills . It described what he considered to be the ideal natural, secular education .
 Emile’s primitive virtue needed to be preserved against the vices of culture, but also developed as an end in itself so that he would become an autonomous individual . Emile's primitive virtue should be preserved, but developed as a result of culture . The writer says Emile
 Rousseau assigned Sophie, Emile’s chosen ‘well-born’ spouse, an education appropriate to what Rousseau considered a woman’�s lower status in life . Sophie was the wife of Emile, who was born in 18th Century France . Sophie
 Rousseau’s insistence on the capacity of women for intellectual development was ahead of its time . Yet, even Rousseau's insistence on women's capacity for intellectual growth was time ahead of her time .
 The groundwork for the Enlightenment lay not only in the realm of ideas, such as those of the Scientific Revolution and Locke, but also in gradual social changes that affected the climate of opinion .
 Changes to French religion in the eighteenth century included challenges to organized religion in some regions . The emergence of a more broadly based culture in France led to the decline of organized religion .
 During the first half of the seventeenth century, the Catholic Reformation engendered a slow but steady religious revival in France, Spain and the Habsburg domains .
 The established churches still retained formidable authority and prestige . It was the first time a church had been allowed to open a church in the United States .
 Pietism reflected dissatisfaction with established religions and the existence of considerable religious creativity . The development late in the seventeenth century of Pietism among Protestants in the northern German states . Pietism emphasized preaching and the study of the Bible .
 Pietists wanted to reaffirm Protestant belief in the primacy of the individual conscience . Disaffected by abstract theological debates and by the Lutheran Church’s hierarchical structure, Pietists were Pietists .
 Like English Puritans and French Jansenists, they called for a more austere religion . The Puritans called for an austere approach to religion .
 Pietists wanted a revival of piety and good works, and asked that laymen take an active role in religious life . Pietists asked for laymen to take a more active role .
 Bible reading and small discussion groups replaced the more elaborate, formal services of the Lutherans . The Lutherans helped expand interest in the German language and culture among the upper classes .
 By the last quarter of the eighteenth century, Pietist influence had waned, reflecting the diffusion of Enlightenment thought . Lutheranism remained the state religion in the northern German states, maintaining a hold on the universities .
 In Britain, religious practice seems to have increased among all social classes during the seventeenth century .
 The Anglican Church of England was the Established Church, but Britain also had about half a million nonAnglican Protestants, or Dissenters, at the end of the eighteenth century . About half-a-half a million Dissentes were in Britain at the time of
 Some middleclass Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Unitarians, Baptists, and Quakers sent their sons to private academies . Some middle class Presbyterians send their sons away from them to private schools .
 Anti-Catholicism remained endemic in England, where there were about 70,000 Catholics in 1770 . Most Catholics were in the lower classes .
 Wesley never formally broke with the Anglican Church nor claimed to be setting up a new denomination . Wesley never claimed to have broken with the church nor to have a denomination .
 He spent a lifetime preaching directly to ordinary people on grassy hills and open fields . Yet that was the effect of his lifetime of preaching directly .
 Methodism suggested that all people were equal in God’s eyes . Methodism stressed personal conversion, emphasizing personal conversion and personal conversion .
 Methodists shouted out their beliefs and sometimes publicly confessed sins that the upper classes thought best left unnamed . This offended upper-class Englishmen and -women, not the least .
 Methodist evangelism was both a dynamic and a stabilizing force in British society . It was both dynamic and stable force of British society, says historian .
 There was little or nothing politically or socially radical about Wesley, as shown by his unwillingness to break formally with the Established Church . Wesley was a conservative Anglican who had little or no political or social activism .
 Wesley encouraged work, selfdiscipline, and abstinence from dancing, drinking, and gambling . He encouraged work and self-discipline .
 The Anglican Church, in turn, began to seek more followers among the lower classes . Anglican church began to look for followers among lower classes in the 1930s .
 Anglican Sunday schools provided poor children with food and catechism . It established the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge . The society established the society for the promotion of Christian knowledge .
 Hannah More abandoned the material comforts of upper-class life for the challenges of bringing religion to the poor . Hannah More was the “bishop in petticoats”
 By the middle of the eighteenth century religion seemed to play a significantly smaller role in the lives of people of all classes, particularly in regions with expanding economies and relatively high literacy rates .
 The numbers of men and women entering the clergy in France declined . Male and female monastic orders lost a third of their members between 1770 and 1790 alone alone .
 Fewer wills requested that Masses be said for the deceased or for souls in Purgatory . Fewer will request Masses were said for those in the Purgatory or for the dead .
 In France, popular dislike of the exemption of the clergy from taxes increased . The Church still provided the monarchy a sizable yearly contribution from its great wealth .
 The philosophes challenged the role of the established churches in public life . They were addressing many readers who had lost interest in organized religion .
 The expanding influence of the middle classes in England and northwestern Europe also began slowly to transform cultural life . The expanding interest in literature, music, and the arts was expanding interest .
 By the end of the century, perhaps half of the men in England, France, the Netherlands, and the German states could read . By that time, perhaps 50 percent of men could read.
 Between a third to a half of the female population of these countries was literate . A smaller proportion of women in these countries were literate, according to the study .
 Fewer people could read in Eastern Europe, Russia, and the Balkans . Rate was considerably lower in southern Europe, and relatively few could read .
 Several German states began schools for girls, although several German states did . Opportunities for women to obtain more than a minimal education remained quite rare .
 Even Marie Antoinette, queen of France, made frequent grammatical and spelling errors . Even the French queen of the 18th century, she made frequent spelling mistakes .
 Publishers fed readers eager to know what events were taking place in their own country and abroad . Publishers fed the growing appetites of readers hungry for news of events .
 Newspapers published one or two times a week summarized events transpiring in other countries . Newspapers covered events in the United States and Canada .
 The number of English periodicals increased sixfold between 1700 and 1780 . Periodicals published by periodicals were published in 1780.
 In the German states, the number of books and magazines published grew by three times during the last decades of the eighteenth century . The number of German states published grew three times in the last years of the century .
 Novels gained in popularity at the expense of books on theology and popular piety . Novels became popular in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Sentimental novels presented syrupy stories of domestic life and tender love . The novels were first published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 English female novelists gave women an unprecedented public voice in Britain . Heroines presented their heroines as affectionate companions to their husbands and good mothers .
 Diderot and Lessing called for the theater to portray the lives and passions of ordinary people, not only kings and queens, princes and princesses . Lessing: Theater should portray ordinary people instead of only kings, queens and princes .
 Traditional literature, such as religious tracts, popular almanacs, and folktales, remained the most widely read literature .
 The Enlightenment had a direct influence on the growing popularity of history . The Enlightenment was an important part of the Enlightenment .
 The philosophes helped create history as a modern discipline . Reflecting their interest in understanding human experience, they created history as an art form .
 Since classical Greeks, there had been relatively little interest in history in Europe . Since the classical Greeks there was little interest for historians .
 Church fathers espoused the primacy of theology and viewed the world as little more than a test to prepare Christians for the afterlife . The world is little more of a test for Christians, the church fathers said .
 All human experience, including non-Western cultures, has emerged as suitable for historical inquiry . But now all human experiences, including those of the past, are suitable for inquiry, says historian .
 Edward Gibbon was inspired to undertake his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (published over a period of twelve years beginning in 1776) in Rome .
 The number of lending libraries, as well as reading circles or clubs, increased . Reading circles and reading circles were organized by resourceful booksellers, some organized by retailers .
 In Paris, London, Milan, Berlin, and other large cities, lending libraries rented books for as short a period as an hour . In London, London and Milan, libraries can rent books for up to an hour each .
 Reading, which heretofore had largely been largely a group activity in which a literate person read to others, has become more of a private undertaking . Reading is now more of an individual undertaking than a group of people who read to each other .
 While some of the most significant works of the Enlightenment were virtually unknown outside the republic of letters, others became the bestsellers of the age . Some of the greatest works of that time were virtually known outside of letters .
 Montesquieu’s The Spirit of Laws went through twenty-two printings in the first eighteen months after publication in 1748 . 35,000 copies of the book were printed in the same period .
 Buffon’s thirty-volume study, The System of Nature —despite its bulk — also enjoyed prodigious success . Buffon's 30-volume work, The system of Nature, was published 30 years ago .
 Voltaire's Candide was reprinted eight times the year of its publication in 1759 . Voltaire’s Candide is published eight times that year .
 Abbe Guillaume Raynal’s The Philosophical and Political History of European Colonies and Commerce in the Two Indies was reprinted seventy times to supply an eager market . The Philosophophysics and Political history of European colonies and commerce in the two Indies is reprinted seventy
 Raynal denounced the colonization of the New World, Asia, and Africa, including the development of the slave trade, which he denounced in no uncertain terms . The book was published in 1883, and was published by the same year .
 The Philosophes sought the same status and freedom for artists that they demanded for writers . The philosophes wanted the status of artists to be equal to writers .
 They believed that the arts had to be not only unfettered by censorship but also subject to critical inquiry . The arts were believed to have been free of censorship .
 Some philosophes worked toward a philosophy of art, but they did not espouse a single theory . Some of the world's most famous thinkers were not philosophers .
 David Hume rejected formal rules or standards for art imposed by royal academies or ecclesiastical influence . Hume, among other Enlightenment figures, emphasized the aesthetic appreciation of art .
 The secularization of culture could be seen in the development of rococo, a new and generally secular decorative style . The style was developed in the 18th century .
 It evolved from the highly ornamental baroque style that had characterized the art and architecture of the Catholic Reformation, particularly in Austria and Bavaria . The style evolved from an ornamental Baroque tradition .
 Closely tied to noble taste, rococo’s popularity in France reflected the fact that many nobles now spent more time in elegant townhouses . The popularity of the townhouses reflects the fact many noblemen now live in townhouses.
 However spacious, such urban residences afforded them less room than they enjoyed in their countryside chateaux .
 The rococo style, sometimes called Louis XV style, was started in France but also became popular in the German and Italian states .
 Rococo stressed smallness of scale, reducing baroque forms to elegant decorative style . Rococo was a form of art that emphasized smallness and smallness .
 It utilized different materials, including wood, metal, stucco, glass, and porcelain, brought for the first time from China during the eighteenth century and reflecting the growing interest in Asia .
 The film combined texture and color with spirited and even erotic subject matter . It combined texture, color and spirited subject matter.
 Elements drawn from nature, such as birds and flowers, replaced religious objects as decorative elements . Birds and flowers were replaced by religious objects .
 Engraving depicting the grand rococo style that was popular in France in the eighteenth century .
 The French painter Jean-Antoine Watteau influenced the artistic move away from traditional religious subjects laden with didactic meaning toward lighter, more secular themes .
 Adopting to a more realistic style than baroque painting, he depicted elegantly dressed noble subjects at leisure . He depicted aristocrats at leisure in his paintings .
 As the market for painting widened, scenes of nature and everyday life also became popular, as they had been a century earlier in the Netherlands .
 In France, the Academy of Painting and Sculpture organized the first public art exhibition in Paris in 1737, bringing together viewers of different social classes .
 The expanding middle-class art market and the growing secularization of artistic ta~,te was nowhere more apparent than in Britain .
 William Hogarth portrayed everyday life in London with affection and satire . Hogarth depicted everyday life with affection, satire .
 He poked fun at the hearty Englishman putting away pounds of roast beef and the dishonest lawyer . The poor drowning their sorrows in cheap gin led the government to raise the tax on alcohol, a plague that led to a tax hike .
 The taste for music moved beyond the constraints of court, ecclesiastical, and noble patronage . Music was first recorded in the 17th century . It was recorded in 17th Century .
 Opera’s great popularity in the seventeenth century had been closely tied to ornate opera houses constructed at European courts . Opera houses were constructed in Europe's most famous courts and courts .
 Court composers were considered the equivalent of favored upper servants . Court composeres were considered to be court musicians . Composers are considered the same as upper servants in court .
 William Hogarth’s Gin Lane is a commentary on the deleterious impact of alcohol on the poor of eighteenth-century London . When someone asked Franz Joseph Haydn . Haydn, who worked as a bartender, he replied: ‘Yes,’
 Readers understood his strident language as he intended—he was denouncing court and aristocratic taste itself . He was denouncing the court itself .
 Rousseau compared the Royal Academy of Music’s monopoly on French music to a ruthless Inquisition that stifled imagination . Rousseau said the Academy of music's monopoly in French music was akin to an Inquisition .
 Rousseau's critique generated a storm of controversy because it seemed to be nothing less than a denunciation of the social and cultural foundations of contemporary French society . Rousseau’s critique of the French society was published in 17th century .
 Rousseau’s operatic compositions extolled the simple, unpretentious life of rural people . Like his philosophical works, Rousseau's operatic works, his works extoll the simple life of the rural world .
 In England, concerts were held at court or in the homes of wealthy families; in Italy, they were sponsored by groups of educated people who gathered to discuss science and the arts . In Switzerland, concerts of music lovers were held in Switzerland, and in England, the music was held at
 The public concert also emerged in some German cities early in the eighteenth century .
 Handel began to perform his operas and concerts in rented theaters . Handel's operas attracted large crowds, attracting large crowds of people .
 By the 1790s, Haydn was conducting his symphonies in public concerts in London . Haydn's symphony was conducted in London by the composer .
 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's life reflected evolution from dependence on court and aristocratic patronage to emergence of public concert . Mozart was born in 17th century and died in 18th century at home .
 Mozart began playing the harpsichord at age three and composing at age five . Mozart also began composing at five years old . He is known for his compositions .
 In 1763, his father took him and his sister on a tour of European courts that would last three years, hoping to make the family fortune . The tour lasted three years and ended with mixed results, with mixed success .
 Mozart wrote church music and light music, including a hunting symphony for strings, two horns, dogs, and a rifle . Mozart resigned after quarreling with his patron, before resigning from his post .
 Mozart spent money as rapidly as he made it and was constantly in debt . Mozart was unable to attract the lavish court, noble, or ecclesiastical patronage he desired .
 Mozart died a poor man at age thirty-five and was buried in an unmarked pauper’s grave in Vienna . Unlike Handel, Mozart, he was buried with an unmarked grave .
 Mozart moved away from the melodious regularity of his predecessors to more varied and freely articulated compositions . Mozart was a prolific genius and a prolific composer . His work was first published in 17th century .
 Mozart’s operas The Marriage of Figaro and Don Giovanni demonstrated his capacity to present characters from many walks of life . Mozart's operas revealed their shared humanity but their personal moods and expectations .
 The Magic Flute , his last opera, expressed his belief in the ability of mankind to develop greater virtue and a capacity for love, he said .
 Salons, academies, and Masonic lodges helped spread Enlightenment thought . The Spread of Enlightened Ideas: The Enlightenment .
 Salons brought together people of means, noble and bourgeois alike, in private homes for sociability and discussion . Salons were concentrated in Paris, but they were also found in Berlin, London, and Vienna .
 The salons of Paris were organized and hosted mainly by women, who selected topics for discussion and presided over conversations . The salon of Paris was organized by women .
 Princess Sophia Czartoryska’s salon played an important role in conveying Enlightenment ideas to Polish elites . In Warsaw, the salon was an important part of the Enlightenment movement .
 In London, women hosted similar gatherings, some composed exclusively of women . Some of the gatherings were held exclusively by women in London .
 In Paris Madame Marie-Therese Geoffrin hosted artists on Monday and men of letters Wednesday .
 Her husband sat silently at the other end of the table while his wife put the philosophes through their paces . Her husband was silent as she put them through the paces.
 A silent man was a silent man who was silent for a long time . The silent man sat in the empty place where he usually sat was empty . A regular guest asked where he was and asked if he was there .
 Salon guests could discuss the work of the philosophes without fear of police interference . Salon guests were able to discuss their work without fearing police interference.
 By the middle of the century, political discussions increasingly captured intellectuals’ attention . Political discussions became more frequent in the 1930s .
 In the 1780s, a German scientist, Franz Mesmer, proclaimed the healing properties of electromagnetic treatments .
 Voltaire believed to have linked the human body to the universe . Voltaire's bust of Voltaire, then in exile, was debated . The bust was made of a bust of the French writer .
 The French Academy of Science vigorously denounced Mesmerism as nothing more than resourceful charlatanism . The academy of science vigorously denounced the practice as a waste of time .
 In France and in some Italian cities academies played a similar role to that of the salons . In some of Italy academies were similar to those in France and Italy .
 These were not “academies’s” in the sense of offering an organized curriculum, but rather formal gatherings of people interested in science and philosophy . These were gatherings about every two weeks of people .
 Meetings consisted of reading minutes and correspondence, followed lectures and debates . Meetings were followed by lectures, debates and meetings .
 Academies also helped spread Enlightenment ideas by bringing together people, including clergymen, eager to discuss the works of the philosophes . Academies were also used to spread ideas by sharing ideas with clergymen .
 They depended on royal intendants, governors, and other state officials for funding and meeting places .
 The monarchy believed that academies served the public interest because members discussed questions of contemporary importance . The academies were formed to discuss issues of current importance .
 The academies contributed to the development of a sense that reforms in France were possible, says French President Francois Hollande .
 Masonic lodges began in Scotland as early as the sixteenth century as stonemasons’ guilds . The lodges were another medium for the ideas of the ideas .
 They now brought together freethinkers and others who opposed the influence of the . established churches in public life . They now bring together .
 Masonic lodges proliferated in Europe during the middle years of the eighteenth century . Freemasons proliferated throughout Europe in the 17th century .
 Members took vows of secrecy, although their meetings, membership lists, and rituals were widely known . Members of the Order were known to be secretive, but their meetings and rituals became public .
 Members held a variety of political opinions, but they shared a general faith in progress, toleration, and a critical view of institutionalized religion . Members of the group shared a wide-ranging range of opinions .
 In Scotland, clubs, coffeehouses, and taverns also provided the setting for discussion of new ideas . In Scotland in particular, clubs and coffeehouses provided the settings for discussion .
 Several obstacles limited the dissemination of Enlightenment ideas . Still, several obstacles still prevented the spread of ideas .
 Censorship, although erratic and varying greatly from place to place, also discouraged publication . Censors, such as censors, discouraged publication.
 In France and Spain, censored books were burned, and those who published material officially considered blasphemous could be, at least in principle, sentenced to death . In France, among other countries, censors were burned in France, Spain, among others .
 Even the relatively tolerant Dutch Republic banned Diderot’s A gathering of a Masonic lodge in Vienna . The book was published by a Vienna Masonic lodge .
 Masonic rituals included the use of allegorical symbols, blindfolds, and swords . Masonic rituals used to include allegorical symbol symbols and blindfolds .
 Louis XV (ruled 1715—1774) promulgated censorship laws in 1757 that were much harsher than those regulating the book trade in England . In the face of publications critical of monarchy, aristocracy, and the Church, Louis XV .
 The French monarchy also controlled what was published through the licensing of printers, booksellers, and peddlers .
 The philosophes believed that the success of any state depended on the degree of freedom and happiness it was able to assure its people . Enlightened Absolutism was the philosophy of the Enlightenment .
 David Hume put it: A state is justified by the good that is done in its name . David Hume said that a state should be justified by its good that it does the good it does .
 They wanted enlightened monarchs to impose reforms that would benefit their subjects . The monarchs were trying to impose reform on their subjects' welfare . But they were not happy with the results .
 Rousseau warned absolutism and enlightened thinking were incompatible with enlightened thinking . Rousseau, however, warned that absolotism and enlightenment were incompatible . The French Revolution was founded in France in 1763 .
 Some rulers applied Enlightenment ‘rationality’ to statecraft, with the goal of making their regimes more efficient . However, some rulers applied it to make statecraft more efficient, as well as efficiency .
 Cesare Bonesana, marquis of Beccaria, had the greatest influence on his era as a reformer influenced by the Enlightenment . Bonesana was a member of the Beccarian family .
 A noble from Milan, Beccaria became a professor of political philosophy in Habsburg Austria . He advised the state chancellory on such diverse topics as agriculture and mining .
 He made his reputation, however, with his ideas on crime and punishment . His ideas were often controversial .
 Beccaria had read Montesquieu, Buffon, Diderot, and Rousseau in On Crimes and Punishment . He applied their analysis to the issues at hand .
 The state’s task was to protect society while respecting the dignity of all people, he said . He argued that the state's task is to respect society and respect all people .
 This meant that the rights of those accused of crimes, too, had to be protected . This was the case for the first time in a row over the death penalty . The case was brought to the fore by a judge in a bid to protect the victims' rights .
 Beccaria wanted standard procedures to govern criminal trials . Rich and poor would stand equal before the law, she said .
 Italian philosopher s assumption that the accused is innocent until proven guilty has remained, along with the tradition of English constitutional law and trial by jury, a cornerstone of Western judicial systems .
 Beccaria argued that punishment for a crime should not be linked to the religious concept of sin . The punishment should be determined by an assessment of the damage done to society, he said .
 His principles reflected the origins of utilitarianism, an influential social theory of the first decades of the nineteenth century that held that laws should be judged by their social utility .
 Barbarous punishment, instead of protecting society, seemed only to encourage disrespect for the law and more awful crimes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Barbaric punishment seems only encourages disrespect for law and crime"
 This led him to object to capital punishment, lamenting the enthusiastic crowds that were attracted to public executions . This led to him objecting to public execution .
 Leopold II of Tuscany (who admired Beccaria), Gustavus III of Sweden, and Frederick the Great of Prussia banned torture . Beccari was an example of the influence of enlightened thought on contemporary rulers .
 Education in the widest sense was central to the program of the philosophes . Educational Reform was central in the philosophy of the Enlightenment .
 Catherine the Great of Russia admired and read Montesquieu and Voltaire, hosted Diderot, and purchased the library for a handsome price . The library was purchased for $1.5 million .
 Born a German princess, she was contemptuous of Russian culture and preferred French . Born in Russia, she preferred French and was contemptuously of the culture .
 She authorized the first private printing presses and encouraged the publication of more books . Without eliminating censorship, she authorized the . first private . printing presses .
 A few other monarchs implemented educational reforms, but they did so at least partially to assure a supply of able civil servants . A few others did so to assure the public that they were able to serve .
 In 1774, Joseph II established a structured, centralized system of education from primary school to university, which doubled the number of elementary schools in Bohemia . Joseph II set up a structured education system from primary to university .
 In Poland, the Commission for National Education was created in 1773 . It oversees Poland’s universities in Krakow and Vilnius, as well as all secondary and parish schools .
 During this period in Central and Eastern Europe, textbooks appeared in Magyar, German, Croatian, Slovak, Ukrainian, and Romanian languages .
 The eighteenth century was a period of relative religious peace, but intolerance could still be intense . Religious intolerance was still intense in the eighteenth century .
 Catholics, in particular, suffered legal discrimination in England . In England, Catholics, especially Catholics, were subject to legal discrimination .
 French Protestants had no civil rights; their births, baptisms, and marriages were considered not to have occurred unless registered by a Catholic priest . French Protestants were not allowed civil rights .
 Protestants suffered discrimination in Hungary and the Catholic Rhineland . Protestants were persecuted for their beliefs in Hungary . Protestants suffered persecution in the Roman Catholic church .
 In 1728 the bishop of Salzburg gave 20,000 Protestants three days to leave their homes, and royal edicts forced Protestants out of Upper Austria and Styria during the next decade .
 Europe’s 3 million Jews suffered intolerance and often persecution all across Europe, especially in Eastern Europe . Europe's 3 million Jewish population suffered intolerance, often persecution .
 Jews could not hold titles of nobility, join guilds, or hold municipal office . Jews were not allowed to hold titles or hold official titles . Jews could also not be allowed to join guild or hold office titles .
 In many places, they could own land, although in some German states they needed special permission to buy houses . In many German states, they needed permission to own houses .
 They were excluded from agricultural occupations and certain trades in France, Eastern Europe, and Russia .
 The Habsburg monarchy required Jews to stay inside until noon on Sundays . In 1745 it suddenly ordered the thousands of Jews living in Prague to leave . Jews were ordered to leave in 1745 .
 In Vienna and Zurich, Jews were confined to ghettos, and in several German towns they were not allowed inside the city walls . In some German towns, Jews could not be seen inside the walls .
 Swedish government allowed Jews to build synagogues beginning in 1782 . Jews were forbidden to marry anyone who was not Jewish, to purchase land, or to produce handicrafts .
 Polish, Russian, and Ukrainian Jews faced resentment from peasants who often owed them money . Moneylending had been one of the few professions Jews were allowed to practice .
 In Poland the Catholic Church often led the way in persecution . Rumors that Jews were ritually sacrificing Christian children during Passover found credulous ears . The Catholic Church was often persecuted by Jews in Poland .
 In 1762, Ukrainian peasants killed at least 20,000 Jews in the bloodiest pogrom of the century . The bloodiest massacre was in 1762 in Kiev, Ukraine . The massacre was part of a bloody massacre of the Jewish community .
 By 1750, Western Europe seemed to be entering a more tolerant age . Yet, by about 1750 it had seemed like Western Europe was entering an age of tolerance .
 For one thing, intolerance generated periodic rebellions, which took state funds to put down . For another thing, intolerances generated periodic rebellion, it took state money to suppress .
 Some rulers who undertook religious reforms were inspired by a desire to strengthen their authority . Some of the rulers undertook religious reform in order to strengthen authority .
 The expulsion of Jesuits from several countries highlighted the struggle between the popes and Catholic monarchs . This was the case in the expulsion of the Jesuits in several countries .
 Jesuits had been closely identified with the papacy since the inception of the order during the Catholic Reformation . The Jesuits were closely associated with the pope during the Reformation.
 They had gained great influence as tutors to powerful noble families and in the Spanish, French, and Portuguese colonies in the Americas . They had great influence in Spain, France and Portugal .
 In Portugal, King John V’s strong-willed minister, Sebastiao, the marquis of Pombal, enhanced the monarchy at the expense of the great noble families and the Church . Sebastiao was Sebastiao's minister at the time .
 Pombal accused Jesuits of exploiting indigenous population of Paraguay, where they virtually ran the colonial state . Jesuits criticized the regime for orchestrating anti-Semitism .
 Pombal falsely accused the order of planning the king’s assassination, the monarch expelled the Jesuits from Portugal in 1759 . The monarch then expelled the order from Portugal .
 Ten years later, Pombal ended the Inquisition’s status as an independent tribunal, making it a royal court . Ten years after that, the Inquisition's status as a tribunal was changed to a court of the royal family .
 The expulsion of Jesuits from some of the most powerful Catholic states reflected the diminishing power of the papacy in the face of absolute monarchs determined to retain control over what they considered to be national churches .
 In Spain, Charles III ordered universities to include instruction in science and philosophy . Charles III also ordered universities in Spain to include teaching philosophy .
 Spain carried out its last execution of a person accused of heretical religious beliefs in 1781 . In 1781, Spain executed a man accused of having heretical beliefs .
 Charles reduced the feared Spanish Inquisition to a series of legal hurdles governing publishing . Charles then reduced the fear of the Spanish Inquisition into a series legal hurdles .
 Charles III expelled Jesuits in part because their near-monopoly on education seemed to pose a threat to the monarchy’s control over the Church . Like the kings of Portugal and France, Charles III in 1776 expelled the Jesuits . The Jesuits were expelled from the UK
 Leopold II also reduced the authority of the Church in Tuscany, ending the tithe and crippling the Inquisition . In Italy, he also cut down the power of the Inquisition, crippling the church .
 Catherine the Great's enlightened approach to religion could be seen in her termination of official (or “government”) persecution of Old Believers, the dissident sect within the Russian Orthodox Church . Catherine the . Great's .
 Catherine Catherine was forced to adopt more restrictive measures after anti-government protests . However, protests brought her to adopt a more restrictive regime .
 In 1792, the first legal Catholic church in England since the sixteenth century opened its doors in London . It was the first in the country since the 16th century .
 In northern German states and Swiss cantons, the ideals of the philosophes provided support for religious toleration that had grown out of the sixteenthcentury Reformation . In the northern Germany and Swiss states and Switzerland, they supported religious tolerance .
 The quest for religious tolerance played an important part in German enlightened thought . The quest to religious tolerance was important part of German enlightenment .
 Gotthold Lessing argued that people of all religions are members of the human family . In his drama Nathan the Wise, he argued that all religions should be seen as a family .
 In Catholic Austria, Joseph IPs relaxation of censorship permitted a spate of pamphlets and brochures calling for toleration of Protestants . In Catholic Austrian Austria, the IPs relaxed of censorship .
 The king’s Edict of Toleration extended some toleration to non-Catholics . The king's Edict extended some tolerance to non . Catholics .
 The edict included Jews, who were now “free” to bear the burden of a ‘toleration tax” and to pay an assessment on kosher meat . Jews were now free to bear an assessment of kosher meat and a “tolerance tax�
 Joseph ennobled several Jews, incurring the wrath of other nobles . Joseph also ennobleed several Jews .
 Protestants could enter the Habsburg civil service for the first time . Protestants were allowed to enter the civil service in 17th century .
 The German states appeared to be the most fertile ground for enlightened absolutism . Frederick the Great was the German states' most successful monarchist . Frederick was known for his tolerance of tolerance and tolerance for tolerance .
 German philosophes remained closely tied to the existing order, looking to the individual states and to religion for reforms .
 Immanuel Kant said the Enlightenment meant the liberation of the individual intellectually and morally, but not politically or socially . The Enlightenment was not about the individual's liberation politically or politically, but it was about its moral and moral liberation .
 Frederick II of Prussia (ruled 1740-1786 and known as Frederick the Great) wanted to be remembered as an enlightened ruler . Frederick II was born in Prussia in 1740 and died in 1786 . He ruled Prussia from 1740—1786 .
 A man of considerable intelligence, he turned his court into a center of learning for the nobility . He turned the court into an educational center for nobility .
 Frederick, a flute-playing ‘philosopher-king,’ made Voltaire the centerpiece of his palace for two years . Frederick made the work of Voltaire in his palace in 17th century .
 The Prussian king invaded the Habsburg territory of Silesia in 1740, in the first year of his reign . But the French philosophe soon grew disenchanted with the cynical, manipulative Prussian .
 Voltaire angered Frederick by lampooning a royal favorite, and when the king ordered his hangman to burn the offending tract publicly, Voltaire took the hint and left Potsdam in 1752 .
 Frederick freed serfs of the royal domains and ordered the abolition of the lords’ right to punish their own serfs physically . Frederick freed the serfs .
 The Prussian king relaxed censorship and abolished capital punishment . Capital punishment was abolished in the army, except for the army .
 He refused to emancipate Prussian Jews, while continuing to depend on loans from them . Yet he continued to rely on them for his loans .
 Frederick intended to enhance the reach of the state rather than make his people equal before the law . Frederick intended his law code to enhance his people's reach, not to make them equal before law .
 When he freed the serfs of the royal domains, it was because he needed them in the army . The serfs were freed by the king because of the need for them to be used in his army .
 Nobles dominate most of the plum positions as military officers and high officials . Nobles dominated most of those positions in the military .
 Commoners did rise to important posts, including some army officers, who were subsequently ennobled . Yet some commoners did in fact rise to an important post .
 Frederick improved the state bureaucracy by introducing an examination system . Frederick introduced the examination system to govern entry to the state . Frederick improved state bureaucracy with the introduction of the examination .
 In Berlin only a third of all judges were nobles . In Berlin, candidates had to pass the most difficult examinations . In the courts of justice, candidates must pass the toughest examinations .
 The Prussian Code divided Prussian society into noble, bourgeois, and common estates . The code was created by the Prussian code in 1881 .
 Frederick bolstered the position of Prussian nobles because he was determined to prevent any erosion of their status as the landowning class . Frederick was determined not to lose his status as a landowner .
 He refused to ban serfdom on private estates . He created institutions that would provide credit to nobles in financial difficulty .
 Nobles were not permitted to sell their lands to non-nobles, and marriages between nobles and commoners were not recognized . Nobles did not allow commoners to marry them .
 The Prussian monarch’s Essay on the Forms of Government offered a recipe for enhancing the efficiency of the absolute state .
 Frederick’s view of the world bound the state and the individual subject together . Frederick's view of world bound state and subject together, he said . Frederick‘s view . bound the . state and individual subjects together .
 When their mutual interests could not be reconciled, however, the Prussian state always took precedence . When they couldn't agree on their terms, the state took precedence.
 Frederick the Great’s reign reflected the limitations of enlightened absolutism . Voltaire had discovered for himself for himself, as well as Voltaire himself .
 Several European rulers tried to improve conditions of rural life . Several other European rulers also tried to do the same .
 Leopold 11, who promulgated a new code of laws in 1786, ended some restrictions on the grain trade, freeing the price of grain . Leopolds 11 established a new and more independent judiciary, establishing an independent judiciary .
 These moves were popular among merchants and wealthy peasants, but not among poor people, who depended upon bread to survive . The move was also popular among wealthy peasants and merchants .
 Austrian Queen Maria Theresa banned the mistreatment of peasants by their lords . Maria Theresa tried to limit seigneurial obligations to peasants in 1770s .
 As she put it, sheep must be well fed if they are to yield more wool and milk . Sheep must also be fed well enough to grow wool and produce milk .
 Her son Joseph II abolished serfdom in 1781, converting peasant labor obligations into an annual payment to the lord . Joseph II ended obligations of personal service to the lords, ending personal service .
 A peasant could marry and/or leave the land without the lord’s permission . Henceforth a peasant could . marry and . leave the . land without permission .
 Peasants, at least in principle, could also turn to the state for support against an oppressive lord; they could even take the lord to court . Peasant could even turn the state to court, or even take him to the same court .
 Joseph II’s Serfdom Patent encountered resistance among landowners and regional powers in the eastern regions of the empire . The Patent was granted to Joseph II in 1881 .
 The nobility of Bohemia simply refused to enact any of the provisions, while the nobility of Transylvania neglected to inform the peasants of any changes in their condition .
 In Hungary, estate owners insisted that their peasants were not actually serfs but simple tenants and therefore not covered by the law . Estate owners insisted they were not serfs, but tenants .
 The Serfdom Patent granted the serfs legal rights but left most of the financial obligations of the old system intact . In the German-speaking parts of the empire, the Serfs were granted legal rights . The Patent granted them legal rights, but also left most financial obligations intact .
 In Tuscany, as in the Habsburg domains, aristocrats and state officials sabotaged Leopold’s reforms .
 "enlightened" reforms had little effect on the lives of most peasants . Thus, “enlightening” reforms had no effect on most peasants, he says .
 Joseph 11 announced that he wanted the Habsburg state to follow “uniform principles,” which included reorganization of the imperial bureaucracy . Joseph 11 also announced he wanted to reorganize the Imperial bureaucracy .
 He taxed Church property, abolished some monastic orders, and forced a reorganization of the Church within the Habsburg domains . He also forced the Church to reorganize within the domains .
 None of the “enlightened’s rulers gave up any of his or her monarchical prerogatives. None of them gave up their monarchial prerogative prerogations. None gave up his or his monarchical power.
 Catherine the Great wanted the nobility to serve as an ‘intermediary body’ standing between the crown and its subjects . The nobility was influenced by Montesquieu’s The Spirit of Laws . Catherine the . Great wanted it to stand between the . crown and the
 Catherine hoped that by clarifying their rights, nobles might contribute to the functioning and glory of her state . Catherine hoped to clarify their rights .
 Charter of the Nobility of 1785 formalized the relationship between the autocratic state and the nobles . It recognized the nobility of blood as equal to that of service .
 It confirmed their security of property, the right to hold serfs, and immunity from arrest and confiscation of property by the state . It also confirmed their right to keep serfs .
 For the first time, nobles could travel abroad without the permission of the emperor . The first time they could do so without permission from the emperor, they could go abroad .
 Local elective councils of nobles could henceforth send petitions to the tsar or empress, but the latter had no obligation to respond . Local electives of nobles were now able to send petitions .
 Catherine feared Enlightenment thought might become a tool of those opposed to absolute rule . Catherine turned against Enlightenment thought, fearing that it might be used by those opposed . Catherine feared that it could be used against the will of those opposing absolute rule.
 Diderot's confidence in Catherine ended in disappointment when he learned that she imprisoned those with whom she disagreed . Like Voltaire’s experience at the court of Frederick the Great, the empress imprisoned those who disagreed .
 Currents of the Late Enlightenment contained several currents . The late Enlightenment had several currents, including the Enlightenment .
 British economists applied the concept of freedom for the first time to the workings of the economy . The concept was first applied to economics in Britain .
 On the continent, philosophes turned away from the preoccupation with rationality and the laws of nature . Meanwhile, on the continent .
 The mark of human freedom was no longer the exercise of reason but the expression of the emotions, says President Barack Obama . Obama: "The mark of freedom is no longer . It is the exercise . of reason," says Obama .
 Rousseau himself had begun this turn toward what he called ‘reasoned sentimentality” by stressing the importance of emotional development and fulfillment . Rousseau began this turn by stressing emotional development, fulfillment .
 In a related development, a number of writers began to ‘discover’ and embrace their own national cultures, seeking their origins in medieval poems and songs .
 In France, when there were no more Voltaires or Rousseaus, a generation of would-be . writers attacked the institutional structure of the French monarchy, influenced public opinion .
 The late Enlightenment’s emphasis on the historical roots of national culture provided a way of conceptualizing national identity, a transformation that would have enormous consequences in Europe in the nineteenth century and beyond .
 This search led away from mercantilism, which had formed the basis of early eighteenth-century economic theory, to the emergence of classical economic liberalism .
 Mercantilist theory held that states should protect their economies with restrictions and tariffs that would maintain a favorable balance of trade . More gold and silver flowing into a nation than going out of the country, theory said .
 The ‘physiocrats’ believed that land, not gold and silver, was the source of all wealth . The “physiocrat’s” belief that land not gold or silver was the main source of wealth .
 They wanted to end state interference in agriculture and the commerce of farm products . They said they wanted to stop state interference with agriculture .
 Francois Quesnay, a French doctor and economist, called on the monarchy to free the grain trade and end arbitrary controls on prices .
 He and other physiocrats insisted that higher prices for goods would encourage production, thereby bringing about lower prices over the long run . He and others insisted that . higher prices would . encourage production .
 The physiocrats encouraged wealthy landowners to put science to work to increase farm yields . They wanted enlightened rulers to free the agricultural economy from tolls and internal tariffs .
 In England, where commercial agriculture was already well developed, the physiocrats attracted an interested following .
 The experiment soon ended with the old strictures and controls back in place . Hoarding contributed to much higher prices; grain riots followed, grain riots .
 He opposed guild restrictions and monopolies, as well as trade barriers and other forms of protectionism . In the name of freeing the economy from restraints, he opposed Guild restrictions, monopolies .
 Merchants looked to the state to provide financial, political, and military protection . Merchants relied heavily on the state for protection, including financial and political support .
 If “left alone,” Smith argued, the British economy would thrive naturally, generating domestic and foreign markets . Smith: If ‘left alone’, the UK economy would flourish naturally .
 The “invisible hand” of the unfettered economy would over time cause the forces of supply and demand to meet, determining the price of goods . The ‘invisible’ hand of the economy would cause supply and . demand to . meet, determine the price
 By overcoming that “wretched spirit of monopoly,” which made people less energetic, the “virtue of the marketplace” would also enhance social happiness and civic virtue, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 Scottish Enlightenment was particularly concerned with how civic virtue and public morality could be inculcated in society being slowly transformed by commerce and manufacture . This was a common theme in the Scottish Enlightenment .
 The basic tenet of German idealism was that we perceive and understand the world through the medium of our ideas, and not through the direct application of our senses .
 Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason affirmed that rational inquiry into nature leads to knowledge . Kant was born an artisan's son in Konigsberg, Prussian town of Konigsburg .
 Kant said that reason alone was not the basis for our knowledge of the world . But for Kant, reason alone did not mean that we knew the world, he said .
 Each person understands the world through concepts that cannot be separated from his or her unique experience . Instead of understanding the world, each person understands it through concepts such as concepts that can't be separated .
 This philosophy undermined faith in the rational objectivity and universalism that had characterized the high Enlightenment . This philosophy was a rejection of the Enlightenment, the author says .
 German idealism invited subjectivity and relativism of early nineteenth-century romanticism . The German idealist's idealism invites subjectivity, relativism and subjectivity .
 Sweden, Denmark, Russia, and Poland all discovered their ‘national” literatures, written in their own languages . In the eighteenth century, writers became interested in discovering the roots of national cultures .
 Gotthold Lessing proudly wrote in German and called for a national theater . Lessing's work was published in German in the early 1900s .
 Scottish readers saluted the ‘discovery’ by the poet James Macpherson (1736— 1796) of the work of an imaginary Gaelic bard of the third century .
 Macpherson’s publication in the early 1760s of what he claimed were translations of the poet he called the Gaelic Homer set off a bitter debate . The debate contributed to the emergence of Scottish romanticism .
 The first Jewish periodicals were published in Konigsberg in the century’s last decades, and the first Jewish school established in Berlin in 1778 .
 The emotional search for and enthusiastic identification with national cultures contributed, as in the case of Scotland, to the development of romanticism and nationalism .
 Nationalism would help undermine the established order in several continental states, notably France . The established order was based on allegiance to a monarchical dynasty and often to established religion as well .
 Public opinion, a concept we take for granted, did not always exist . The Enlightenment and Public Opinion are the result of the Enlightenment . Public opinion did not exist in the past .
 During the 1770s, more people in France discussed the pressing political issues of the day than ever before . More people discussed political issues in France than before .
 Lawyers helped establish the concept of public opinion when they sought a wide spectrum of support for the parlements . Lawyers helped established the concept in the 1970s when they tried to gain public support .
 Louis XV replaced noble law courts in 1768 with malleable institutions more directly under royal control . Louis XV had decided to replace these provincial noble law court courts with new institutions . The new institutions were more directly controlled by the royal family .
 Public opinion forced the king to restore the parlements six years later . The king was forced to restore them after public opinion forced him to do so .
 Public opinion, to which opponents of the monarchy and increasingly the court itself appealed, provided a forum in which political ideas were increasingly discussed . Public opinion provided the forum for discussion of ideas .
 These ideas were shaped by Enlightenment discourse on political sovereignty and the limits of absolute rule . These ideas are shaped by the Enlightenment discourse about political sovereignty, the limits to absolute rule.
 A number of the treatises published during the late Enlightenment dealt with contemporary political issues . Voltaire’s broadsides at the time of the Calas Affair exposed the consequences of intolerance and persecution to public opinion .
 As the financial crisis of the French monarchy worsened during the 1780s, such publications would help make the question of reform an increasingly national issue .
 Some fringe members of the republic of letters undermined respect for the monarchy and the royal family . Voltaire had dismissed them as mere “scribblers,” but they also undermined respect .
 The would-be philosophes of the last period of the Enlightenment hung around cheap cafes, lived in rooms high above the street, and dodged creditors by frequently changing addresses . Whereas the milieu of the . Enlightenment earlier in the century had been elegant salons .
 At the same time, they insisted that royal censorship blocked their ascent to better things . The pair insisted that censorship blocked them from better things.
 There had been such publications before the 1770s and 1780s, but never so many of them . Never had they been so widely read .
 Banned books reached France through the efforts of resourceful shipping agents, transporters, bargemen, dockers, and peddlers . They smuggled books published in Switzerland or the Austrian Netherlands to French booksellers willing to circumvent controls .
 In 1783, the crown redoubled its efforts to stem the tide of smuggled books and to still the clandestine presses within France . The crown continued its efforts in 1783 .
 These publishers undercut the legitimate Parisian book trade because they published banned books . They produced cheaper editions of acceptable works .
 The royal officials were concerned about the effects of these smuggled satires on public opinion .
 In fact, the envious and mediocre descendants of the philosophes in some ways continued their predecessors’ work by undermining respect for the authority of the Church, the aristocracy, and the monarchy .
 Certain themes of the Enlightenment did find their way into their work . Moreover, certain themes were found in their works .
 They joined their far more illustrious predecessors in attacking the foundations of the French monarchy . The French monarchy was attacked by the French monarchists in the 18th century .
 Frustrated authors attacked the privileges, for example, of the printing and booksellers’ guild, which they blamed for keeping them from reaching the stature they desired .
 Their identification of censorship with despotism, though self-serving, was nonetheless effective, as they argued that only its abolition could permit the free exchange of ideas . They argued that the abolition of censorship would allow the exchange of free ideas .
 Political events and scandals kept the presses of the literary underground turning, fanning critiques of the monarchy, Church, and nobility .
 Enlightenment philosophes celebrated reason, while acknowledging the passions, and were suspicious of pure faith . Enlightenment philosophers celebrated reason while rejecting pure faith, but rejected religion .
 Steeped in respect of science and reason and confident that humanity would discover the truths of nature, they were optimistic about human potential .
 The philosophes’ belief in progress, which Kant insisted was a sign of modernity, separated them sharply from the Catholic Church, in particular . Kant insisted that progress was the sign of progress .
 Voltaire’s Candide, who thought progress inevitable, was naive, uncritical, or foolish . Yet, they were not as naive and uncritical or foolish as Voltaire's Candide .
 The philosophes believed that the combination of thought, study, education, and action would lead to a better future . The philosophy of the French philosopher is thought to be the work of a philosopher .
 States, they thought, were not ordained by God but by mankind . States should be subject to critical scrutiny, they said .
 The philosophies’ belief in human dignity led them to oppose all forms of despotism . Of Letters Of Letters: Of Letters. Of Letters .
 Enlightenment thinkers and writers recognized that contemporary assertions about the inequality of women contradicted their understanding of nature .
 Some philosophes had strong reservations about the ability of individuals to develop equally . Some philosophers believed individuals should not be able to develop as individuals .
 Those with power and influence first must be enlightened, they reasoned, so that eventually everyone could develop through education . Those in power first must first be enlightened .
 Diderot, Montesquieu, and Voltaire supported the right to divorce, but also opposed equal status for women . Voltaire was the first French politician to speak out in favor of divorce .
 In their commitment to individual freedom, the philosophes influenced the subsequent history of the Western world .
 Most people still considered the monarchy to be the repository of the public good . The philosophes proclaimed that the public had rights of its own and that freedom was a good in itself .
 Enlightenment thought helped create a discourse of principled opposition that would shake the foundations of absolutism . Enlightenment thought was created by the Enlightenment in order to create an opposition to absolationism .
 Many of the ideas in the context of eighteenth-century Europe were indeed revolutionary . If the philosophes themselves were not revolutionaries, many of their ideas were revolutionary . The philosopher's ideas were not revolutionary .
 More than one gentleman had an entire village demolished or flooded because it stood in the way of his landscaping plans . More than a village was demolished because of the way it was built .
 Another wrote, “It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one of one's own country.” Another said, ‘It is the melancholy thing that stands alone in your own country'
 A certain Parson Woodforde carefully entered in his diary the day of his death, “Very weak this morning, scarce able to put on my clothes and with great difficulty get downstairs with help.” The Parson’s diary entry said he was “very
 In Switzerland, a peasant lived a very different and arguably more productive life . At about the same time, in Switzerland, the peasants lived a more productive and productive life, says the historian .
 Jakob Gujer inherited an indebted small farm and transformed it into something of a model farm . He grew vegetables and new crops and raised cattle . Gujer was called Kleinjogg (Little Jake)
 The duke of Wiirttemberg came to see the famous peasant . Kleinjogg told him how flattered he was that a prince should pay a visit to a peasant .
 Kleinjogg is alleged to have said, "We are both good if each of us does what he should" to each other .
 There are few peasants with the means and initiative of Kleinjogg on the continent . But there were few peasants in the world with the initiative of the peasants .
 The transformations were uneven and regionally specific, affecting England and northwestern Europe the most . The transformations bypassed much of Central and Eastern Europe .
 In economically advanced regions, some of the traditional checks on population growth became less imposing . Population growth in some parts of the U.S. has been slowing in recent years .
 Increased productivity supported a larger population that, in turn, expanded the demand for food . Increased agricultural productivity supported the larger population . Food production has increased in recent years .
 Manufacturing developed in and around northern English towns, leading to the beginning of what we know as the Industrial Revolution . Manufacturing led to the start of the industrial revolution .
 In a related change, distinctions within the highest social estates or orders were becoming less marked in Western Europe . The distinction between social estates and orders is less marked .
 Increased wealth generated some fluidity between social groups, contributing, to the dynamism that made Britain the most powerful state in the world, writes David Cameron .
 In France, wealth increasingly blurred lines of social class without, however, eliminating them entirely . Wealth also blurred lines in France, too, but not as much as eliminating them .
 Distinctions in title no longer necessarily corresponded to patterns of wealth distribution . Distinctions of titles no longer correspond to patterns in wealth distribution.
 Social barriers remained much more rigidly defined in Central and Eastern Europe . By contrast, social barriers remained less rigidly defining in the region .
 Social structure was marked by birth into particular estates, or orders, which conferred collective identities and privileges . In much of early modern Europe, birth into estates or orders confer collective identities . The Social Order was created by birth in order to confer collective social status .
 Each order was legally defined, with specific functions and rights conferred to it by virtue of being part of the order, not through individual rights . Each order had specific functions, not individual rights, according to the law .
 The nobility was a privileged order, with special rights accorded by rulers and law, such as exemption from taxation . The nobility is said to be the most privileged order in the world .
 Noble titles were hereditary, and stemmed in principle from birth . Many families during the century were able to purchase titles . Noble titles stemmed from birth, but many families were able purchase titles. Noble titles are hereditary .
 The clergy was also a privileged order and, like the nobility, generally exempt from taxation . It was also exempt from paying taxes .
 In France, the ‘third estate’ was everyone who was neither noble nor clergy, and included peasants and townspeople . All of whom were subject to taxation, all of whom had to be taxed .
 Within and between these estates, or orders, some degree of social movement was possible, particularly in Western Europe . Within and around these estates and orders, social movements were possible, especially within Western Europe.
 The extent of social mobility that existed within the ‘societies of orders’ was debated by contemporaries, as it has been subsequently by historians . Historians have debated the social mobility of the 'society of orders' that existed .
 Nobles dominated political life during the eighteenth century . Nobles in most of the continental European states (with the exception of the Dutch Republic and Switzerland) Nobles were no more than 2 to 3 percent of the population .
 In Spain’s northern provinces and in Poland, more than 10 percent of the male population held noble titles . In Poland and Spain, 10 per cent of the population hold noble titles. In Spain and Poland, over 10 percent have noble titles, officials say .
 The first accurate census in Hungary in 1784 counted more than 400,000 people claiming to be nobles . In Hungary, about 5 percent of the population claimed to be noble .
 In France, by contrast, there were only somewhere between 25,000 and 55,000 noble families . In France there are only somewhere as many as 55,00 noble families.
 Noble landlords owned between 15 and 40 percent of the land, depending on the country . Landowners own between 15-40 percent of land, and an even higher percentage of productive land . Noble landlords own up to 60 percent of all the land .
 In Prussia, only nobles could own land that was exempt from taxes . In Poland, commoners could not own any land at all . Only nobles were allowed to own land exempt from tax .
 Russian commoners lost the right to own property to which serfs were legally bound . Serfs had been legally bound to the property of commoners . The Russian peasants were forced to leave their serfs to live in Russia .
 Austrian nobles held half of the arable land in the Habsburg domains . They hired agents to collect what peasants owed them . Austrian peasants owed their land .
 In the Italian states, the nobility’s share of the wealth was even more than that of the Catholic Church . The nobility was the most powerful in Italy, with more wealth than the Church .
 Many continental nobles retained specific rights, often called seigneurial rights, over the peasantry . Many continental nobility retained specific rights over the peasants .
 Nobles drew income in rent, kind, and dues owed them by virtue of their social status and ownership of land . Nobles were rich enough to own land and had a social status .
 Peasants were obligated to pay to have their grain ground in the lord’s mill, to bake bread in his oven, and to squeeze grapes in his press . Peasant were forced to pay for their grain to be ground, baked bread and pressed grapes in a press .
 The burden of seigneurial dues and debts left peasants with little or sometimes nothing left to pay state taxes and church taxes . peasants might well include parents and unmarried sisters, brothers, and children . peasants were often left with no money to feed their families .
 Nobles proved remarkably adept at maintaining their privileges while adapting to the challenges and possibilities resulting from the growth of the centralized state . Nobles were able to maintain their privileges despite the challenges of the growing state .
 Privilege included being exempt from virtually all taxation, as were nobles in Prussia, Poland, Hungary, and Russia, or exempt from direct tax .
 Other noble privileges included the right to bear a family coat of arms, to wear certain clothing and Hungarian noblemen in the eighteenth century .
 Commoners were expected to bow, curtsy, or tip their hats when a noble walked by . The gestures were increasingly insisted upon by nobles . Commoners are now expected to curtsy or tip hats when they walk by .
 The right to duel over family ‘honor’ in some states and the right to wear a sword were honorific privileges that served to distinguish nobles from their social inferiors . In some states, dueling over family "honor" was a family honorific privilege .
 There were significant differences in the wealth and status of European nobles, however, in their wealth .
 The wealthiest, most powerful nobles considered themselves ‘aristocrats,” although this was not a legal category . Wealthy, powerful noble considered themselves themselves “aristocrats” This was not legal .
 They were proud possessors of the most ancient titles (in France, they were the nobles of the sword, whose titles originated in military service to the king). Many of them were members of the court nobility, and many of the aristocracy .
 Aristocrats viewed themselves as the epitome of integrity, honor, and personal courage, and the embodiment of elite culture . Aristocrats were considered the epitomites of integrity and courage . Aristocratic culture was the embodiment in elite culture. Aristocrats considered themselves to be the most powerful in
 The grands seigneurs in France and the grandees in Spain were identified by their great wealth and ownership of very large estates . In Spain, the grandes were known for their large estates and their wealth .
 The wealthiest nobles may have been the great landed magnates of East Central Europe . But they may also be the wealthiest nobles of the region . They were the most powerful landed lords of the continent .
 Prince Charles Radziwill of Poland was served by 10,000 retainers and a private army of 6,000 soldiers . Prince Charles was also served by a small army of soldiers and retainers .
 Another Polish nobleman’s property included 25,000 square kilometers of land, about four-fifths the size of today's Belgium . The property included about 25,500 square kilometers, about 4,500 acres of land .
 In every country there were also nobles of modest means who eagerly sought advantageous marriages for their daughters, and state, military, and church posts to provide a living for their sons .
 Demographic factors put pressure on poorer nobles, because now more noble children survive birth and childhood . More noble children survived birth, childhood .
 Many Sicilian, Polish, and Spanish noblemen owned little more than their titles . Many of them owned only their titles rather than their title .
 In Spain, these impoverished nobles retained the right to display their coat of arms and to be called “Don’t” and freedom from arrest for debt .
 Until 1773 they were not permitted to engage in manual work, and hence they had few ways to emerge from poverty .
 Nobles who could afford to maintain an aristocratic lifestyle kept up chateaux on their rural estates . Some also owned elegant townhouses with gardens designed to recreate the illusion of a rural manor .
 Some nobles of lesser means attempted to keep an aristocratic lifestyle, going into debt as a result . Some noblemen went into debt to try to keep aristocratic lifestyles . Some of the debt-ridden aristocrats were forced into debt .
 The percentage of English land owned by nobles rose from about 15 to 25 percent, a far larger percentage than in either France or the German states .
 Unlike their continental counterparts, British nobles had to pay property taxes . The only special privileges that peers retained were the right to sit in the House of Lords and to be tried by a jury of their equals .
 In Britain only the eldest son inherited his father’s title and land . Younger sons had to find other sources of income .
 The plums of the plums were reserved for the younger sons of peers and which offered considerable revenue and prestige . One such source was the Anglican Church and its twenty-six bishoprics .
 By 1760 only a few were not the sons of nobles . In the previous century a quarter of Anglican bishops had been commoners .
 Only nobles could sit in the House of Lords, the British ruling elite of great landowners was considerably broader . Although only nobles were allowed to sit in Lords, only aristocrats could have a seat .
 British landowners became more prosperous during the eighteenth century, particularly after about 1750 . They raised rents on their estates and amassed fortunes selling agricultural products .
 Wealthy newcomers who owned large chunks of land also joined the elite . Wealthy newcomers joined the ranks of the elite at the time .
 The ownership of landed estates conferred ‘gentry’ status, which a broad range of families claimed . Ownership of land estates confer “gentry status’s” status, a wide range of .
 At the time of the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the landed elite numbered about 4,000 gentry families . The landed elite were at the height of the 1688 revolt .
 The wives of gentlemen oversaw governesses and domestic servants while instructing their children in the responsibilities of family, religion, and social status . They instructed their children to behave politely, but confidently .
 It was considered poor form to show too much emotion, to be too enthusiastic, and to be overly passionate, sensual or, worse, licentious . It was thought to be bad form to have too much passion, too enthusiastic or overly passionate .
 "One did not seek openly to convert the lower classes to better manners and virtue, but rather to set a good example," he said .
 Horace Walpole once claimed he attended church only to set a good example for the servants . The writer once claimed that he only attended church to set an example for his servants .
 Young gentlemen were tutored at home, or they attended secondary schools, such as Westminster and Eton, boarding schools . The shift to out-of-home education throughout Europe for elites was a gradual shift .
 Oxford and Cambridge Universities then beckoned some, although few actually graduated . Oxford was the first major university to open its doors to students in the 1960s .
 Scottish universities offer more dynamic thought and research . Scottish universities offered more dynamic thinking and research, it said . Scottish Universities offer more 'dynamic thought' than Scottish universities .
 Young gentlemen were expected to know something about the classics and contemporary poets . Young men would be expected to learn something from the classics, contemporary poets and classics .
 To many if not most wealthy families, academic knowledge seemed superfluous, even suspect . Yet, to many of the world's richest families, it seemed as superfluous as knowledge .
 The goal of the ‘grand tour’ of the continent, servants in tow, was to achieve some knowledge of culture and painting .
 Such trips further enhanced the popularity of the classical style of architecture in Britain . The style emulated classical Greek and Roman edifices, emulating classical Greek architecture .
 The clergy in France, Prussia, and Sweden the clergy was technically the first order or estate . The clergy reflected the social divisions between rich and poor that characterized European life .
 Most village priests and ministers had prestige and local influence, but shared the poverty of their parishioners . They shared their poverty, but they shared it with their parishionalers .
 In many places, the material advantages of being a priest attracted the sons of peasant families . The material advantages include exclusion from some taxes and exclusion from paying taxes . In some places, priests attracted sons of peasants .
 On the continent, the members of the French clergy were likely to be the most literate, Russian Orthodox priests the least . The French clergy are the least literate in Europe .
 The lower clergy, drawn from the lower middle class, resented the ambition, greed, and arrogance of the bishops . The bishops were seen as having undisguised ambition and greed, the lower clergy .
 Wealth and rank, not piety, usually determined such selections, as in the Italian states, where bishops were invariably drawn from the families of the great landowners . Wealth often determined by wealth and not piety .
 King Philip V of Spain named his eight-year-old son to be archbishop of Toledo . Even so, few monarchs were as brazen as Philip V .
 In the 1760s at least forty bishops resided in Paris, only one was, in principle, supposed to live there . Only one of them was supposed to be allowed to live in Paris .
 Some parts of Europe had already become ‘de-christianized,” meaning that religious practice and belief had declined . But in most places religion still played an important role in village life .
 Priests and ministers supervised charitable activities and provided certificates of good behavior for those leaving to search for work elsewhere .
 In general, the quality of the parish clergy seems to have been quite high in the eighteenth century . This was due in part to efforts to improve clerical training in order to improve the quality .
 The duchess of Alba in Spain tried to cure her son’s illness by having him ingest powder from the mummified finger of a saint . Nonetheless, many parish priests were caught between liturgical demands and superstitions .
 Most of those engaged in commerce, trade, and manufacturing were known as the “middling sort” by the English and the ‘bourgeoisie’ by the French . The “Middling Sort” was known by the British and French . Most of
 The middle classes ranged from wealthy entrepreneurs to struggling retail merchants, craftsmen, and innkeepers, who made barely enough to hang on to their businesses .
 Wealthy commoners owned about a quarter of the land in France and most of Switzerland . Purchasing land and titles when they could, the wealthiest commoners own about a third of the country's land .
 Great Britain had already become the proverbial “nation of shopkeepers,” with one shop for every thirty or forty people . Great Britain has already become a nation of shops for every 30 or 40 people . The country has already had one shop per person in every city .
 In Western Europe, the middle decades of the eighteenth century brought an expansion of the liberal professions, particularly in the number of lawyers . In the 17th century, lawyers became the most prominent profession in Europe .
 Men trained in law took positions in state bureaucracies and law courts . Men trained to law took jobs in state bureaucracy, law courts, courts .
 In England and France, some of the best students, or at least the best connected, became barristers . This gave them the right to plead in court, which attorneys , their subordinates, could not do .
 Distinguished medical schools produced few physicians, not yet a profession viewed with great respect . The profession is viewed with little respect .
 Military surgeons tended to be a cut above the others, their skills were honed in the heat of battle .
 Despite the fact that some universities taught anatomy, surgical techniques were learned on the job . The surgical technique was learned by the surgical staff at the time .
 Arthur Young was traveling in Champagne in northern France when he encountered a peasant woman . Young encountered the peasant woman who looked to be about sixty or seventy years old .
 The woman, old before her time, stated simply that the ‘taxes and seigneurial obligations” were a crushing burden, one that seemed to be getting worse . The woman said that the burden was getting worse, and that it was becoming worse .
 Peasants were the source of the wealth that sustained the incomes of the crown, nobility, and church . Peasant wealth sustained the income of the nobility, the church, and the crown . Peasties were a source of wealth .
 Peasants condemned as “a hybrid between animal and human” in the words of a Bavarian official . Peasans stood at the bottom of society, condemned as a “hybrid” of animal-human hybrid .
 Village solidarities helped them pull through as best they could in hard times, through harvest failures, epidemics, and wars . Villagers pull through through hard times and through epidemics . Village solidarity helped the community pull through, through and around .
 Folk songs celebrated peasant wisdom and wiliness, as humble rural people outfoxed naive and bumbling outsiders, whose wealth could not impart common sense . Folk songs celebrate peasant wisdom .
 All peasants were vulnerable to powerful outsiders in the overlapping and interdependent systems of domination that characterized early modern Europe . All peasants in the early medieval Europe were vulnerable .
 The state, nobles, and churchmen extracted taxes, produce, labor, and cash . The state and nobles extracted taxes and produce from the church .
 Rulers extracted money, commodities, and labor payments, imposing additional taxes when they were at war . They imposed additional taxes during the war, imposing more when fighting .
 In Western Europe, where almost all peasants were free, a peasant’s status depended upon the amount of land, if any, owned or controlled through leases . The peasants' status depends on the land they own or control through leases, not ownership .
 Many peasants owned or rented plots of sufficient size and productivity to do well enough in most years . In northern France, Flanders, southwestern Germany, Switzerland, and Sweden, many peasants own or rent plots .
 Swedish peasants owned about a third of the cultivable land in their country . Swedish peasants own about a quarter of the land they own .
 Sweden's peasantry maintained a degree of independence perhaps unique in Europe . Recognized formally as a fourth estate, the Swedish peasantry was once formally recognized formally as the fourth estate . The peasantry's independence was perhaps unique among European nations .
 Charles XII of Sweden bragged that he would rather be the most miserable Swedish peasant than a Russian noble unprotected by law from the whims of the tsar . Charles XII said he would not be happy to be a Swedish peasant .
 Rural industry provided supplementary income for peasant families in parts of France, Switzerland, and Germany . Rural industry—for example, linens—provided income for peasants in some areas .
 In Zurich’s hinterland in the 1780s, about a quarter of the population spun or wove at home for the cotton and silk industries . In Zurich's hinterlands in the 1800s, a 25 per cent of people spun or weaved for cotton and
 Many landowning peasants were constantly in debt, borrowing against the often empty hope of the next harvest . Landowners were often in debt and often borrowed against the hope of a harvest .
 Sharecroppers worked land owned by landlords in exchange for one-third to one-half of what was produced . Sharecropper worked for one third to one half of what produced by landlords .
 Landless laborers scraped by, if they were lucky, working on rural estates . Landless labor was common in the 1930s and '50s, but not '30s'
 Seasonal migrants left their homes in the Alps, Pyrenees, and other mountain regions each year for construction work in Milan, Lyon, Barcelona, or other large cities . Migrants left their home to work in the grain fields in the summer or vineyards in the fall .
 Many free peasants were subject to some kind of seigneurial justice . Yet many free peasants continued to be subject to such a form of justice .
 Thousands of manorial courts still existed in France in 1789, providing lords with additional income by virtue of legal fees and fines assessed on peasants . In France, thousands of manors still existed .
 In addition to taxes on land and salt, peasants also owed obligatory labor service, usually work on roads, in France, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, Poland, Russia, and some German states .
 Peasant children were sometimes required to work in the service of the lord . In Eastern Europe, peasant children were often required to serve their lords .
 Other obligations included the duty to provide food for the lord s household with a certain amount of food .
 To these were added mandatory payments to the seigneur upon transfer of land held by peasants with hereditary tenure . The payments were added to these mandatory payments for peasants .
 When a peasant with such tenure died, the lord claimed both money and the best animals the peasant owned . When a lord died, he claimed both the money and animals the peasants owned .
 The conditions of peasant life became worse the farther east one traveled . Conditions of living in the East were similar to those of the West .
 Peasants in Russia and Eastern Europe lived in hovels made of earth, clay mixed with straw, straw, branches, twigs and twigs, and sometimes caked manure .
 The farther east one went, too, the more authority lords wielded over peasants . The farther the farther east a lord's authority was, the less authority he wielded .
 Most peasants east of the Elbe River were serfs, some of whom had to take an oath of loyalty to their seigneur, as during the Middle Ages . Some of the serfs were forced to take a loyalty oath to their owner .
 There were some free peasants in the Habsburg domains and in Poland, but very few in Russia . Free peasants in Russia and Poland were free peasants .
 The number of people who lost their freedom by becoming serfs had increased so much in eastern Prussia and Brandenburg that the German term for serfdom had become the same word for slavery .
 Gallows stood near some Prussian manor houses, symbolizing the judicial prerogatives nobles held over serfs, including the right to dispense corporal punishment . Gallows symbolized the rights of the Prussian nobility to punish serfs .
 In Poland, nobles could have their serfs executed until late in the eighteenth century . In Poland it was possible to execute serfs until the end of the century .
 Russian lords could torture serfs, as long as they did not die immediately from such treatment, or they could send them into exile in Siberia . Serfs could be sent to Siberia or sent into exile .
 In Poland, a noble convicted of murdering a peasant paid only a small fine . The Polish noble was convicted of the murder of a peasant . He was sentenced to a small prison sentence .
 In Russia, proprietary serfs remained personally bound to the land of the nobles and, after Catherine the Greats Charter of 1785, to the nobles themselves . Propripriprietary serfs were personalised serfs of the Russian nobility .
 Lords could sell serfs, give them away or lose title to them through gambling . Lords could give serfs away as part of a dowry or lose their title to serfs through gambling.
 Serfs could be sold individually or as a family to another noble, or be exchanged for animals . Serfs were sold individually, or as families to other noble, to be traded for animals or sold to a noble .
 Lords could refuse permission for their serfs to marry or to choose a certain occupation . Lords could also refuse permission to allow serfs  to marry .
 A good number of serfs took their chances in setting out to seek their freedom in Siberia . Serfs set out for freedom in the vast expanses of Siberia .
 In Russia, as well as in Central and Eastern Europe, a few serfs managed to put together enough money to purchase their freedom . Serfs were able to purchase freedom from their serfs in Russia and Eastern European countries .
 All male peasants could be conscripted into army service for terms of twenty-five years, a life sentence for most soldiers . Most soldiers could face life sentences of 25 years .
 Possibilities for peasant resistance were limited; yet the “weapons of the weak” were not insignificant . Possibilities were limited for peasants in Russia, but they could be used to fight back .
 These ranged from sullen resentment and foot-dragging to arson, or even insurrection . These included arson, arson and even insurrection, according to reports .
 As legal and material conditions of the serfs deteriorated, rebellions were endemic in eighteenth-century Russia . As the legal and . material conditions deteriorated, serfs began to revolt .
 Pugachev’s followers included Cossacks, Old Believers (dissidents persecuted by the Orthodox Church and doubly taxed), miners from the Ural Mountains, and desperate serfs . Pugachev's followers included miners, Cossack, miners, and Serfs .
 About 3,000 landowners perished in the Pugachev rebellion before it was crushed . The rebellion was crushed by the government of Soviet Russia .
 In Bohemia and Moravia, 40,000 royal soldiers were required to put down peasant uprisings in 1775 . The Czech Republic and Bohemia were ruled by the Roman Empire of Bohemia .
 They demanded the abolition of the nobility and burned several hundred manor houses to make their point . They demanded that the nobility be abolished .
 The uprising ended with the torture of several of the leaders, parts of whose bodies were nailed to the gates of towns . Parts of the bodies of those tortured were found nailed to gates in towns .
 The Industrial Revolution began in England during the eighteenth century . Industrial Revolution was the start of the Industrial Revolution in England .
 Technological innovation played a part, but in the beginning its role was not as large as has sometimes been assumed . Technological innovations played a large part in the development of the country's first generation of computers .
 In the nineteenth century manufacturing increasingly would be characterized by factory production . Ultimately, however, the steam engine would replace animal and human power . The steam engine was a new source of power .
 The two were so closely linked that it is sometimes difficult to know which followed which . The two are so close to each other that it's impossible to tell which was which was what happened .
 Agricultural productivity permitted the European population to increase during the century . An increase in agricultural productivity allowed the population to rise .
 Greater demand for food encouraged capital-intensive farming, including cash crops and the raising of cattle and poultry for the market . At the same time, greater demand for meat encouraged capital intensive farming, experts say .
 Greater profits from agriculture generated a surplus of funds that could be invested in manufacturing, the government says .
 A larger population, with some of the growth concentrated in and around cities and towns, increased the demand for manufactured goods and provided a labor supply for town-based and rural industry . In turn, a larger population also increased the need for manufacturing goods .
 New agricultural methods were first applied in the seventeenth century . They helped raise farm yields, in England above all .
 The practice of leaving part of the land fallow every other or every third year gave way to crop rotation, which helped regenerate the soil . Gradually the practice of putting some of the fallow land on the ground gave way .
 This provided food for animals as well as for human beings . It also enriched the soil by helping it absorb and retain nitrogen . This helped to enrich the soil .
 On average, at the end of the seventeenth century an acre of agricultural land yielded perhaps 2. times more food in England than in France .
 Open fields or common lands made up about half of the arable land in 1700 . The open fields were an obstacle to the expansion of agricultural production in England .
 Between 1760 and 1815, 3,600 separate parliamentary acts enclosed more than 7 million acres of land . More than one-fourth of the farmland of England was enclosed by the acts .
 Over two centuries, enclosure acts forced perhaps half of English small landholders from the land, swelling the ranks of agricultural laborers . Perhaps half of small English landholders were forced from their land .
 Small tenant farmers, too, suffered, as many could not afford to pay rents . Rents rose rapidly after about 1760 .
 The poorest members of the rural community lost their age-old access to lands on which they had gleaned firewood, gathered nuts and berries, and grazed animals . The poorest in rural communities lost their old access to land .
 Before enclosure, a ‘cottager’ was a laborer with land; after enclosure, he was a labourer without land . After enclosure, it was said, a "cottager" was a "cottager" with land .
 The law locks up both man and woman Who steals the goose from off the common, But lets the greater felon loose . The greater felon is the man who steals the common from the goose .
 Primitive farming techniques (including wooden plows that barely scratched the surface of rocky terrain) characterized the mountainous and arid land of southern Italy and Sicily, the Dalmatian coast, southern France, much of Spain, and much of the Balkans .
 Peasants lacked farm and draft animals, therefore fertilizer, meat, and milk . Peasans lacked farm animals and therefore fertilizer and meat . Peasant farmers needed animals to produce fertilizer and produce milk .
 Markets and transportation networks remain inadequate to the task of agricultural modernization . Markets and transport networks remained inadequate to task of modernization .
 On the continent, a bewildering variety of land tenures and agricultural practices under which they were held seemed to set rural poverty in stone . The continent's rural poverty seemed to be set in stone, with a variety of tenures .
 Each year more than one-third of arable land may have lain fallow, with crops rotated between fields . Most continental farmland remained divided into small strips .
 Traditional peasant agricultural methods blocked a major expansion of production . Traditional peasant farming methods also blocked the expansion of the market .
 The studied attention many English country gentlemen gave to their lands may be contrasted with the approach of many French, Spanish, and Prussian nobles, content to sit back and live .
 While the state had an interest in increasing farm output to generate additional tax revenue, most royal officials, seigneurs, and churchmen looked first to better ways of extracting peasant surpluses, not to improving yields .
 Nobles resisted attempts to reduce the peasants’ obligations, or to change them . Nobles were forced to commute labor service to payments in cash or in kind . The peasants' obligations were often reduced to cash or kind .
 Much of what peasants managed to produce they owed to landlords, the state, and to a lesser extent, the Church . Furthermore, much of the peasants owed to the state and the church .
 In Central and Eastern Europe, an old adage went “there is no land without a lord” because in most places only a noble, the crown, or the Church could own land . In most of Europe, the land was owned by a noble or the crown .
 The absence of independent peasant proprietors left a formidable obstacle to agricultural development, says the author of the book .
 Changes on the continent comparable to those taking place in England were mainly confined to northwestern Europe . Changes in Europe in the 1930s were largely confined to the continent .
 In northern France, Flanders, the Dutch Republic, Schleswig-Holstein, parts of northern Italy, and Spanish Catalonia, the fertile land and sufficient capital facilitated investment in commercial agriculture .
 These regions were generally farmed by people who owned the lands on which they worked, and therefore had more incentive to augment production .
 More land was brought into cultivation in the less densely populated countryside of Eastern and southern Europe . Even in Russia where the population pushed into the steppes of the eastern frontier lands, the population grew .
 Other factors, too, contributed to improvements in Western European agriculture, say experts .
 This had a salutary effect on population, agricultural yields, and commerce . This had an impact on population and agricultural yields . It also had an effect on commerce and population growth .
 Land reclamation projects helped expand the amount of land under cultivation in China . Land re-clamation projects expanded the amount under cultivation of land .
 The Dutch continued to reclaim land from the sea, and land reclamation added significantly to the amount of land under cultivation in the Southern Netherlands (Belgium) and Brandenburg .
 The enclosure of separate strips of land and the sale or consolidation of common lands in northwestern Europe permitted the development of “agricultural individualism/’ as more land passed to peasant-owners . Though not to the same extent as in England, the enclosure and consolidation of land
 Danish state policies created small farms owned by peasants in 1760s . State policies helped transform Danish agriculture from stagnation to relative prosperity .
 Royal decrees encouraged enclosure and forced the commutation of labor obligations to rent payments . Royal decree: "Rent and rent payments must be commuted to rent"
 Some techniques that characterized agricultural improvements in England reached the continent . Gradually some techniques that characterize agricultural improvements were developed in Europe .
 Innovative landowners and tenant farmers began to implement crop rotation (growing foliage crops to improve the fertility of fields) Crop rotation replaced the old three-field system .
 Many peasants refused to plant or eat potatoes, despite the fact that they can grow almost anywhere under any conditions . Yet many peasants remained prisoners of tradition, refusing to eat potatoes .
 Sugar beets, the tomato and chestnuts also spread, sustaining population growth . The cultivation of sugar beets and the tomato also spread .
 Oxen, mules, and especially horses could pull plows more easily than peasants . Oxen and mules pulled plows better than peasants, but peasants could not pull them .
 More cattle provided manure for fertilizer, meat and milk for nutrition . More cattle were used for fertilizer and meat for nutrition, according to the USDA .
 Some landowners formed societies to discuss agriculture, and a handful began model farms . Some landowners have formed societies .
 French physiocrats, who believed that land was the source of all wealth, urged landowners to make their property more profitable and encouraged state policies to free the price of grain .
 A few continental rulers took steps to intervene in the interest of agricultural progress . A few European rulers intervened in the interests of agriculture .
 The elector of Bavaria in 1762 offered farmers an exemption from taxes for ten years in the hope that they would plant foliage crops in their fallow fields . Bavaria's elector offered farmers a ten-year exemption from tax for 10 years to plant foliage in their fields .
 Several princes in the German Rhineland encouraged selective breeding of cattle . The selective breeding was encouraged by several princes .
 In 1768, Queen Maria Theresa of Austria ordered the division of common pasturelands in some parts of the Habsburg territories and the establishment of agricultural societies . The division of pasturelands was ordered in 1768 by Maria Theresa .
 Historians have long debated the causes and consequences of this demographic revolution . Historians studied parish registers of births, marriages, and deaths in parish registers .
 Europe’s birthrate increased, particularly after about 1740, and the number of deaths each year—the mortality rate—declined even more rapidly . Europe's birth rate increased, especially after the 1740s .
 This suggests that an increase in agricultural production was the most important factor in explaining why the European population began to rise . Agricultural production is the most significant factor in European population growth .
 Plagues and epidemics, as well as chronic malnourishment, still intervened periodically .
 Many monarchs ascended the throne because elder siblings had died young . Frederick II of Prussia came to the throne after his two elder brothers did not live past their first birthdays . Many monarchies ascended to throne because of the deaths of their elder siblings .
 Poor people were particularly vulnerable to infection, and rates of infant mortality remained high . Poor people are especially vulnerable to infections, especially in the United States .
 Epidemics such as influenza, typhus, smallpox, and the plague occasionally ravaged populations . Epidemics like influenza and typhus also ravaged populations in Europe .
 Malaria epidemics occurred frequently in Spain during the 1780s and 1790s . Malaria was the subject of several epidemics in Spain .
 Whooping cough alone killed at least 40,000 children in Sweden during a period of fifteen years in the middle of the century . More than 100,000 people died of bacillary dysentery in Brittany in one year .
 Famine, following several successive harvest failures, accentuated disease, particularly for those at opposite ends of the life cycle . Infants and the elderly were particularly vulnerable to disease .
 In 1769 alone, as much as 5 percent of the population of France may have died of hunger . The hunger crisis in 1769 may have killed as many as 5% of France .
 Cities and towns remained unhealthy places where more people died than were born . Cities were unhealthy places with more people dying than born, experts say .
 Life expectancy gradually rose as diseases and epidemics ravaged the population less often and less murderously . Yet life expectancy rose as the population grew less frequently and less frequently .
 Average life expectancy for French men and women during the last half of the century still was only twenty-nine . In Sweden, the average life expectancy stood at about thirty-three years for men and thirty-six for women during that period .
 Vaccinations against smallpox gradually proved effective, at least in Western Europe, although mass inoculations were not yet available .
 Scientific and medical societies encouraged towns to supervise waste removal and take greater care when burying the dead, forbidding inhumations within town walls .
 Cotton was more easily washed than wool and other materials . The expansion of the cotton industry provided clothing, especially underwear, for clothing .
 Warfare, which had checked population growth during the seventeenth century, became less devastating . Warfare was less devastating, and population growth in the seventteenth century was less dramatic .
 Armies became professionalized, and more under the control of stronger dynastic states . Armies were professionalized and more in control of strong dynastic state .
 Military discipline and supply improved, sparing civilians the long, bloody conflicts (such as the Thirty Years’ War) that had taken a heavy toll in earlier centuries . Military discipline, supply and discipline improved .
 Economic opportunity, such as the expansion of cottage industry, encouraged couples to marry earlier . Marriage in early twenties in England was in the early twenties .
 Thomas Malthus was alarmed by the rise of the European population . The English clergyman warned of the dangers of population overpopulation .
 Malthus predicted in his Essay on the Principle of Population that natural checks on population growth would become less significant . He called nature's auditing with a red pencil’s auditing “with a red . pencil” would be less significant, he wrote .
 The rise in population put more pressure on the land, particularly where most land holdings were small and often too subdivided to be profitably farmed .
 Malthus did not take into consideration rising agricultural productivity, nor the fact that some people had already begun to limit the size of their families . Malthu did not also take into account that people were already starting to limit their family size .
 In France, coitus interruptus is credited with bringing about a small decline in the birthrate after 1770 . The French birthrate was also credited with a decline in birth rates .
 The workshop remained the basis of manufacturing in eighteenth-century Europe . Guilds and domestic industry were the basis for manufacturing in Europe .
 In most countries, merchants and artisans were organized into corporate guilds by the goods they sold or produced . The guilds were organized in most countries by the products they made or sold .
 Guilds conferred a type of privilege, because rulers awarded them monopolies over the production or sale of certain products, particularly luxury goods . Guilds were granted monopolies by rulers over production and sale of luxury goods.
 Masters’ guilds and associations of journeymen gave rights and status to craftsmen . They limited and oversaw the training of boys as apprentices, beginning at the age of 12 or 13 .
 In France, journeymen perfected their skills while completing a ‘tour of France,” the origin of the modern bicycle race . The modern cycle race is called the Tour of France .
 A journeyman stopped in a number of cities over a period of several years . He was housed in the craft association’s ‘mother house’ before returning home with skills acquired .
 It was, however, becoming increasingly difficult for a journeyman to become a master, particularly if he did not have a father or other male relative to smooth the way with money .
 Spanish and French skilled trades, in particular, had become glutted in the 1770s . By the 17th century, skilled trades in Spain and France had become more and more competitive .
 Parisian guilds faced competition from outsiders who escaped corporate controls, such as craftsmen who lived on the outskirts of the city and produced cabinets and other goods more cheaply than their Parisian rivals .
 Since at least at least the sixteenth century in England, some merchant-manufacturers had looked to the countryside for workers to produce goods . Some merchant-made goods had been produced in the countryside to circumvent guilds .
 This shift to domestic industry (also known as proto-industrialization, the cottage industry, or the putting-out system) contributed to what would eventually become a worldwide revolution in manufacturing .
 The early stages of the Industrial Revolution showed an increase in domestic industry rather than a shift to new forms of production .
 New technology would only gradually lead to mechanization and the standardization of tasks previously done by hand . New technology is only gradually leading to the introduction of mechanization .
 In 1500 about a quarter of the people of England worked in nonagricultural occupations . By 1750 the proportion had increased to about half of the population .
 The quest for profit was considered perfectly respectable, the manufacturer worthy of emulation . It was seen as a model of success worthy of success in the world .
 Home workers carded, spun, or wove with equipment that they either owned or, most cases, rented . Home workers wove, spin, or spin with equipment they owned or rented .
 Hand spinning continued throughout the century to be the largest source of female employment . Hand spinning was the largest employment source of women in America .
 They would then transport the goods to the next stage in the production process, for example, to a dyer . The goods would then be transported to next stages of production .
 Low pay rates in the countryside encouraged the persistence of rural industry in rural areas . Low pay rate in rural England encouraged the growth of rural industries .
 Hand-knitted stockings produced by rural Scottish families still cost less than those knitted on a power loom . At the end of the eighteenth century, the stockings cost less .
 As the cottage industry was organized by household, women had a major role in the organization of the household economy, including training young children .
 Many families of home spinners, weavers, glove-makers, shirtbuttoners also worked the land . Many families also worked on the land—theirs or someone else's—part time .
 Inventions contributed to the Industrial Revolution . The Industrial Revolution was the beginning of the industrial revolution .
 Some inventions were only gradually diffused, or their importance not recognized until later . Some inventions only slowly diffused or were only recognized later .
 The steam engine was invented by James Watt, a Scot who made musical instruments . Watt invented the steam engine in 1883 . Watt's invention was of greater long-term significance than any other .
 Watt added a separate condenser to a primitive steam engine, resulting in a more powerful engine, which he patented in 1769 . Watt's invention was the first steam engine to have a condenser built in the world .
 Watt’s costly invention was first used only to drain mines . It made it possible to dig deeper shafts and to rapidly increase coal production . Yet, like its predecessor, it was only used only for draining mines .
 Abraham Darby came up with a process to smelt iron ore into cast iron by using coke instead of charcoal . Foundry man used coke to make cast iron from iron .
 In 1775, there were still only thirty-one blast furnaces in Britain . This process spread only slowly, but in 1775 there were only 30-one furnaces .
 charcoal smelting continued to be important, further depleting Britain’s forests . Charities smelt continued to contribute to the destruction of the forests .
 Henry Cort (1740-1800) invented the “puddling and rolling’’ process in iron casting . Cort invented the process in 1784, an ironmaster .
 Molten metal in a furnace was raked to remove carbon and other impurities, producing wrought iron . The wrought iron was far stronger than cast iron, and was far more powerful than castiron .
 Cast-iron railings and gates began to appear on landed estates and in elegant townhouses . Cast iron railings began to be added to landed estates .
 Low-cost iron made possible sturdier plows and other farm implements that, in turn, significantly increased the demand for iron . The iron is used to make plows, other farm tools and farm implements .
 Improvements in spinning wheel and basic looms had already accelerated textile production in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries . Improvements in the spinning wheel, basic looms and spinning wheel had already sped textile production .
 The stocking frame produced lighter and more fashionable cotton and silk stockings . The lighter stockings replaced the heavier woolen hose of the upper classes .
 John Kay invented the ‘flying shuttle’ (patented in 1733 but James Watt. Watt. invented the 'flying shuttle' (patents in 1732)
 Machines powered by water and then by steam eliminated bottlenecks in textile production . Eventually machines powered by steam and powered by electricity, they were eventually replaced by steam .
 Drawing on medieval technology, Hargreaves multiplied the number of thread spindles a worker could operate from one to eight, and then soon to eighty . The thread-spindles were first created in medieval times .
 In 1769, Richard Arkwright patented a mechanized “water frame’s” water frame, combining spindles and rollers, became the first spinning mill . Arkwright borrowed money from a publican and patented the machine .
 With the exception of its waterpowered rollers, Arkwright built his power spinning machine out of the same components as the ordinary spinning wheel that had been found in medieval times .
 He had his portrait painted with his hand touching his famous spinning machine . The same painter might have formerly depicted a country gentleman standing with a hand resting on a fence .
 Cottage industry, artisanal workshops, and factory production often coexisted within the same industry . The cottage industry was often associated with the cottage industry .
 With the gradual mechanization of spinning, weaving could only keep pace with the rapid expansion of the number of hand-loom weavers . Weavers have been weaving for centuries, with weaving becoming more and more popular .
 Even a rudimentary power loom, invented in 1784, was too expensive to compete with domestic industry . Domestic industry continued to be based on availability of an inexpensive workforce .
 Hand-loom weavers survived well into the middle decades of the nineteenth century . Hand-lovers weavers were hand weavers in the mid-century .
 The inventions that slowly revolutionized the textile industry did not inevitably lead to factory production . Inventors' inventions did not lead to factories being made .
 The factory, however, slowly became the symbol of the new' industrial age in England .
 An ironworks employed more than 1,000 workers by 1770, a concentration previously seen only in great shipyards . The ironworks were once a concentration of workers only seen in great shipsyards .
 In 1774, Watt and Matthew Boulton (1728—1809), a toymaker, went into business in Birmingham producing engines and machine parts in the largest factory in the world . The toymakers built the world's largest factory .
 About 20,000 men, women, and children worked in the countryside around Birmingham . It was not a single structure but rather a number of adjacent workshops .
 The development of the factory at first had relatively little to do with technological imperatives . The factory was first developed in the 1930s, but has since been transformed into a factory .
 Manufacturers preferred bringing workers under one roof so that they could more easily supervise them . Manufacturers wanted to impose discipline of factory work on people used to having their schedule defined by the rising and setting of the sun and the passing of the seasons. Manufacturers prefer to bring workers under
 When a defective piece of pottery emerged from the kilns, Josiah Wedgwood would storm over and stomp on it with his wooden leg, chiding his workers . The pottery manufacturer would stomp on the defective pottery with wooden leg .
 Factory manufacturing had begun to alter the northern English landscape . Factory manufacturing began in the 17th century .
 The production of manufactured goods doubled during the last half of the eighteenth century in Britain . The British economy doubled during that period .
 Cotton made up 40 percent of British exports by the end of the century . Cotton was once a major source of trade for the UK . Cotton now makes up 40 per cent of the UK's cotton exports .
 The production of iron followed in importance, along with wool and worsteds, linen, silk, copper, paper, cutlery, and the booming building trades . Iron production was also important in the early 1900s .
 Despite its relatively small size, Britain’s significant economic advantages over the nations of the continent help explain why the manufacturing revolution first began .
 France and the Italian and German states still had internal tariffs that made trade more costly . In Britain there were no internal tariffs once the union between England and Scotland had been achieved in 1707 .
 Its colonies provided raw materials for manufacturing and markets for goods produced by the mother country . The colonies were used to provide raw materials and trade links for manufacturing .
 English merchants supplied slaves snatched from the west coast of Africa for the plantations of the West Indies in exchange for cotton . The slaves were snatched from west coast Africa .
 Raw cotton imported from India increased by twenty times between 1750 and 1800 . The amount of raw cotton imported increased by 20 times between the 1800s and 1800s .
 The United States provided Lancashire manufacturers with cotton picked by southern slaves in the 1790s .
 England’s stable banking and credit arrangements facilitated the reinvestment of agricultural and commercial profits in manufacturing . England's stable banking . arrangements facilitated reinvestment . in manufacturing.
 London's banks, particularly the giant Bank of England, were profitable and respected . London’s banks were profitable, respected and respected in the 1930s .
 Merchants and manufacturers accepted paper money and bills of exchange with confidence with confidence . Merchants accepted paper currency and bills with confidence in the 1930s .
 Gentry invested in overseas trade expeditions and in manufacturing without the reticence of continental landowners . Gentry made significant investments in France and England .
 London’s financial market could provide information twice a week on what investments were worth in Amsterdam and Paris . Amsterdam and France are the two most important European cities in the world .
 Joint-stock companies, which had begun in the late seventeenth century, offered limited personal liability, which meant that in the case of a company’s financial disaster, individual investors would be liable only to the extent of their investments . Joint stock companies began in the 17th century
 Expanded demand for manufactured goods led to a dramatic improvement in Britain’s roads .
 A new process of road surfacing—macadamization—improved travel on the main routes . The process is a form of road resurfacing .
 Investors formed ‘turnpike trusts,” repairing the highways and turning a profit by charging a toll . Turnpikes were extended and improved; investors formed “turnpikes trusts” and turned profits .
 In 1700, it took fifty hours to travel from Norwich to London by coach . By 1800, the journey could be achieved in nineteen hours . The journey was achieved in 19 hours .
 The daunting trek to the Scottish city of Edinburgh from London from London was reduced to a mere sixty hours of travel .
 England’s water transportation was also unmatched in Europe, a gift of nature . England's water transportation system was unmatched in the world .
 Navigable rivers facilitated the transportation of raw materials and manufactured goods . Canals built in the middle decades of the century, including a ninetymile-long canal linking Manchester to the Mersey River and the Irish Sea .
 The British government offered businessmen more assistance than any continental rivals could anticipate from their own governments . British businessmen were offered assistance by the British government .
 The Royal Navy protected the merchant fleet, which tripled in size during the first three-quarters of the century .
 Navigation Acts forced foreign merchants to ship export goods to Britain in British ships . Navigation Acts made foreign merchants ship their goods to the UK in ships . British ships were used to transport goods from foreign countries .
 The British government in 1700 had imposed protective tariffs on imported silk and calico, undercutting imports from India . Bowing pressure from woolens producers, the British government imposed the tariffs .
 Agreements with the Dutch Republic and France in the late 1780s reduced trade tariffs with those states, which helped British exports . British exports were boosted by the trade agreements with those countries .
 Britain rarely interfered in operations of the economy in ways that businessmen might have considered intrusive . Yet the British government rarely interfered with operations in ways such as intrusive .
 Smith rejected the prevailing theory of mercantilism and extolled economic liberalism . Smith rejected mercantillism and embraced economic liberalism in his work .
 He also observed that the greater division of labor was increasing productivity . He also said that the division of work was also increasing productivity.
 A single worker could probably not make a single common pin in one day, but ten workers could make hundreds of pins in a workday . Ten workers, each repeating the same task, such as straightening the wire, or grinding its point, could do the same thing .
 On the continent, too, particularly in the West, manufacturing expanded rapidly . Manufacturing expanded rapidly in cities, towns, and the countryside .
 France did not lag far behind Britain in the production of manufactured goods . It remained the principal supplier of Spain and its empire .
 European commerce developed rapidly during the eighteenth century . Despite bewildering differences in, for example, weights and measures, currencies, and calendars .
 Increased trade with the wider world brought new products—Chinese silk and porcelain, Indian cotton, West Indian sugar and rum, East Indian tea, South Seas spices, and much more .
 In the chancy sweepstakes of colonial trade, traders and their investors could make considerable fortunes . But they could also easily be ruined when a sudden storm or pirate attack destroyed a ship and its cargo .
 Bankers and investors profited from the marked increase in international trade . Bankers, investors, shipbuilders, ship builders, and insurance underwriters profited .
 Some of the prosperity trickled down to more ordinary folk as well, providing work for carpenters, dockers, haulers, and artisans, who supplied luxuries .
 Considerable obstacles remained, however, to further economic development on the continent . Considerable challenges remained, but the continent's economic growth is still possible .
 Traditional suspicion of paper money, the problems of obtaining credit and raising investment capital, and periodic government debasing of currencies created hurdles for long-distance commerce .
 London and Amsterdam were alone in having respected banks, credit facilities, relatively low interest rates, and insurance companies . Liverpool, Amsterdam, La Rochelle, Bordeaux, La-Rochelle, Paris, Paris and Amsterdam had respected banks .
 Trade from Colonies to Europe, including the value of the trade . Exports from the colonies to Europe . Ex-colonies to Europe. Exports to Europe from colonies .
 Capital remained in the hands of wealthy families and small groups of associates who loaned money to states, pushing up the cost of credit . Capital remained for the most part of the .
 The absence of investment capital led the Prussian and Austrian monarchies to supply capital for some manufacturing enterprises . Prussian monarchies supplied some of the capital for manufacturing .
 Guilds held monopolies on the trade and production of certain products . International tariffs and tolls complicated trade between the many small states in Central Europe .
 Few' nobles took an active interest in manufacturing, although exceptions were to be found in France, the Austrian Netherlands, and Russia, w here some nobles developed coal mines and invested in the iron industry .
 In the Russian Empire the possibilities for increased manufacturing were limited by the monumental distances between population centers and natural resources, as well as an inadequate transportation network . Despite the development of the copper and iron industry of the Ural Mountains, the transportation network had barely changed since the time of Ivan the
 Urban grow'th, particularly after 1750, was one of the most visible changes engendered by the rise in population and the expansion of trade and manufacturing, as w'ell as the continuing centralization of state power .
 Other changes included the rise of the ‘middling sort’ and the greater vulnerability of the laborer . The laborer was displaced by enclosure and forced to move from place to place in search of work .
 Although Europe remained overwhelmingly rural, cities and towns grew faster than the population as a whole . Europe, particularly the West, slowly urbanized, with cities growing faster than their population .
 Cities grew as people moved to areas where there was work, or for the poorest of the poor, where they might find charity . Cities grew because of work and charity, and the poor could not afford to live in such areas .
 New manufacturing centers served as magnets to those who had no land or prospects . New factories were magnets for those with no land, prospects or prospects to build on .
 The British urban population grew from slightly less than 20 percent of the population in 1700 to more than 30 percent in 1800 . London’s population reached nearly a million people, nearly twice that of Paris, in 1800, when London's population reached almost a million .
 London was the world’s largest port, the center of banking, finance, insurance, manufacturing, exports, and empire . London is now the world's largest port .
 In the eighteenth century, a fifth of the British population spent part of their lives in London . In the 17th century, the population spent most of their life in London.
 London was Europe's Largest City at the End of the Eighteenth Century . Paris, Paris, Naples, Naples and Constantinople were Europe's largest cities .
 St. Petersburg 270,000 people live in the capital in search of opportunity . Vienna, Vienna 230,000, Amsterdam 220,000 and Lisbon 180,000 . Berlin 170,000 are in search for opportunity .
 Some contemporaries believed wickedness and crime increased almost inevitably with larger cities . Some believed that wickedness increased with larger towns . Others believed that crime increased with large cities .
 London's emerging social geography reflected the paradox that Britain was both an aristocratic and commercial society . London’s emergence of social geography reflects the paradox of being both aristocratic . society .
 Bloomsbury Square and Bedford Square, West London, were largely aristocratic creations, as nobles developed some of their land .
 Commercial London expanded rapidly along with the British Empire . At the same time, commercial London also expanded rapidly . Commercial London became a major city of commerce and commerce .
 Near the burgeoning docks of the East End on the River Thames, dilapidated buildings housed the poor . The poor were housed in the buildings near the growing docks .
 Liverpool, a teeming port on the Irish Sea, was ‘the emporium of the western world,” and Manchester, a northern industrial town, developed rapidly . Manchester was the first city to develop northward with increased manufacturing . Liverpool is now the largest city in the
 By 1800, Manchester had become the “metropolis of manufactures,” with 75,000 inhabitants and growing industrial suburbs . Manchester was known as the ‘metropolitan of manufactures’ by 1800 .
 In France, only about 10 percent of the population lived in towns of more than 5,000 people in 1789, compared to 25 percent in England . Only 10 percent lived in smaller towns in France in 1790s, but 25 percent did .
 In the German states, there had been but twenty-four towns with more than 10,000 people in 1500; by 1800, there were sixty of them . In 1800, sixty of these towns had more than ten,000 residents .
 In Berlin, royal officials, lawyers, and soldiers accounted for about 40 percent of the Prussian capital’s 140,000 inhabitants in 1783 .
 Naples was barely able to support its impoverished population of more than 400,000 people . In southern Italy, Naples has been left impoverished in recent years .
 In Rome, the clergy constituted about half the population of 160,000 people . The clergy constitute about half of Rome's population .
 East Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans had relatively few cities . The Balkans and East Central Europe had relatively little cities .
 Warsaw had only 7,000 inhabitants in the mid-sixteenth century . Yet the Polish capital, Warsaw, had grown to 150,000 a century later . Warsaw, Poland's capital, now in its fifth century, had 150,00 inhabitants .
 As cities developed, those with money and leisure time found more to do . Those with more leisure time had more things to do than those with more money .
 The largest English towns sported theaters and concert halls, gentlemen’s clubs, scientific societies, and racetracks . The largest towns sport theaters, concert halls and gentlemen's clubs .
 Towns published guides for visitors and directories listing the names of shops . Towns took pride in their development, publishing guides and directories for visitors . Towns published guidebooks and directories to promote their tourism .
 Elegant buildings of brick and stone replaced tottering woodbeamed medieval structures . The buildings replaced the wooded medieval structures of medieval buildings .
 Streets were widened and paved, paved, and cleaned, at least in wealthy neighborhoods . Streets widened, paved and paved in wealthy areas .
 Dublin, Boston, and Calcutta offered smaller versions of English urban society, sporting private clubs and municipal pride, at least for British residents . The city of Dublin and Boston was a model of British urban society .
 Wealthy merchants and bankers lived in elegant townhouses near the docks in Hamburg, Nantes, and Genoa, bustling port cities of international trade . Wealthy bankers and bankers used to live in townhouses close to the docks .
 Paris became the European capital of luxury goods, as French nobles continually raised the standards of conspicuous consumption . Paris is now the world's most expensive city of luxury .
 In Sweden, such luxury reached court, aristocrats, and wealthy bourgeois, but a diplomat in 1778 estimated the market for such goods in Sweden to be only 70,000 people of a population of 2. million .
 Thomas Jefferson paid for a stream of luxury goods from London and Paris to be shipped to Virginia . Thomas Jefferson, who espoused simplicity in life, nonetheless paid for the goods . Jefferson's wife was a slave .
 Noble and wealthy bourgeois alike insisted on personal prerogatives of taste, in decoration and food, in particular .
 Three-cornered hats, along with wigs, became symbols of respectability . Stockings, wigs and stockings emerged as symbols of good manners .
 Cafes took their name from the coffee served there, a drink only people of means could afford . Cafes are now known as the coffee shops in the United States .
 Upper-class men and women became concerned as never before with modesty . “water closets” became more common . ‘Water closets were more common. ‘’
 A code of conduct served as a barrier between wealthy and ordinary people, says John Sutter . Sutter: Code of conduct is served as barrier between rich and poor .
 The eighteenth-century consumer revolution extended to the poor, as well as the poor . The 18th century consumer revolution included the poor as well .
 By the mid-seventeenth century, resourceful households in northwestern Europe were finding ways to purchase consumer goods that would make their lives more comfortable .
 Families drew upon the labor of women and children, as well as longer working hours by husbands . Families relied heavily on women's labor and children's labor .
 The number of ordinary families able to acquire household utensils and even books and cheap prints increased dramatically . Now the number of people able to buy household utnsils and books and even even books has increased dramatically.
 Some servant girls wore silk kerchiefs, and occasional laborer sported a watch, for which he paid the wages of several weeks . Sometimes laborer wore a watch for several weeks, and sometimes he paid wages of a week .
 Even infants deposited at foundling homes had been dressed in printed cottons . Even some infants were dressed in print cottles .
 For very ordinary people with a little money or some credit, taverns and bars provided cheap liquor and sociability . Taverns were popular for people with little money, some credit or some social status .
 Bankers aspired to social distinction and an aristocratic lifestyle . Bankers and wealthy merchants aspired for social distinction .
 In Paris, wealthy merchants purchased elegant townhouses and mingled with nobles . Wealthy merchants purchased townhouses for the first time in Paris .
 In Barcelona, members of the trading oligarchy earned the right to carry swords like nobles . Members of Barcelona's trading oligarchs were allowed to carry out their trade duties .
 The bourgeoisie of the Austrian Netherlands demanded the same privileges Habsburg rulers had granted to Belgian nobles . The Austrian Netherlands was granted the same rights to Belgian nobility .
 Noble titles could be purchased in most European states, providing a relatively easily obtained means of social ascension, without eliminating the distinctions between nobles and commoners . Noble titles were purchased in many European states .
 The sale of titles and offices swept more commoners into the nobility in France, Austria, and Castile . The rise of warfare and reduced tax revenue during hard economic times weighed heavily on royal coffers .
 The number of French nobles doubled between 1715 and 1789, and relatively few noble families could trace their origins back more than a couple of generations . Few French noble families can trace back a few generations .
 In Britain it was rare for commoners to move into the nobility . In Britain, the other hand, it was rarely for commoner to become nobility .
 The crown occasionally elevated wealthy commoners into the peerage with hereditary noble titles (baron, viscount, earl, marquis, and duke) Yet the crown sometimes elevated spectacularly successful, wealthy, successful commoners to the peerages .
 Few people ever rose from trade into a peerage, or even to the upper gentry . Very few people rose to the peerage or even the gentry.
 Entry into the British elite, however, was generally more open than into its continental counterparts . Entry into Britain's elite was more open in Europe than in the UK .
 Gradual shifts in social structure in English society, beginning in the seventeenth century, contributed to nation’s social stability .
 No legal or cultural barriers prevented bankers, manufacturers, merchants, and urban professionals from ascending through wealth to social and political predominance .
 Unlike on the continent, where second and third sons often were automatically relegated by their fathers into Church or military posts, many of these sons marched proudly into business . Many of the sons of those who succeed in business are now in business .
 In France, Denmark, and Sweden, tensions remained between old noble families and those more recently ennobled, whom the former viewed as boorish newcomers . In Denmark, Sweden, and France, tensions remain between the two countries .
 The number of ennobled commoners in the eighteenth century may not have been significantly greater than that in the previous century, but those who were ennobledged were wealthier . Those who were wealthier were wealthier, according to the historian .
 The older noble families still controlled the most important and lucrative offices in the royal bureaucracy, the Church, and the army .
 The French army began to phase out the purchase of commissions in the late 1770s . Early in the next decade nobles demanded that the crown would respect their monopoly on the most prestigious military titles .
 Segur Law of 1782 asserted that no one could be appointed to a high post in the army who could not demonstrate at least four generations of nobility on his father’s side . The law was directed against newcomers to the army .
 Barriers between bourgeois and nobles in many states were starting to break down . However, barriers between the bourgeois and noble in many countries were starting breaking down .
 In some places, a small number of nobles entered commerce or manufacturing . In some cases, they entered commerce and manufacturing .
 The expansion of trade and manufacturing led more continental nobles to seek new sources of wealth . The expansion led to more continental noblemen seeking new wealth .
 Swedish nobles contributed to the modest expansion of manufacturing in their country . Swedish noblemen contributed to a modest increase in manufacturing .
 In eighteenthcentury Spain, little stigma was attached to noble commercial ventures, perhaps because there were so many nobles . In the 17th century, there was little stigma attached to such ventures .
 In Prussia, Poland, and Hungary most nobles still considered participation in commercial activity to bring derogation, implying a loss of status and honor . In contrast, in Prussia and Poland, most nobles considered participating in retail commerce to bring a derogation .
 Economic crisis often pulled a couple apart, as one partner might be forced to leave to look for work elsewhere . But economic crisis often pulls the couple apart .
 At the end of the eighteenth century, almost 30 percent of the British population depended on some sort of poor relief . More than a million people were classified as “paupers” in England and Wales .
 Laborers had been chased from village common lands by parliamentary acts of enclosure . Laborers wandered in search of work . Some were chased from common lands .
 Residents of a village or neighborhood were far more likely to benefit from local charity than outsiders . outsiders were often feared as thieves or worse. Yet residents of a given village were more likely .
 Beggars in Austrian law' were referred to as ‘push people,’ because authorities sought to push them away . Authorities were called 'push people' because they wanted to push people away from them . Austrian law says beggars are not allowed to be pushed away from
 Meager harvests and bitter winters periodically took terrible tolls on the poor . Indigents found frozen to death in church doorways, barns, or fields .
 When food shortages occurred or the police expelled beggars from large cities, country roads swarmed with young children who had been abandoned by parents .
 The elderly, particularly widows, were often the poorest of the poor, unable to move elsewhere, depending on neighbors little better off than themselves . The elderly were often unable to leave their home to find a new home .
 Bread remained the basis of the diet of the vast majority of Europeans . Black bread, porridge or gruel made from rye, potatoes, or buckwheat for everybody else .
 Vegetables were prized as occasional additions to soup or porridge . Peas and beans were prized in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Poor people rarely consumed meat, except heavily salted meat that could be preserved . Poor people often consumed meat only for salted meats that could have been preserved . Meat was preserved in salted and salted food .
 The orphanage of Amsterdam, a prosperous city, served meat and fish twice a week and vegetables once a week . Orphanage served meat, fish, and vegetables in the orphanage . It is now a thriving orphanage in Amsterdam .
 Water, often not very clean, w'as the drink of necessity; wine and beer were beyond the budget of most people . Water was often not clean, and water was often a necessity .
 Swiss peasants prosperous enough to drink coffee and eat chocolate were the exception in Europe . The Swiss peasants were the exceptions in Europe's history .
 Overall, ordinary people experienced a modest improvement in diet and health during the eighteenth century .
 Charity, however impressive, fell far short of relieving the crushing poverty, particularly in France, where it provided only about 5 percent of w hat was needed . Charity was impressive, but it fell short of relief in France .
 During the Catholic Reformation, the Church had emphasized the importance of charitable works in the quest for eternal salvation . During the Reformation the Church emphasized charitable works .
 Most Protestants believed in the importance of good works, after Christ had washed a beggar’s feet . Most Protestants, too, believed in good works .
 Parishes and, in Catholic countries, often provided what relief they could afford to the poor . Monasteries and convents provided relief around Christmas and during Lent .
 During hard times, the number of abandoned infants increased dramatically . It is beyond the capacity of institutions to care for them . The number of infants abandoned has increased dramatically in recent years .
 By the middle of the eighteenth century, many upper-class Europeans believed that they had entered an age of clamoring crowds and even riots . Social Control was a form of social control .
 In the 1770s and 1780s, the lower orders seemed increasingly less deferential . The lower orders became increasingly deferential to the British aristocracy .
 The poor protested the purchase and removal of grain from their markets at prices they could not afford . The poor were outraged by the prices they were being sold at the time .
 They stopped wagons, seized grain, and sold it at what they considered to be the ‘just price” Even the poor could afford enough to buy enough to survive .
 The first Combination Act was passed in 1721 after a London strike by journeymen tailors protesting cuts in their pay . It was passed by the British Parliament following a strike in London in 1720 .
 The law established wages and working conditions for tailors . It allowed the jailing of striking workers without benefit of a trial .
 Many craftsmen and skilled workers were leaving Britain, some for colonies . Parliament then passed legislation forbidding their emigration .
 The British Parliament represented the interests of wealthy landowners, who consolidated their property during the eighteenth century . Wealthy landowners alone could elect members of the House of Commons .
 In 1723, Parliament passed without discussion a law that added fifty capital offenses against property . Parliament passed the law without discussion in 1723 . The law was added to the list of property offenses .
 It was a domesticated, usually nonlethal, nonlethal—at least for the hunters—version of warfare . It was the domesticated and nonlethal version of warfare.
 The exclusive right to hunt was a vigilantly guarded prerogative of any and all who could claim noble status . It was an exclusive prerogate of any who claimed noble status. It was the exclusive right .
 Act against poaching was invoked more often to protect property rights . But acts against poaching were invoked more frequently in the UK .
 Wealthy English landowners set brutal mantraps that maimed poachers who snuck onto their property, including in the “deer parks” established on land that had once been common land . Wealthy landowners used trap-guns and snares to maim poachers
 The blackening of one’s face as a form of disguise included poaching game or fish, chopping down trees, or gleaning branches blown down in storms . Among the felonies listed under the Black Act, among them the blackening the face .
 It specifically sought to protect property against ambitious men who might be tempted to try to elope with the daughters of wealthy property owners .
 Parliament also passed a law permitting divorce by parliamentary act, which none but the very wealthy and well-placed could seek . Men wanted to be free to divorce wives who shamed them with adultery or who could not produce heirs to inherit their estates .
 People of means debated strategies of social control with increasing urgency as economic crises widened the gap between rich and poor . Subordination and social control was debated in the wake of the economic crisis .
 During 1724— 1733, the French state undertook a “great confinement” of paupers, beggars, and vagrants in workhouses . The French state was to learn menial trades under strict conditions of strict discipline .
 The subsequent reorganization and expansion of royal efforts at policing the poor represented an increase in the reach of the state . The following reorganization was the result of the royal efforts .
 Temporary programs of poor relief were common on the continent, as were repressive campaigns against beggars and vagrants . Yet temporary programs were common in Europe .
 Since the beginning of the seventeenth century, English parishes or townships provided charity to those wearing the requisite “P” for pauper .
 In order to keep indigents off the road, towns established workhouses, where the poor would be forced to work in exchange for subsistence . Workhouses were established in order to stop the poor from traveling .
 In 1795, the Speenhamland system, so called after the parish in which it was conceived, provided for a sliding scale of assistance . The system provided for assistance, determined by the current price of bread and wage rates .
 The problem of poverty has entered public discourse to an unprecedented degree . But such programs merely scratched the surface as the problem has become public discourse, experts say .
 Britain did not do enough to limit capital crimes to those that threatened life or the state . Britain's capital crimes were not limited to the kind of campaign found in some places on the continent .
 Parliament added almost two hundred capital offenses to the law between 1688 and 1810 . A gamekeeper snags a poacher, sixty-three of the capital offenses were added .
 Their wives went to the landlord’s estate to beg his merciful intercession . Their wives were also forced to beg him to give them mercy .
 The lord, moved to tears, said that their husbands would be returned to them . The lord said that they would be able to live with their husbands .
 Only about two hundred criminals were executed each year in England . English juries hesitated to convict those accused . Only two hundred people were executed per year .
 Corporal punishment, such as branding or being exhibited in stocks to public contempt, was far more common in the 19th century . Corporal punishments such as being branded in stocks were more common .
 Children were worked and punished as adults, though not all as harshly as the seven-year-old girl who was hanged in Norwich for stealing a petticoat . The girl was hanged at the age of seven in Norwich, Norwich .
 Authorities everywhere lumped the poor into one of two broad categories—“deserving” and “undeserving,” that is, whether they were considered worthy of pity and charity . Authorities everywhere tended to lump the poor in one broad category .
 Among the latter were ‘false beggars’ who simulated horrifying wounds or injuries with the skill of a makeup artist . The beggars were clutching at the clothes of the wealthy passing by and received a few cents .
 These categories reflected the belief that many, if not most, of the poor were destitute because they were lazy and that stiff punishment would be enough to end begging . The categories reflected a belief that some people were lazy .
 In small bourgs, villages, and the countryside, people feared bands of thieves, whose threat of arson could intimidate . A fire would destroy a harvest or a farm in a matter of minutes, as a fire would .
 Many poor people considered some bandits as heroic Robin Hoods, who stole from the rich to give to the poor . Yet many poor people thought some bandits were heroes and Robin Hooders . Some poor people still considered bandits as heroes .
 A Century of Contrasts: The eighteenth century was a period of contrasts . A century of contrasts was the period of the most turbulent period in history .
 Musical performances at court and in chateaux and elegant townhouses took place while peasants and rural day laborers were toiling in fields .
 The well-heeled financier, wholesale merchant, manufacturer, or lawyer in Paris, Amsterdam, Barcelona, or Vienna lived in a vastly more cosmopolitan world . Their counterparts in Prussia, Russia, and the Balkans were relatively few cities and towns .
 In many ways a century still dominated politically by nobles, the eighteenth century also was a dynamic period of economic and social transformation, beginning with the Industrial Revolution in England . The eighteenth century was a period dominated by the industrial revolution, but dominated by nobles .
 Developing trade across oceans changed patterns of consumption in Europe . Developed trade across ocean changed patterns in Europe's consumption .
 Trade remained the basis of the British Empire, which stretched across the world . The British Empire was the basis for the British empire .
 Economic and social changes brought remarkable political consequences during the 1760s and 1770s . The 1760-1770s was a period of unprecedented political upheaval .
 English country gentlemen who invariably supported court policies and those who sometimes opposed them began to look and act like political parties .
 The domination of political life by an oligarchy of landowners came under challenge from ordinary people without the right to vote . And the domination of the oligarchy was challenged by ordinary people in Britain .
 In the North American colonies, the king’s subjects protested the fact that they were taxed without representation, and they rebelled against British rule . In the 17th century, King Edward VII was born in England .
 On the continent, denunciations of unwarranted privilege began to be heard, including calls for reform of the French absolute monarchy . Calls for reform were also heard in Europe .
 Public opinion gradually began to see parlements as blocks against absolute rule . Parlements were seen as defenders of the rights of the ‘nation,” a term that increasingly came into use .
 Opposition to entrenched privilege became more insistent in Africa . Elsewhere on the continent, too, opposition to privileged status became more pronounced .
 During his reign, despite his personal failings, a nationalist cult developed around the British monarchy . It was significantly after the empire suffered its biggest loss, that of the thirteen American colonies . The British monarchy suffered the biggest loss of the 13 colonies .
 The king projected the image of an ordinary family man, surrounded by his homely wife and fifteen children . The king was a homely, homely family man surrounded by 15 children .
 Less interested in goings-on in Hanover, his family’s dynastic home, than his predecessors, he won popular affection in Britain .
 The king’s domesticity also made him a target for the gentle spoofs of caricaturists .
 By the last decade of the century, symptoms of a hereditary disease made George III appear to be quite mad .
 Early in his reign, King George III held strongly to royal prerogatives, even within the context of the British constitutional monarchy . George III's prerogative prerogatory powers were still strong in the British monarchy .
 The party of opposition formed an essential part of the parliamentary system of representation in Britain . The idea developed in and beyond Parliament that a party of opposing formed an important part of Parliament .
 The nature of the European state system underwent fundamental change in the eighteenth century . The rivalries between Great Britain, France, Spain, Spain and the Dutch Republic broadened to a global scale .
 This balance of power is increasingly affected not only by events overseas but also by those in Eastern Europe . This balance was increasingly affected by events abroad and by Eastern Europe, it is said .
 The increasingly global nature of conflicts between empires put strains on the structures of states in Europe . Europe's history of empires has strained the structure of European states .
 In Britain, newspapers and organizations in which politics was discussed created public opinion, transforming the public sphere . Newspapers and organizations transformed public opinion as more people demanded political reform .
 A precocious sense of British national identity and patriotism developed in the early 1900s . The children's parents were at the centre of their national identity .
 Reform movements alarmed rulers and intrigued intellectuals, who denounced unwarranted privilege and despotism . Reform movements and even uprisings in Europe alarmed rulers, intrigued intellectuals .
 Public opinion on the continent demanded reform; in France, the parlements began to defend the ‘nation’ against monarchical despotism . The parlements defended the “nation” against monarchs . Public opinion demanded reform .
 The Eighteenth-Century State System was created in 17th-century Europe . The powers danced together in temporary partnership until the music changed and old partners deserted .
 The eighteenth-century state system was a pattern of rivalry and alliance in which powerful states vied for dynastic and global power .
 Few borders or thrones were secure from challenge by other rulers coveting more territory . Few borders were secure in the early days of the Middle Ages .
 Rulers sought to expand their power through marriage, inheritance, alliances, or warfare . They sought to extend their power by marriage or inheritance .
 Other states sought to maintain the balance of power, so that one state did not grow more powerful at the expense of the others . Other states also sought to prevent the growth of power in one state .
 Spain, France, the Dutch Republic, Sweden, Poland, and the Holy Roman Empire had less power than in the seventeenth century . Britain, Russia, and Prussia continued to extend their reach .
 The emergence of a global economy increasingly linked to colonial trade engendered rivalries . Britain, France, Spain, Spain and the Dutch Republic battled for commercial and colonial advantage .
 The powers were motivated by the hope of economic gain and reflected the primacy of the economic theory of mercantilism . The might of any state depended on its success in bringing in more gold than it paid out .
 George I from the German state of Hanover succeeded to the throne of England in 1714 . His German origins complicated British foreign policy and led to unsuccessful attempts by the Catholic Stuart pretenders to take back the British throne .
 Frederick the Great of Prussia and Maria Theresa of Austria locked horns in a battle of expansion for the former and survival for the latter . On the continent, the pair were engaged in expansion for Prussia, Austria, and the latter for Austria .
 As voyages of discovery opened up new horizons to Europeans, the stakes of colonial rivalry between the great powers rose . The rise of colonial rivalries between the world's most powerful nations rose .
 During the seventeenth century, England, the Dutch Republic, France, Spain, and Portugal had gradually expanded their trading routes across the seas .
 Coffee, tea, molasses, ginger, indigo, Indian calicoes, tobacco, and other colonial products—for the most part luxury goods—fetched high prices at home . The colonial products, including coffee and tea, fetched high prices .
 The discovery of gold in Brazil in 1694 and 1719 further whetted the appetites of commercial companies .
 By the end of the seventeenth century, Dutch and French traders began to sail to China in greater numbers . The Dutch, French and Dutch traders began sailing to China .
 The K’ang-hsi emperor and the Ch’ing dynasty had expanded toward the south even while affirming Chinese cultural unity, even within the context of China .
 The Chinese rulers manifested little interest in the traders from the West, says historian .
 Sea routes had largely supplanted the old land trade routes that had stretched through the Middle East and Central Asia . Ambitious European merchant-traders still brought back spices and fine silks from Asia .
 Chinese prints, porcelain, silk, and rugs became popular in Western Europe . Chinese prints became popular with Western Europe in the 1930s .
 In the eighteenth century, the British East India Company established new posts in South India and Bengal . In the 17th century, they established posts in both South and East India .
 Ships of the British East India Company carried Chinese porcelain, silks, spices, and tea to England in exchange for silver and opium grown in India .
 British traders exchanged slaves taken from West Africa for colonial products . Textiles, textiles and other manufactured goods were exchanged for colonial goods .
 At the middle of the eighteenth century there were about 3 to 4 million Europeans living in British, French, Spanish, Spanish and Portuguese colonies in America . Several times that number of slaves had been carried there by European ships from Africa .
 The Dutch had bases on the northern coast of South America, West Africa, South Africa, the Indian subcontinent, and Southeast Asia . The Dutch conquered three Islamic states in the late seventeenth century, where they conquered .
 The Dutch were also in Japan, which in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth century had expanded trade in East Asia and Southeast Asia . The Dutch also had trade in Japan .
 Dutch presence in Japan during the 1630s and 1640s had been limited to the port of Nagasaki . Japan rejected more than superficial contacts with foreigners .
 As in the case of China, the Japanese exhibited little knowledge of or interest in other cultures . The Japanese showed little interest in or knowledge of other cultures, says historian .
 French forts and settlements dotted the North American colony of Nouvelle France . The French colony was established in the 1920s and 1930s .
 French trappers established posts on the Mississippi River, with the port of New Orleans at its mouth far to the south . New Orleans was the first port of its kind .
 The territories claimed by the French, on which they had only scattered military and trading posts, almost tripled in size by the middle of the eighteenth century . By the 1760s the French population of Nouvelle France stood at only about 80,000 people .
 French and British armies and navies battled in North America, the West Indies, and India . They believed that the loss of Canadian furs, Caribbean spices, or Indian jewels might be a damaging blow to prosperity .
 Spanish colonial rivalry with Britain led to the only war ever fought over an ear . The ear was the only ear fought over in Spain .
 Both Spain and Britain insisted that their colonies ship goods only on vessels flying their flag . Both countries agreed to allow their colonies to ship goods on ships flying their flags .
 Since 1713 the Spanish had granted the right to Britain to supply its colonies with 4,800 slaves each year . In exchange for this sale, a single English ship each year could trade at one Spanish colonial port .
 Spanish navy sank several British ships in 1731 . In 1731 one of its vessels accosted an English frigate suspected of smuggling . The Spanish navy sunk several British vessels .
 The incident led to the ‘War of Jenkins’s Ear’ in 1739 after a member of Parliament whipped up anti-Spanish sentiment by waving the severed ear in the air during a speech . The ear's severed ear was used to raise anti-Spain sentiment .
 In 1702, Queen Anne succeeded her brother-in-law, William III, to the throne of England . The Hanoverians and the Stuarts in Great Britain are the descendants of James II .
 Despite eighteen pregnancies and five live births, Anne had no surviving children . Anne died at the age of 92 .
 The House of Commons had passed the Act of Succession in 1701 to prevent any future restoration of the Catholic Stuart line to the throne . The Act was passed to prevent a future restoration to the British throne .
 By this act, the Protestant ruling dynasty of Hanover would become the English royal line upon Anne’s death . The act broke rules of dynastic succession, which broke strict rules of succession .
 In 1707, the Act of Union created the Kingdom of Great Britain, which took the Union Jack as its flag, and linked Scotland to England and Wales . The Union Jack is the flag of the United Kingdom .
 Scotland received seats in the House of Commons, but fewer than its population should have warranted . Scotland received fewer seats than it should have had in the Commons .
 Parliament's goal in formalizing the dynastic union was fear that Scotland might seek to summon Queen Anne’s exiled Catholic half-brother to be king of Scotland, instead of going along with England and Wales's awarding of the throne to the Hanover .
 English Protestants continued to support Catholic monarch James II after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 .
 Legal restrictions prevented Irish Catholics from being merchants, lawyers, or members of the Irish Parliament . The powers of the Parliament were strictly limited .
 In England itself, Parliament had not extended the Toleration Act of 1689 to Catholics . Parliament did not extend the Act to Catholics in 1689 .
 The Hanoverian George 1 , a distant cousin of Queen Anne, became king in 1714 . George 1 became king of Hanover in 1715 . He is a distant relative of Queen Anne Anne, who died in 1716 .
 He never learned English, brought some of his own advisers from Hanover, was stubborn and obese . He may have ordered the murder of his wife's lover in Hanover . Some of his subjects referred to their monarch as ‘King Log’
 He spent long periods in his beloved Hanover, spending most of his life in Hanover . All of this was more easily forgiven by wealthy Englishmen than his apparent indifference .
 The Hanoverian dynasty’s accession to the throne complicated British foreign policy . Hanoverians ruled the country for centuries .
 The Treaty of Utrecht was the first of two treaties that concluded the War of the Spanish Succession . It confirmed Britain’s colonial supremacy, adding Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, the Hudson Bay territory, and New Brunswick .
 George 1 looked with disfavor on the treaty because it had not advanced the interests of Hanover . The treaty was not advanced in Hanover's interests .
 Some in Parliament considered the compromise treaty as too much of a compromise and thus humiliating for Britain . Furthermore, some in parliament considered the treaty as a humiliating for the UK .
 It was ratified by the House of Lords only because Queen Anne had created enough new peers to assure passage . Queen Anne ensured passage because she created enough peers to guarantee passage . It was only ratified by Queen Anne because she had created new peers .
 The new Hanoverian dynasty was threatened by remaining support for the Catholic Stuart dynasty . The new dynasty was created in 16th century .
 By the Treaty of Utrecht the king of France had officially renounced support for James, Catholic France still wanted him on the British throne . Catholic France wanted James on the throne .
 Like his father, he was courageous and had led troops into battle in the German states . He was courageous like his father .
 He had a stiff, tedious personality, displaying impatience and a bad temper, he said . He said: 'He was a stiff and tedious personality. He was a tedious personality'
 In 1745, Charles Edward Stuart planned an invasion of England, similar to the one his father had undertaken thirty years earlier . The dreamy pretender planned to invade England in a similar way to his father .
 Adding Scottish clansmen from the Highlands to his force, he marched into England with about 9,000 men . He then marched into the country with 9,500 men .
 The threat to the throne was serious enough to give birth to the British anthem “God Save the King,” which dates from this time . It was the first time the threat to Britain's throne was considered serious enough .
 The young pretender hesitated a hundred miles from London and then retreated to Scotland . He retreated to the north of Scotland, where he fought for the throne .
 Bonnie Prince Charlie defeated by English troops at Culloden Moor near Inverness in April 1746 . Many highlanders deserted his ranks as English troops ravaged their country . Many Scots deserted him as English forces ravaged his country .
 The government ordered the execution of two Scottish peers who had thrown their support to the pretender . The government also forbade the wearing of kilts or tartans, symbols of the highlanders .
 A handful of Jacobites continued to celebrate Stuart birthdays . Thereafter, a handful of the Jacobites celebrated Stuart births .
 They toasted ‘the king over the water’ living in French exile by holding their glasses of spirits over another glass filled with water . The king over water is a French exile living in exile in France .
 Prussia threatened Habsburg interests in Central Europe . The Prussian-Austrian Dynastic Rivalry was the result of Prussia and Austria . Prussia was one of the most powerful powers in Europe .
 Charles VI (ruled 1711 — 1740), the decent but mediocre Holy Roman emperor, had never recovered from the Habsburg loss of Spain in the War of the Spanish Succession . Charles VI died in 1740 at the hands of the Emperor of Austria .
 He remained obsessed with keeping the remaining Habsburg lands together . He was obsessed with maintaining the remaining parts of the Austrian empire .
 As Charles had no son, he spent years trying to convince other European powers to recognize the integrity of the Habsburg inheritance upon his death . Charles spent years during his reign trying to bribe or otherwise convince the other European countries to recognize it .
 In 1713, he tried to get them to recognize the Pragmatic Sanction, which asserted the indivisibility of the Habsburg domains and recognized the right of female as well as male succession .
 Maria Theresa could, as a woman, be archduchess of Austria and queen of Hungary and Bohemia . But she was barred from becoming Holy Roman empress, thus opening up the question of imperial succession . Maria Theresa was banned from becoming empress of Holy Roman .
 The young queen had little money, no army, almost no bureaucracy, and bad advisers, and hence was in a poor position to defend her throne against aggressive hostile powers . She was in poor position, having little money and no army .
 France and Prussia, despite having pledged to uphold the Pragmatic Sanction, were each preparing to dismember the Habsburg Empire . The two countries were preparing for dismemberment of the Empire .
 Frederick William I had little in common with his raging father, Frederick William William I . The royal son was intelligent, played the flute, enjoyed reading, preferred French to his native German, and as a boy expressed little interest in army .
 At the age of eighteen, he tried to run off to England to catch a glimpse of his intended English bride . At the same time, he was trying to run away to see her intended English wife .
 Frederick William executed his son after his best friend's plot was foiled . Frederick William was furious after his son was found guilty of plotting to kill himself .
 Frederick William made the young prince watch from a prison cell the decapitation of his friend . Frederick William was dissuaded by his officials by making him watch the execution . The young prince was forced to watch from prison cell .
 Frederick became an aggressive absolute monarch . Forced by his father to serve in the royal bureaucracy and as an army officer, Frederick became aggressive .
 Frederick, called ‘the Great’ by his subjects, worked twelve hours a day overseeing minute details of army administration . Frederick worked 12 hours per day overseeing details of the army . Frederick was called 'the Great' by his people, and his subjects .
 His own physical courage was legendary—six times horses were killed beneath him in battle . Six times horses died beneath him, six times he was killed .
 Frederick the Great’s ‘enlightened’ reforms made Prussia a more efficient absolutist state . Frederick the . Great's reforms made the Prussian state more efficient and efficient .
 He improved the state bureaucracy by introducing an examination system . He introduced the examination system in order to improve state bureaucracy .
 Frederick the Great, King of Prussia, ordered officials to accumulate stocks of grain in good times . Because he ordered officials . to accumulate . grain stocks in good . times, Frederick the . Great ordered officials. to accumulate grain stocks . In good times, officials accumulated grain in a good
 Frederick the Great managed to pay for his wars with careful budgeting . Frederick closely monitored state tax revenues and expenses, closely monitoring state tax revenue and expenses .
 He refused to undertake expensive loans, sell noble titles and privileges, or impose new levies on the peasantry . His policies were wreaking financial and social havoc in France . The French monarch refused to sell titles or sell privileges .
 Frederick continued the exemptions of the Junkers from many taxes and preserved their domination of the bureaucracy and army . Frederick continued to continue the exemptions from many tax .
 He personally planned educational reforms with an eye to improving the performance of his officials . He planned reforms with a view of improving performance of officials .
 Nobles oversaw regional government, as well as the collection of taxes, in charge of regional government . Nobles were responsible for regional government and tax collection .
 Frederick also wanted to keep the Junkers in a position of subordination to the crown . Frederick wanted to give the family the right to be subordinate to the Crown .
 Noble army officers could not marry or travel abroad without the king’s authority . Noble soldiers were not allowed to travel abroad or marry without permission from the king . Noble officers would not be allowed to leave the country to marry or marry .
 Prussia had a relatively rigid social structure, aristocratic and military virtues were henceforth inseparable in Prussia . This is a fact fraught with significance for modern German history . Prussia was one of Germany's most powerful statesmen .
 The rise of Prussia and Russia carried European dynastic rivalries and warfare into Central Europe . Russia and Prussia were the most powerful powers in Europe .
 The unchecked success of any one power seeking to expand its territory inevitably brought a combined response from the other powers to maintain a rough balance between the states .
 The long, costly war between France and Britain was truly global in extent . Both powers battled in North America (where the war became known as the French and Indian War)
 The armies that fought in the Great War were larger and better drilled than ever before . The armies were larger than ever ever before, and were better drilled and more drilled .
 French and British navies played a greater role in transporting troops and supplies in the global struggle . At the same time, they also played a role in guarding commercial vessels .
 The War of the Austrian Succession reflected naked absolutist aggression . The War was the most successful period of Austrian rule .
 Frederick the Great coveted Silesia, a Habsburg territory south of Prussia and then squeezed between Saxony, Poland, and Austria . Frederick wanted the territory south-of-Prussia, then squeezed into Saxony and Poland . The area was part of the Habsenburg
 Silesia was a relatively wealthy province within the Habsburg domains . With its textile, mining, and metallurgical industries, it was the focus of its industries . The province was once a relatively prosperous province within Habsberg domains .
 Frederick sent his army into Silesia after the death of the Russian empress . Frederick was confident that the empress' death would prevent Russian assistance to Austria .
 Frederick the Great was the latest in a long line of aggressive Prussian kings . He had a powerful army and a centralized bureaucracy able to raise money through taxes . Frederick was the first to identify the interests of the state .
 The Habsburg monarchy embodied, by contrast, the complexity of Central Europe . It embodied the complex complexity of the monarchy .
 Austrian Germans dominated the administrative structure of the empire of many different peoples and languages . The empire was dominated by the Austrian Germans .
 The multiplicity of privileges and traditions, and cultures undermined the authority, resources, and efficiency of the state . The state's authority is undermined by the plurality of privileges, traditions and cultures, the author says .
 The Habsburg Empire lacked the trading and manufacturing base of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic . Great Britain was foremost among non-absolutist states, or of France or Prussia .
 Mercantilists in Austria hoped that foreign trade would add to the coffers of the state . The overwhelmingly rural Habsburg lands had little to export .
 The nobles of Bohemia rebelled against Habsburg rule, offering the throne to the ruler of Bavaria . Austria’s rival in southern Germany, Bavaria, offered the throne . Bohemia was the richest province of Austria's Bohemia .
 No Habsburg monarch could be sure of having either sufficient support from the Estates or money with which to raise an effective army . Dependent on the good will of the provincial Diets, no Habsburger monarch was sure to have sufficient support or money for an army .
 The Hungarian Diet had agreed to the Pragmatic Sanction in exchange for recognition of Hungary’s status as a separate kingdom within the Habsburg Empire . Now, with Prussian troops occupying Silesia, Maria Theresa traveled to Hungary to ask for the support of the Hungarian
 Dressed in mourning clothes following the recent death of an infant daughter and clutching one of her 16 children to her, Maria Theresa convinced the Diet to provide an army of 40,000 men .
 Magyar nobles held out their swords to her, shouting their promise to give ‘life and blood’ for her . The Magyars shouted their promise of life and blood to her . She was killed in the battle of her homeland .
 The gesture could not restore Silesia to the Habsburgs, but it may have saved the monarchy . The gesture was a gesture of support for the monarchy, which may have been seen as saving the monarchy from extinction .
 Imperial forces put down the Bohemian revolt in Hungary . Aided by Hungarian troops, imperial forces fought the revolt .
 Fearing a disproportionate expansion of Prussian power in Central Europe, other states now joined an alliance against Frederick the Great . Frederick's power was feared to be a disproportionate power in Europe .
 Prussian army more than held its own with the help of France as well as Spain and Bavaria . Austria, Russia, Sweden, Piedmont-Sardinia, and Denmark, states with a combined population twenty times that of Prussia, held their own .
 France joined the anti-Austrian coalition because it coveted the Austrian Netherlands . Spain participated because it wanted to recapture influence in Italy at Habsburg expense . The king of Piedmont-Sardinia cooperated because he coveted Milan .
 Frederick withdrew from the war in 1745 after the Peace of Dresden . Frederick was satisfied for the moment with the acquisition of Silesia . Frederick withdrew after the peace of Dresden in Germany .
 At Dettingen in 1743, King George II became the last British monarch to fight in battle . George II was the last monarch to have fought in battle with the Germans .
 His horse was spooked and rode off with its frightened royal rider still astride . His frightened rider was still on his horse when it was spooked and rode away .
 In North America, a British force captured the French fort of Louisbourg, which guarded access to the Saint Lawrence River . Louisbourg was the first French fort to be captured in North America .
 France’s army defeated the combined Dutch and British forces in the Battle of Fontenoy in what is now Belgium in 1745, the bloodiest battle of the century until the French Revolution . The battle was bloodiest since the French revolution in France until the end of the 17
 Fifteen thousand soldiers were killed or wounded in Fontenoy . 95,000 soldiers fought at the battle, including 15,000 who died or were wounded .
 French forces withdrew from the Austrian Netherlands in return for the English abandoning the captured fort of Louisbourg . English forces withdrew in exchange for the French withdrawal of French forces from Austrian Netherlands .
 Parma passed to a branch of the Spanish Bourbons, and Piedmont-Sardinia absorbed parts of the duchy of Milan . The northern Italian city of Parma was taken by the Bourbons .
 The Seven Years’s War was remarkable for several reasons . It was the first time the war was over .
 For the first time we can speak of a war not just of kings but selfconsciously of nations, at least in the cases of Britain and France . The war was a war of self-consciousness, not of kings, but of nations . It was the war of kings and
 Both states underwent a surge of patriotic enthusiasm, marked by calls for ‘patriotic gifts’ to support the war .
 In Britain, the sense of being ‘Briton’ developed among all classes, accentuated by an overwhelmingly popular war against Catholic France . The war was overwhelmingly popular, with the majority of British citizens supporting the war .
 In both countries there were calls for the more efficient management of the war, seen as part of pursuing national interests . For the first time, the war was seen as a national war effort .
 Prussia’s gains in the War of the Austrian Succession engendered the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 . Prussia gained the right to become part of the Prussian monarchy .
 France had previously undertaken alliances with Prussia and the Ottoman Empire to counter the threat of Austrian invasion .
 The Seven Years’ War, 1756-1763, was the start of the Seven Years' War . Areas of conflict, including battle sites, were the focus of the war .
 British territory acquired from France acquired from Spam Battle sites . Spanish £ ll. was acquired from the UK .
 Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 ended more than a century of intermittent warfare between France and the Austrian Habsburgs . France and Austria had been engaged in intermittent warfare since 1756 .
 Austria now allied with France, and then Russia, with the goal of recapturing Silesia . Austria was alarmed by the expansion of Prussian power . Austria allied with Russia and allied with Austria with France .
 Frederick the Great, determined to keep Silesia, turned to Britain, France's enemy . Frederick wanted to keep the region from becoming part of the Silesian kingdom .
 To France and Russia, Britain's sudden alliance with Prussia seemed a betrayal, even as France reversed its century-old opposition to Habsburg interests .
 Frederick defeated a large French army and then a Habsburg force in 1757 . In 1757, Frederick defeated the French and then the French forces .
 Russian army attacked from the north, occupying Berlin, while more Austrian troops marched on Prussia from the south . But a Russian army invaded Berlin, occupying the city .
 The new tsar admired the Prussian king and called the Russian troops home . The Russian troops were sent home by the Russian tsar .
 At the cost of perhaps 300,000 soldiers, Prussia preserved its full independence . At the time of the Second World War, the country was still in the grip of its independence .
 The rivalry between the European powers in India took the shape of a struggle between the British and French East India Companies . It was the result of intrigue and warfare among Indian rulers .
 The Mughals had conquered most of the subcontinent in the seventeenth century . But along the southern coast, where Mughal control was limited, the European trading network had continued to expand .
 In the meantime, India became the largest producer of textiles in the world, threatening the production of English cloth . India is now the world's largest textile producer .
 The Mughal Empire collapsed during the first half of the eighteenth century following invasions from Iran and Afghanistan . The Empire collapsed in the early 1800s after invasions by the two countries .
 Bengal, the wealthiest part of the Indian subcontinent, became autonomous . Bengal is now an autonomous state of Bengal . Bengal has been the richest state of India .
 The resulting political chaos in the 1740s aided the subjection of India by Britain . In 1750 there were only 5,000 British residents (and 20,000 soldiers) in the subcontinent .
 Robert Clive led troops of the East India Company and Indian mercenaries into Bengal . Robert Clive was the son of a provincial gentleman and lawyer . He led troops into Bengal with Indian mercenaries .
 Clive's force defeated the prince's army at Plassey, north of Calcutta . That same year, Clive's forces defeated Prince of Bengal . Clive's army defeated Prince Raja's army in the same year of the defeat .
 Clive used British troops to further the interests of the British East India Company . Clive continued to use British troops in Bengali to further his interests .
 He became very rich through imperial acquisitions and secured a British peerage . He was made very rich by imperial acquisitions .
 British control of most of the Indian subcontinent, with the British navy preventing French traders and soldiers from receiving sufficient supplies . The British navy prevented French traders from receiving enough supplies .
 The East India Company’s great successes opened up new trade between Britain, India, and South China, a vast new market . The company's great success opened up trade between India and China .
 Britain and France were fighting for control of a vast territory in Canada . In what became Canada, there was much more at stake because of the war .
 At mid-century ‘New France’ had a French population of only about 80,000 people . Even after more than a hundred years as a colony, "New France" had a population of about 80-000 .
 The thirteen British colonies already had more than 2 million residents . By contrast, the 13 British colonies had 2 million people .
 British incursions into their territory led Native Americans to ally informally with the French . Native Americans fought informally against the British in 18th century .
 During the French and Indian War, British troops forced over 10,000 French-speaking Acadians living in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to emigrate . During the war, British soldiers forced over ten,000 Acadians to leave Nova Scotia .
 British ships reduced French reinforcements and supplies to a trickle in 1759 . British ships also bested a French fleet at Quiberon Bay off the coast of Brittany . Despite the capture by French troops of several forts in the Great Lakes region, British ships cut French reinforcements .
 British forces captured Fort Duquesne in 1758, driving the French from the Ohio River Valley, and in 1760 took Montreal . In 1760, British forces took Montreal and drove the French out of the area .
 In the Caribbean, the British picked off French islands and their small garrisons one by one . The British took over the Caribbean from France in the 1930s .
 Seven Years’ War ended the domination of France on the continent and cleared the way for the expansion of the British Empire . The Seven Years' War ended France's domination of the continent .
 Austria recognized Prussia's absorption of Silesia in 1740 in exchange for Saxony’s retention of independence . By the Treaty of Paris of 1763, Austria recognized the absorption of Prussia in 1763 . Austria also recognized the annexation of Saxony in return for Sax
 The Southern Netherlands, however, remained an Austrian Habsburg territory . Southern Netherlands remained a part of the Austrian Empire in 18th century .
 The settlement in North America and the Caribbean was much more far-reaching . The settlement was first established in Europe, Africa and the United States .
 France retained fishing rights on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland, but accepted British claims to territory east of the Mississippi River, and those of Spain to all territory west of Mississippi River .
 Louisiana Territory stretched from the almost tropical climate of New Orleans to the freezing plains of central Canada . This enormous western region, known as the Louisiana Territory, stretched from New Orleans .
 France retained the Caribbean islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe only because English colonists feared competition from sugar produced on those islands if they became British .
 Britain then tried to mend fences in Europe, where the balance of power had been preserved . The balance was preserved in Europe's power balance, where it was preserved .
 Austro-Prussian rivalry for domination of German-speaking Central Europe continued unabated . Like Franco-British enmity, it was a rivalry between the Austro and Prussian .
 Armies and Their Tactics in the Eighteenth Century . Long after monarchs put an end to private noble armies, warfare remained part of noble culture .
 Military schools in France, Russia, and several German states trained the sons of nobles in the skills of war . French, Russian and German military schools were used to train noble sons .
 Noble officers had much more in common with the officers of the enemy than with their own troops, who were conscripted or impressed from the lower classes . Noble officers were more likely to have more common relations with the enemy's officers than those of their own .
 Habsburgs often appointed foreign nobles as officers in its army . Indeed, the Habsurgs often appoint foreign noble as officers .
 Officers captured during a war were treated to a nice glass of wine and a good meal . They were then exchanged for their own officers who had fallen into enemy hands .
 In some ways, it seemed like a game of chess played between aristocrats in a manor house parlor . It was played by aristocrats playing chess in a parlor in the parlor at the time .
 It is said that the French officers at the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745 gallantly shouted to their British counterparts, “Fire first, messieurs les anglaisr before the slaughter began.”
 The Prussian army’s military recruitment system was the most comprehensive . Prussian soldiers were recruited from around the world to join the army .
 Each of its regiments was assigned a district from which to draw recruits . Each of the regiments had a district in which they drew recruits .
 In France, military recruitment was placed directly under the control of the state bureaucracy . The state relieved officers of the responsibility for filling a quota of recruits .
 Throughout Europe, certain categories of the population were exempt from service, including prosperous farmers, servants of French nobles, Russian merchants, and, in some countries, men with families .
 England alone among the major powers in not having a standing army, at least in principle . England was alone among major powers not having standing army .
 mercenaries still provided the bulk of European armies, the notable exception being France . The notable exception was France .
 Military service provided those who joined up with regular meals, shelter, and adventure . Military service . provided them regular meals and shelter .
 Swiss guards served the French royal family as well as the popes in Rome . Their countrymen fought with a variety of armies, including the French .
 Criminals and other men with something unpleasant in their past often turned up as soldiers . Criminals, other men who had unpleasant pasts turned up to be soldiers in the U.S.
 Desertion is widespread, affecting up to 35 percent of the army, despite threats of mutilation for those caught leaving . Desertion remains widespread, with threats of being mutilated for those who leave . Desertions are still widespread in the country, with some soldiers mutilated .
 During the Seven Years’ War, 62,000 soldiers deserted the Habsburg army, 70,000 left the army of France behind, and 80,000 Russian soldiers disappeared into the night .
 Tightly packed formations served to discourage desertions, as they were intended to do, because soldiers were under constant control . Soldiers were under more constant control because of tight formations, which discourage desertion .
 Harsh, even brutal, discipline in army camps complemented that in the field . Harsh discipline in camp camps was harsh, brutal, and brutal, according to the soldiers .
 Although strategies for supplying troops improved during the century, armies rarely moved far from their supply camps . armies rarely move far from supply camps.
 The lack of commitment and unreliability of mercenary and levied troops often helped end fighting . It was often the only way to end fighting in Afghanistan .
 Military technology has evolved slowly since the invention of gunpowder . Military technology had evolved slowly but has been slow to evolve .
 In the seventeenth century, the soldier wielding a bayonet, a musket topped with a razor-sharp knife, had pushed the pike man, a foot soldier armed with only a spear-like weapon, off the battlefield . In the 17th century, a man armed with
 Other significant changes in warfare in the seventeenth century included improved flintlock muskets, with cartridges and iron ramrods that permitted riflemen to fire three times per minute .
 Artillery pieces were lighter and more mobile, with somewhat greater range . Artillery Pieces were lighter, more mobile and with greater range, with lighter and mobile .
 The discipline and efficiency of troops in formation won or lost battles, says the author . The discipline of soldiers in formation is the key to winning or losing battles, he says .
 Muskets fired in deadly volleys by rows of soldiers taking turns reloading . Muskets, inaccurate beyond a short distance, were fired in volleys . Soldiers took turns reloads for each volley .
 Cavalry charges generally took place on the flanks of battle with the goal of neutralizing the enemy’s cavalry, usually were over quickly . Charge charges were used to neutralize the enemy's cavalry, and were over soon .
 New tactics had brought greater maneuverability in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries . linear formations involving coordinated movements required well-trained and disciplined troops .
 The British and Prussian armies were the first to create a light infantry division that could engage the enemy more rapidly, often fighting with bayonets . Moreover, the Prussian and British armies were also the first .
 Defense still dominated in battle, as symbolized by impregnable fortresses along the northern frontier of France built in the late seventeenth century .
 The Thirty Years’ War (1618-1648) ended with fewer civilian casualties . After the war, warfare became somewhat more civilized, or at least somewhat more predictable, with fewer casualties .
 Prisoners of war, even commoners, were kept in relatively decent conditions . They were sometimes exchanged for their counterparts . Prisoners were kept relatively well .
 The development of logistical support and professionalized, well-drilled armies meant that soldiers no longer had to live off the land . Soldiers no longer have to live on the land.
 The goals of warfare were now restrained by traditions of monarchical and aristocratic civility . The goals were now generally restrained by aristocratic and monarchical rules .
 Once victory had been achieved, there seemed no reason to pursue one’s enemy to finish him off . Once victory was achieved there was no need to pursue the enemy to die .
 British statesmen knew that to maintain superiority over France on the seas, their enemy had to be kept busy on the continent . France’s enemies among the German states were paid to keep the enemy busy .
 The Royal Navy had begun to grow in size during the second half of the seventeenth century .
 Building on earlier improvements in sails, rigging, charts, charts and navigational techniques, the size and quality of ships improved in the 1800s .
 Shipbuilding drew on scientific assistance from experts in mathematics and navigation . Shipbuilding in the 1930s drew on help from mathematicians and navigation experts .
 The British first added copper to hulls, which made their ships sturdier . It was added to their hulls to make them stronger .
 Navies were also beset by problems of desertion, at least when ships were in port . Navies also had problems desertion when they were at sea .
 Almost one-fourth of the men who joined the British navy between 1776 and 1780 deserted . Many of them had been dragged to the docks by press-gangs .
 The British naval supremacy established the basis for the expansion of commerce and empire . Few decisive naval confrontations in the eighteenth century .
 The cost of full-fledged battles seemed too high; ships were enormously expensive to build and maintain . The cost was too high to carry out battles, and the cost of battles was too much .
 Fifteen times more British sailors died of disease between 1774 and 1780 than succumbed to battle wounds . 15 times more deaths were caused by disease than those from battle wounds during the period .
 In England, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 had put an end to fifty years of social and political turmoil . In 1688, the revolution was the end to 50 years of political and social turmoil .
 The Bill of Rights of 1689 guaranteed Parliament’s right to approve taxation . It also prohibited the monarch from suspending or dispensing with laws . Parliament's right to vote on taxation was also guaranteed in 1689 .
 Parliament also maintains control of military funding and the size of the army . Parliament also maintained control of the size and budget of the military .
 The political struggles of the seventeenth century had demonstrated that the king had to work with Parliament in governing the nation . Thus, the political struggles in the seventteenth century demonstrated that .
 In turn, the state served as a guarantor of rights of property and patronage . The state was also a guarantee of property, patronage and property rights . In the 1930s, state was a guarantee to property rights, patronage .
 The rights of Parliament and the elective nature of the House of Commons, even if based on an extremely narrow electoral franchise, distinguished British political life from that of its continental rivals . Parliament is based on the fact that it is an elective democracy .
 The period of ‘aristocratic consensus’ that followed the Glorious Revolution was not as free from political contention as the term suggests . The period was not free from politics as much as it was supposed to be .
 The interests of wealthy property owners were represented in the House of Commons . It gradually became a far more important political forum than the Lords, which only represented peers .
 It also became more difficult for the king to manage the House of Commons . The king also had to deal with the Commons in order to keep control .
 The former were now clearly identified with the prerogatives of the throne, the latter with the rights of Parliament . Parliament. Parliament. The former .
 Whigs believed that the role of Parliament was to defend liberty, property, and the rule of law . They believed that it was to preserve the British constitution against possible abuses of power by the throne .
 During the eighteenth century, political life began to spill beyond the narrow confines of the British political elite . As ordinary people demanded a voice in political life with increasing insistence .
 Britain was justly renowned for its political preoccupation with liberty . Expanding Central Government in Britain was an attempt to expand the state of state .
 An essential part of eighteenth-century British identity included the victory of Parliament during the English Civil War in the mid-seventeenth century in defense of constitutional monarchy . Parliament's victory in the English civil war in the 17th century was an important part of British identity .
 By the end of the eighteenth century, the British state had perhaps ten times more revenues than a century earlier . The British state's revenues were perhaps 10 times more than they had been a century ago .
 The increasingly global nature of trade and warfare made greater demands on the state’s administrative abilities . At the same time, the increasingly global . nature of . trade and . warfare made demands on state's administrative . abilities .
 The growth, greater centralization, professionalization, and efficiency of military and civilian administration allowed Britain to replace France as the strongest power on the globe . The growth of centralization and professionalization of the British government permitted Britain to become the strongest in Europe .
 British landed, financial, commercial, and manufacturing interests followed British military engagements across the globe with rapt attention . British landed and commercial interests followed the British military .
 Britain’s financial community, centered in what would become called ‘The City, became more dependent on the wars in Europe and abroad . The financial district of London's financial district became more financially dependent on British wars .
 The British Empire became closely linked not only to British prosperity but also identity . The Empire was closely associated with British prosperity and identity .
 The power and reach of the treasury also increased, along with its capacity to raise money for foreign wars and imperial conquest . The power of the Treasury was also increased .
 As the economy grew rapidly, the British state raised and efficiently collected taxes, including land taxes, excise taxes (on commodities) and customs taxes . Land taxes provided an increasing share of revenue, with land taxes providing an increasing part of revenue .
 Government officials became more professional, technical expertise more important, and government offices more clearly defined . Technical expertise became more important as technical expertise was more important .
 Civil service posts offered educated men chances for social advancement . Civil service jobs were meant to be social opportunities for educated men .
 The British government, like its continental rivals, continued to confront the problem of paying off the massive national debt amassed by loans that financed dynastic and trade wars . Britain's debt was amassed by debts amassed by debt that financed Dynastic and Trade wars .
 The government spent more than three-quarters of its expenditures on the army, navy, or paying back debts from previous wars . The British government spent most of its budget on paying back previous wars debts .
 Two years later, the government had awarded it a monopoly over the slave trade with Latin America . The government had given it a favorable conditions for European trade . The slave trade monopoly was granted by the government in 1881 .
 Any profits from such trade seemed in the distant future . But because of the intermittent fighting with Spain during the War of the Spanish Succession, any profits were in the future .
 Needing a rapid infusion of capital, the directors of the company offered stock for sale on attractive terms . Needed a rapid . infusion of . capital, directors offered stock on attractive . terms. Needing to be able to afford a rapid influx of capital .
 They bribed some potential purchasers and developed ties with high government officials . They developed ties to government officials to develop ties with the government .
 The company converted the debt owed by the state into company shares . With the help of unscrupulous investors, many of whom were holders of part of the national debt, wanted to get their money back .
 The scam worked as long as there were enough investors whose funds could be used to pay dividends to those who had bought shares earlier . The scam was carried out by investors who had already invested in the company .
 The profits were all based on the sale of the stock rather than on real commercial gains . But the profits were based on selling the stock .
 Smaller companies started up overnight, most of them insolvent or strangely organized, such as one literally limited to women dressed in calico . Most of the companies were insolvent, or were organized, as well as strangely organized .
 The ‘South Sea Bubble’ burst in September of that year . With no gains of any kind forthcoming, the ‘Bubble’ ended .
 The cartoon shows how speculation caused shares in the South Sea Company to rise . The South Sea Bubble would eventually lead to the 'South Sea Bubble' The cartoon was published in 1720 .
 The financial scandal hung over political life when Robert Walpole became chancellor of the exchequer in 1721 . He would hold a post he would hold for more than twenty years .
 Short, ruddy-cheeked Walpole was energetic and ambitious, making himself quite rich at state expense . The son of a gentry landowner of relatively modest means, Walpole made himself rich .
 In office, he was determined to restore political confidence to Britain . In office he pledged to restore confidence to the country .
 Parliament passed a law that allowed only companies chartered by the government to sell stock shares to the public . Parliament passed the law allowing only chartered companies to sell their shares to public .
 George II trusted Walpole’s judgment, and the latter survived the wrath of some members of Parliament . Members of Parliament disliked his unpopular financial reforms, including greater taxes on imports and on salt .
 Walpole perfected the system of political patronage, virtually managing the House of Commons . Walpole made the Anglican Church part of a state structure that would last more than a century .
 He placed MPs loyal to him—“placemen” in well-paying governmental positions, some of which were veritable sinecures . Some of those positions were sinecracies .
 On the local level, the bigger fish became county lord-lieutenants and the smaller fry justices of the peace . The bigger fish become county lords-lieutenantants and justices of peace .
 Walpole also worked to isolate Jacobites, smoothing the Hanoverian succession to the British throne . Walpole was also known for his efforts to isolate the Jacobite .
 His attempt to extend the excise tax to wine and tobacco failed in 1733, after generating riots . His attempt at extending the tax also failed to stop riots .
 William Pitt the Elder led a coalition of ‘boy patriots’ against Walpole . William Pitt was the leader of the coalition of "boys patriots" against the British leader .
 They objected to his inaction against Spain, whose ships were harassing British ships in the Atlantic . Specifically, they objected to him taking action against Spain .
 After being forced by public outcry to declare war on Spain in 1739, Walpole resigned two years later . The War of Jenkins’s Ear was the result of a public outcry against the war .
 The duke of Newcastle succeeded Walpole and ably manipulated the patronage of his position . He was known as “Hubble-Bubble’s”
 The “Great Commoner” Pitt was a lonely, unstable man who alternated between feverish excitement and dark depression . Pitt was an unstable man with a dark side, alternated from feverish .
 He was demagogic, arrogant, and ruthless, commanding respect through fear . "He was demagogue, arrogant and ruthless," he said .
 The cabinet and government officials carried out the functions of state . The cabinet carried out a series of functions of the state .
 Parliament and the monarch have been making compromises in recent years . But they did so against the backdrop of ongoing practical compromises between Parliament and monarch .
 The House of Commons gradually emerged as an epicenter of political life . During the early decades of the eighteenth century, it emerged as a political center .
 Members of the House of Commons were elected by Britain’s narrow electoral franchise based on landed wealth . Unlike the Lords, all of its members were nobles, members of the Commons elected by the electoral franchise .
 Although still dominated by ‘gentle, or landed, interests, the number of merchants elected to the Commons increased . For families that had made fortunes in business, for families that made fortunes, they invested their money in land . The Commons was dominated by merchants .
 Wealthy MPs could easily control blocs of votes in their countries through patronage . Wealthy politicians control bloc of votes through patronage, says David Cameron .
 In 1776, only 5,700 men in Britain elected half of the members of the Commons, most of whose members were routinely reelected every seven years . Most of Britain's members of parliament were re-elected every 7 years .
 Only 3 boroughs did more than 4,000 men have the right to vote . In several others, fewer than 15 men could cast ballots in several others .
 Rotten boroughs ranged from the infamous ‘Old Sarum’ which had no inhabitants but two representatives in Commons, and another that had been under water for centuries, to those with several hundred voters .
 Pocket boroughs were in the pocket of the MP because his election was uncontested . His election was an uncontested election in the boroughs .
 Some of England’s growing industrial towns were not represented in Parliament . Some of the largest industrial towns in the country were left out of Parliament .
 Many urban elites no longer bought the idea that their interests were ‘virtually represented’ by MPs from districts represented in the House of Commons . Urban elites are unhappy with the idea they are “virtually represented” by MPs .
 Political discontent reflected alarm that the role of the House of Commons as the defender of the constitution against possible tyrannical abuse was compromised by institutionalized patronage and outright corruption .
 Whigs and Tories governed in reasonable harmony during the Walpole era . Whigges and Tories had governed during the Robert Walpole administration .
 Whigs came to believe ministers ought to be acceptable to Parliament as well as to the king . After Walpole, many Whigs believed that ministers should have been acceptable to parliament .
 Tories traditionally took the view that the prerogatives of king and Church had to be maintained at all costs . In contrast, Tories traditionally held the view of maintaining the monarch's prerogative .
 George III gave the impression he intended to rule without Parliament in 1760 . After coming to the throne, George III said he would rule without the Parliament .
 Pitt resigned when the king refused to declare war on Spain in 1761 during the Seven Years’ War . Pitt resigned as prime minister after the war broke out during the 1761-1761 conflict .
 Bute was unpopular choice because he was not an MP, had little political experience and even less influence . He did not want Britain to undertake hostilities against Spain . He was unpopular because of his lack of political experience .
 The king's appointment of his ‘dearest friend’ seemed to violate the unwritten agreement that the king act with Parliament’s consent . Whigs believed it was a breach of that agreement . The king acted with Parliament's consent .
 The press castigated Bute, and crowds in the street howled against him . Bute was forced to step down from his post in Scotland .
 Rumor insisted that he owed his controversial appointment to having been the lover of the king’s mother . The king's mother is believed to have been his lover .
 Bute’s appointment, raising the question of ministerial responsibility, divided Commons along ideological lines .
 George III turned against the Whig country gentlemen who no longer could be counted upon to support him on all matters . George III became a despot of Whigs .
 The king insisted on the monarchy’s independence and particularly on his right to choose whomever he wished as minister . King insisted that he had the right to appoint whoever he wished .
 MPs representing the interests of the “country gentlemen” began to use the term “party,” but without the trappings of formal organization that would come late in the next century . The term ‘party’ began to be used in the early 20th century
 Whigs were loyal to the throne, even if King George accused them of being otherwise . Although they traditionally upheld the rights of Parliament, Whigs remained loyal to King George . The Whigs, to be sure, remained loyal .
 The emerging notion of political parties was probably of more lasting significance than the political groupings themselves . While issues dividing Tories and Whigs remained the same as those that had characterized the Walpole period, or even the English Civil War .
 The term “party” had existed since the time of the Glorious Revolution of 1688 . It had the sense of a group of people sharing a belief on a specific matter of political controversy .
 It had been somewhat synonymous with ‘faction,’ which since the 1670s had the negative connotation of a cabal of individuals working for their own interests . The word 'faction' had been used to refer to a group of individuals .
 The Whigs and Tories were vague and uncertain during the reign of the first two Georges . With the exception of the Jacobite Tories, however, the differences between the two parties were vague .
 George Ill’s seeming determination to create a government above parties revived the solidarity of the old Whigs .
 The idea developed that a party of parliamentary opposition formed an essential part of the parliamentary system of representation . The party of opposition is a key component of the system of parliamentary representation .
 Political parties stood as the basis of representative government and therefore of political order, he said . Political parties were the basis for representative government, he added . He believed that political parties were responsible for representative politics .
 The concept of a loyal parliamentary opposition did not exist in France or anywhere else on the continent . This concept of loyalty to a loyal opposition was not existed in France, nor Europe .
 In many places, politics, dominated by family ties and outright patronage, went on as before . Nor, for that matter, did it exist in all constituencies in Britain .
 George III could count on about a third of the members of the Commons for unconditional support . George III was able to count on support from members of parliament because they held court-appointed posts .
 Unfailing voters for ‘court’ became increasingly known as Tories, particularly to the Whig opposition . Unsuccessful voters for 'court' were increasingly known to the Tories, especially to the opposition .
 Supporters of the government rejected the term, as they did all labels, but at the same time they lent credence to the concept by cohesively defending a patriarchal society based on the prerogatives of monarchy, aristocracy and the Anglican Church .
 In 1766, George III turned to Pitt, who was immensely popular, again to serve as prime minister . Pitt hoped to split the Whigs, because the ‘Great Commoner’ was alienated from aristocratic Whigs .
 Pitt lost support even among his political friends by accepting a peerage, becoming duke of Chatham . Pitt's decision to accept peerage saw him lose support among political friends .
 Vigorous debates among Whigs, principally between the imperious Pitt and the duke of Newcastle and his followers, however, did not diminish the emerging notion of ‘party” that most Whigs now accepted .
 For Whigs, the most significant issue remained the extent to which the king could act without the support of Parliament . Whigs were concerned about the extent of the king's power without Parliament's support .
 The Rise of British Nationalism was the English Civil War and Glorious Revolution . King and Parliament were united in quest for British commercial and international predominance .
 During the eighteenth century, a strong sense of nationalism developed in Great Britain . During the 17th century, the British state of British nationalism developed .
 This included pride in the nation’s high degree of freedom and reverence for Parliament . Parliament as the Protestant institution that had turned back the threat of Catholicism and prevented absolute rule .
 The fear of Catholicism, endemic in England since the Reformation, fired British nationalism . Fear of Catholicism has been endemic in the UK since the 16th century .
 Faced with the threat of French invasion during the Anglo-French wars, British patriots across the social spectrum embraced the British Isles as the chosen land of God .
 They boasted of Britain’s prosperity and social stability while belittling France and Spain, Catholic powers . But they also belittled France, Spain, and Spain as Catholic powers.
 Pitt turned his attention to expanding the colonies after accusing Walpole of indifference to British interests abroad . Pitt believed Hanoverian interests were dominating foreign policy .
 Horace Walpole, Robert Walpole’s youngest son, was among the few who had doubts about all of this . Horace was a novelist and the beneficiary of lucrative posts that left him plenty of time to write .
 The lure of commercial profit and empire helped define British nationalism . British nationalism was defined by the lure of success and empire .
 As we have seen, the financial community of investors in London closely followed not only the vicissitudes of the economy but the ups and downs of British warfare . As we've seen, we have also seen the financial .
 A good many financiers had, after all, loaned money to their state and therefore eagerly watched what was done with it . The state of New Jersey has been in a state of crisis in the past decade .
 Foreign and colonial trade often depended on naval protection, further linking their interests to the Union Jack, Great Britain .
 The state itself depended on expanding commercial activity for tax revenue . The state's economy relies heavily on commercial activity .
 Representatives of economic interest groups and lobbies made contacts in London financial community and government circles to put forward their views .
 New patriotic societies, some of them drawing ordinary people into the wave of nationalist enthusiasm, sprang up . Some of them drew ordinary people to join the nationalist movement .
 The generally harmonious relationship between the landed elite and the commercial community was a source of social and political stability and of rising British nationalism . The land elite and commercial community's harmonious relations were a source .
 Nobles and gentry benefited from the expansion of state activity, diversifying their investments with loans to the crown . Nobles, gentry and others invested in state activity .
 Better communications and the development of a national market aided the process of national integration in Britain . At the same time, improved communications and development of the national market helped the process .
 The British elite accepted a stronger state apparatus without complaining about infringements on their liberty . Their commitment to the nation also enabled the British elite, proud of their freedoms and their country’s more decentralized form of government, to accept the stronger state .
 They didn't feel the need for constitutional guarantees against arbitrary tyranny . Thus, they did not feel a need to defend themselves from arbitrary tyranny.
 The stronger state did not diminish the status of British landowners, and it in no way infringed on their personal freedoms within civil society, says the historian . It did not infringe on their individual freedoms, he says .
 Anglo-Irish, Scottish, and Welsh landowners became more integrated into a national British elite . The increasing intermarriage among these groups indicated .
 Many Scots, though hardly all, began to see themselves as British, just as fewer English people considered Scots or Welsh to be outsiders who were potentially disloyal to the crown . English people continued to hold views of the Catholic Irish .
 The British monarchy and its army and navy became increasingly revered and celebrated as a rallying point for the nation . The prerogatives of Parliament notwithstanding, the British monarchy was increasingly revered .
 In the 1760s and 1770s, movements for reform emerged in several countries . Challenges to established authority emerged in 1760-1770s .
 In a parallel struggle on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, the American colonists of Britain's thirteen colonies demanded “no taxation without representation,"" and then, when rebuffed, rebelled against British rule in the War of American Independence .
 Other movements for reform challenged what seemed to be unwarranted privileges, again most notably France .
 In every Western country, more information about political events in other states was available through newspapers and gazettes, as well as from merchants, travelers, and diplomats . In all Western countries, the information was available .
 In Britain and parts of Western Europe, political clubs reflected greater preoccupation with politics . Political clubs also reflected greater interest in politics .
 These reform movements, however indirectly, influenced each other, however .
 In the 1760s in Britain, ordinary people demanded electoral reform, and some even called for universal male suffrage .
 Reformers asked that constituencies be redrawn so that rapidly growing industrial regions in the north of England be appropriately represented in Parliament . London, which was grossly underrepresented, is underrepresented in Parliament, they said .
 Shouts for more liberties came from ordinary people without the right to vote . Moreover, shouts for more liberty came from people who didn't vote .
 John Wilkes was the son of a successful London malt distiller . He was an MP of modest means and a Protestant Dissenter .
 The king ordered “that Devil Wilkes, a trumpet of sedition,"" arrested for libel . Wilkes was arrested in 17th century for libel.
 The court freed Wilkes after a week in jail on the basis of parliamentary immunity . Wilkes was freed after the court freed him on the grounds of immunity .
 Wilkes boasted that his fate was tied to “that of the middling and inferior set of people” in Britain . Wilkes triumphantly boasted that he was a ‘middling and inferior set of people"" in Britain.
 Fearing prosecution for pornography, the government dug up a bawdy old poem he had written . Wilkes left for France in 1764 .
 Thousands of people demonstrated on his behalf . Upon his return four years later, he was arrested, tried, and convicted, and then freed . He was freed after thousands of people protested his release .
 Four times he was elected, and four times Parliament refused to seat him because of his previous conviction . Four times elected, he was refused seat by Parliament because of conviction .
 Cloaking himself in a patriot's garb, he became a rallying symbol for the rights of the unrepresented in a time of economic hardship, grain riots, and work stoppages .
 The phrase "Wilkes and Liberty" echoed in speeches, conversation, and song . The phrase ‘Wilkes’s and Liberty’ echoed in speech, conversation and song.
 The number 45—the libelous issue of the North Briton —became a rallying cry . The North Britishon is a British issue of libelous issues .
 Wilkes’s rather misshapen face appeared on posters, handbills, verses, cartoons, tea mugs, and dinner plates . Wilkes was a popular poet in the early 1900s .
 He was elected sheriff of London in 1771 and even lord mayor of London three years later . He was not allowed to occupy either position .
 More “respectable’s reformers now began to demand greater freedom of the press . More "respectable" reformers demanded a redefinition of libel laws to allow criticism of the government .
 They demanded that Parliament meet each year and that MPs be required to live in districts they represented . They also demanded that MPs live in their districts .
 Few Whigs were willing to go beyond insisting on the principle of ministerial responsibility . The Whigs insisted that ministers should be responsible for their decisions .
 Literary and ‘philosophical” societies, which had sprung up in most large towns, facilitated the emergence of an even wider political culture than that which had developed during the political crises of the seventeenth century .
 Inns and coffeehouses added special reading rooms to accommodate their clientele . Inns, coffeehouses, cafes and hotels added special rooms for their clients .
 London printing presses had increased from seventy-five in 1724 to about two hundred at the time of Wilkes’s first arrest . By 1760, the printing presses churned out eighty-nine newspapers .
 By 1790, there were fourteen daily London newspapers, and the number of provincial papers had multiplied by four times . The number of daily newspapers in London had increased by 4 times .
 Political pamphlets, handbills, and caricatures inundated the capital and the larger provincial towns . The city was inundated with political pamphlets and hand-bills .
 By the 1760s, artists had stopped omitting the names of the targets of their satirical wit . Artists no longer used to omit the names .
 Whig opponents and the extra-parliamentary radicals used newspapers, pamphlets, brochures, and handbills to argue its case before public opinion .
 During the 1760s, another challenge to the British crown was smoldering far across the Atlantic Ocean in North America . The American Revolutionaries were born in 1763 .
 The thirteen American colonies, many times the size of England, had become ever more difficult for the British government to administer . The 13 American colonies were many times larger than England .
 The colonies took in 20 percent of British exports and supplied 30 percent of its imports . The population of the colonies had grown by tenfold in just seventy years, from 250,000 in 1700 to 2. million in 1775 .
 Many were able to purchase land that would have been beyond their means at home . Many of the land purchases were purchased for less than their own means .
 Artisans and common laborers commanded relatively high wages because of the shortage of labor in the colonies . Artisans, even common laborers were able to earn relatively high salaries .
 The colonies had developed a sense of living in a British-American society with its own distinct culture . Over the decades in the eighteenth century, the residents of the colonies developed a distinct culture.
 The North American colonies had developed without the kind of centralized organization for economic exploitation and determination to conquer that had characterized the Spanish Empire . The colonies had no kind of central organization for exploitation .
 English settlement colonies had been founded in the quest for trade and economic opportunity, as well as religious freedom, as in the case of Massachusetts Puritans .
 Merchants, lawyers, and wealthy landowners, like George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, stood on top of the social hierarchy, led the colonists . The Virginians led the colony in 17th century .
 They resented the continued presence of the British army and the attempt of British officers to impose on colonial forces the same standards of discipline .
 American colonists believed that they had the right to resist unjust laws in the name of liberty . The American colonists were able to resist injustice in the face of unjust laws .
 The quest of George Grenville , who had succeeded Pitt in 1763 as prime minister, for supplementary revenue aggravated the strained relations between the colonists and the mother country .
 In 1765, Parliament passed the Stamp Act, which forced Americans to purchase stamps for virtually anything printed . Stamp Act was passed in 1765 .
 A year later, Benjamin Franklin of Philadelphia made the colonists’ case to the House of Commons . Benjamin Franklin made the case a year later in the Commons .
 He argued the act represented the unfair domination of England over another part of the empire . He argued that the act was unfair to England .
 The House of Commons repealed the Stamp Act, but the government then initiated other taxes . The Stamp Act was repealed by the British government in 2010 .
 Parliament proclaimed a Declaratory Act in 1766, which asserted its right to tax the colonies as it pleased . Furthermore, Parliament proclaimed the Declaration of Proclamation of the Act of 1766 .
 A year later, the Townshend Acts levied duties on colonial imports of paper, tea, and other products . A year after, colonial trade duties were imposed on colonial paper and tea imports .
 Some British Whigs began to identify themselves with the colonists, who took the name Whigs themselves . They claimed corruption was threatening Britain’s constitutional balance between monarchy and Parliament .
 The colonists’ claim that they were being taxed without having the right to representation played nicely into the hands of political radicals in Britain .
 American political pamphlets and brochures found an eager audience among British merchants, manufacturers, artisans, and others eager for representation in Parliament . The pamphlets were published in the early 1900s .
 The British government was at first divided and uncertain in the face of an upsurge of demonstrations at home and agitation in the colonies . The government was divided in the wake of the demonstrations at first .
 Popular protest quickly revealed the limits of the hold Britain had on its thirteen American colonies . Popular protest soon revealed the limit of the British hold on the colonies .
 In March 1770 in Boston, British soldiers fired on a crowd that was protesting the quartering of British troops in that city . The incident took place in Boston and Boston .
 That year, George III appointed Frederick Lord North as prime minister . George III was George III's first prime minister in the British Empire .
 North was an amiable, sensible man who got along well with the king . North was skilled at putting together political coalitions and was a brilliant debater in the Commons .
 North hoped to aid the East India Company by allowing the company to ship a surplus of tea to the colonies . Paul Revere’s depiction of the Boston Massacre depicted as the Boston massacre . The British government collected its tariff when the tea arrived in American ports .
 The move would reduce the price colonists paid for tea but would maintain the British government’s assertion that it could tax goods imported into the colonies . It would maintain that the government could .
 It would threaten the interests of American smuggling, a widespread money-making operation . It would also threaten the interest of American smugglers, such as smuggling, it says .
 On December 16, 1773, colonists dressed as Native Americans forced their way aboard British merchant ships docked in Boston . They dumped the tea cargo of tea into the harbor .
 In September 1774, representatives from the colonies met in the First Continental Congress .
 Benjamin Franklin drew a distinction between “uncorrupted new states,” by which he meant the colonies, and “corrupted old ones” one of which seemed to be waging war on liberty . Franklin drew the distinction between the colonies and old ones .
 In April 1775, colonial militia held its own against British troops searching for weapons at Concord and Lexington, Massachusetts, and then in the pitched battle at Bunker Hill near Boston .
 He helped convince delegates to the Second Continental Congress to adopt Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776 .
 It declared equality of all people, based on ‘inalienable rights,’ and asserted that the authority of government stems from the consent of the governed . It declared the equality of . all people based on . “inalienability rights” and asserted . that the
 It also stated that when governments violate the “unalienable rights” to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” of their people, they had the right to rebel . The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that the U.N. should
 The Continental Congress appointed George Washington to command its troops . George Washington was appointed to command the troops in 17th century .
 The British government hoped to recover the colonies at the lowest possible cost . Military campaigns were compromised by halfhearted and often inept leadership by the British commanders .
 The initial British policy of isolating and punishing the rebels quickly failed . The initial policy was to punish rebels, but it failed to work .
 There were too few British troops to fight a war on unfamiliar territory against an increasingly determined foe . Too few British forces were able to fight the war in unfamiliar territory .
 In 1776, Washington’s army managed to cross the Hudson River into New Jersey . Washington's army crossed the river in 1776 .
 Admiral Richard Howe tried to negotiate with the rebels at the end of 1776 . But the colonists refused to listen because they had no reason to negotiate .
 In contrast to British soldiers, the colonial army was virtually selfsufficient and broadly supported by the colonists . The colonial army is virtually self-sufficient .
 The most significant battles of the war were fought in the classic European style of confrontations, not as engagements between hit-and-run patriots and British regulars . Most significant battles were fought on the battlefields of Europe, not on the frontline .
 The brutality of the British soldiers in requisitioning goods and maintaining order in the territories they controlled was self-defeating . The brutality in the British troops in the UK was self defeating, writes historian John Defterios .
 During the war more than 60,000 American loyalists left the United States . Many resettled in distant reaches of the British Empire, including Canada, the Caribbean, and Africa .
 France signed an alliance with the American rebels in February 1778, agreeing to provide substantial loans in gold . France signed a treaty with the U.S. rebels in 1778 .
 The French monarchy realized that favorable commercial treaties with the independent United States might more than compensate for having lost all rights to territory east of the Mississippi River in 1763 . In 1763, the French monarchy decided to trade with the United States .
 In 1779, Spain joined the war on the American side, hoping to recapture Gibraltar and the island of Minorca . Spain also joined the fight on the U.S. side .
 Britain confronted the refusal of Russia, Sweden, Prussia, Portugal, and Denmark to curtail trade with the rebellious U.S. Americans .
 Britain's naval advantage, the basis of its strength in modern times, had been eroded . Its naval advantage had been eroding, and its naval advantage was eroded .
 Despite swelling the army to 190,000 men, campaigns on land went badly . Campaigns on land failed to impress the Germans .
 Lord Cornwallis surrendered his outnumbered army at Yorktown, Virginia, on October 19, 1781, to a combined force of U.S. and French troops . Cornwallis' outnumbered army was defeated by combined forces of American and French forces .
 Britain officially recognized the independence of the American colonies by signing the Treaty of Versailles in 1783 . The treaty was signed by the French-American colonies .
 Having lost its richest colony, Great Britain did not want to lose any others . Great Britain wanted to avoid losing any of its colonies .
 In 1774, Parliament passed the Quebec Act, in an effort to prevent tensions between the British Anglican conquerors and the Catholic population of Quebec from boiling over .
 The Test Act, which required all officials to take communion in the Anglican Church, was abolished in Quebec . The Catholic Church was given the status of an established church . The test Act was abolished, and the Catholic Church became a church .
 The British government also strengthened its control over its other colonies .
 The India Act created a board responsible to Parliament to which the East India Company had to report . The board was created by the India Act and was responsible to the Parliament to report the company .
 Another parliamentary act in 1791 created more centralized administration in Canada . Governor-general exercising far more authority than two colonial assemblies elected by restricted suffrage .
 James Cook sailed around New Zealand and along the eastern coast of Australia in 1770, claiming half of the continent for Britain . Cook claimed half of Australia for Britain in the 1770 .
 He was killed by indigenous people upon arriving in Hawaii . He showed the dangers of venturing into unfamiliar waters .
 In 1788 the African Institution was established in London to encourage the exploration of Australia . Only some coastal regions of which were known were known .
 At the same time, British Evangelicals imagined the conversion of the peoples with whom commerce and empire brought the British into contact . At the time, the British were trying to convert the people they met with .
 Mercantilism’s hold on the economic thinking of states disappeared forever . The U.S. State of the Union was founded in 1883 . It was the first state to impose a state of its own trade policy .
 The advent to power in 1784 of William Pitt the Younger restored political stability in Britain . In 1784, the British government was in full control of the country .
 The next year, Pitt introduced a wide-ranging bill for political reform . Pitt introduced the bill in 1996 .
 It proposed to reduce the minimum tax required for the electoral franchise . It also proposed to abolish thirty-six rotten boroughs, awarding their representation .
 Opposition among the country gentlemen, as well as that of the king himself, led to the bill’s defeat . The bill was defeated by the king in a bid to keep the bill passed .
 Pitt did manage to eliminate useless offices that had become sinecures, introduce more accurate accounting methods into government, and facilitated the collection of excise taxes . Pitt also introduced accurate accounting and efficient tax collection methods .
 Britain emerged from turbulent decades of the 1760s and 1770s with its constitutional monarchy strengthened . Despite the personal failings of George III, the British monarchy survived . George III's personal failings led to his downfall as a British monarch .
 Two interrelated struggles in the early 1770s challenged the nature of absolute rule . The Parlements and the French Monarchy in France were the subject of the French Revolution .
 The first was against privileges held by nobles and other corporate groups . The second was against the idea of nobles being nobles, other groups .
 The second opposed royal policies and pretensions that seemed to verge on despotism . The first opposed royal pretensions . The second opposing royal policies .
 In France, reformers seeking to limit royal authority had a daunting task because of the absolute nature of monarchical rule . Reformers in France had to limit the absolute power of the monarchy .
 The kings of France nonetheless depended on the support of the parlements . The king of France had to rely on the help of his parlements in order to keep his power .
 Law courts were made up primarily of nobles, seated in Paris and in twelve provinces . These law courts were primarily made up of nobles and sat in Paris .
 Their principal function was to give royal edicts the force of law by registering them . The principal function of the edicts was to register them and give them the power of law .
 By refusing to register them, the parlements could impede the functioning of the absolute state . The parlements are a key part of the state's power .
 When the king’s edicts had to do with increased or new taxation, political opposition to royal policies sometimes emerged in the parlements . The king's edicts were often followed by political opposition .
 The concept of a ‘public’ emerged, to which the monarch was in some sense considered responsible . Before which layers of privilege in French society no longer seemed to some acceptable .
 The crises that embroiled the king and the parlements from the 1750s to the 1780s helped shift public opinion . The parlements represented the rights of the ‘nation,” threatened by a monarchy that seemed to be ruling in despotic way .
 The issue of Jansenism set the parlements against royal absolutism by raising the constitutional issue of the right of the monarch to circumscribe the monarch’s traditional prerogatives . The issue was raised by the Parlements against the monarch .
 The pope had condemned Jansenism in 1713 with the papal bull Unigenitus y which Louis XV supported . Louis XV had supported the pope's condemnation of Jansenistism .
 Jansenists, with a considerable following in Paris, found support within some of the parlements . They identified with Jansenist resistance against what they considered the papacy’s undue interference in French affairs .
 The period of conflict between the parlements and the crown really began in 1749 . The conflict began in the 1749-1750 period between the two parlements .
 The controller-general attempted to make the vingtieme tax permanent . The tax applies to both nobles and commoners, drawing heated opposition from the parlements .
 The Church again sought, without success, to force the French clergy to accept the papal bull Unigenitus . And the Church again tried to force . without success .
 Many bishops threatened that sacraments would be refused to laymen who did not have a certificate signed by a priest attesting that the person had made his or her confession to a priest who had accepted the papal bull . Many bishops also threatened that laymen would not be allowed to
 The pope tried to defuse the crisis by banning these certificates . Seven years later, the pope banned the certificates .
 Jansenist magistrates convinced colleagues that French acceptance of the papal edict amounted to an abandonment of French sovereignty over the temporal affairs of the Church . Many parlements were manipulated by a handful of Jansenists magistrates and lawyers .
 The king made clear that he considered the parlements nothing more than rubber stamps, a means of promulgating his will . The king, refusing to hear the . parlements’ grievances, made clear he considered . the parlement nothing more . than rubber stamping his will, he
 When the Jesuit order continued to crusade against Jansenism, the Parlement of Paris ordered Jesuit schools closed in 1761, citing the fact that members of the order took a vow of obedience to the pope .
 The successive crises over Jansenism may have weakened the authority of the French monarchy . The Parlement of Paris, and several provincial parlements as well, may have defended constitutional liberties and the independence of the Gallican Church .
 The crisis over Jansenism also eroded the prestige of the absolute monarchy . By weakening the authority of the Catholic Church in France, the crisis weakened the authority .
 The self-proclaimed role of magistrates as representatives of public opinion was a legacy of the Jansenist crisis . But magistrates were also seen as protecting the sovereign political will of the nation against abuses of power .
 The layers of economic privilege in France had proliferated with the extension of state power, as each monarch sought revenues with increased desperation . France's economic privilege has proliferated throughout the decades .
 Even critics who vociferously challenged monopolies did not intend to end privileges per se . Despite increasing calls for reform, even critics did not want to end privilege per se, they say .
 Many of them wanted a share of the privileges and wanted to eliminate ‘unjust” monopolies that seemed to benefit others unfairly . Many of the protesters wanted to end the ‘just’ monopolies’
 Wealthy commoners sought the kind of privileges nobles enjoyed, including exemption from many kinds of taxation . Wealthy were enriched by the economic changes, and sought the same privileges as nobles .
 The issue of taxation would mobilize some of the parlements against the monarchy . It raised questions about the layers of privilege within the French state and about the limits of absolute authority . Thus, the issue of tax on the monarchy would mobilize .
 In 1771, Chancellor Rene-Nicolas de Maupeou provoked the parlements by attempting to make the vingtieme tax permanent .
 Many nobles feared that general tax increases might lead to peasant uprisings, in which nobles stood to lose the most .
 He created new docile law courts that would not resist royal authority . He then created new courts staffed by magistrates who did not own their offices . The new courts would be more docile than those of the previous courts .
 Both sides in the conflict between the parlements and Chancellor Maupeou appealed to public opinion . Both sides of the conflict have appealed to the public .
 Lawyers called for judicial reform, religious toleration, and the end to the abuse of privilege . Lawyers were influenced by the ideas of the Enlightenment .
 When the monarchy tried to silence the lawyers, the latter turned courtrooms into forums for political opposition . The lawyers' role was a key part of the monarchy's attempt to silence them .
 Lawyers explored notions of national sovereignty while putting forward the case of the parlements against the crown . Lawyers explore notions of sovereignty .
 As the idea of the nation gradually entered political discourse, the possibility emerged that when the interests of the monarchy and the nation clashed, popular allegiance could ultimately pass exclusively to the nation . The idea of a nation gradually became political discourse .
 Some degree of popular identification with parlements as defenders of the nation against despotism would not be effaced . Parlements are seen as defenders, not as despotists, as defenders .
 The Maupeou “coup” lasted only three and a half years, but it had far-reaching effects on the nature of the opposition to the monarchy . It was only a three-and-a-half years, and it had an impact on the future of
 The Estates-General had not been convoked since 1614 . The Parlements were not powerful enough to protect ‘the nation’ against royal despotism .
 Rumors had him obediently following the orders of his favorite mistress . He was held to be lazy and indifferent, and rumor had him following orders of mistress .
 France had lost Canada and several Caribbean islands to Britain . France had also lost several Canadian and Caribbean islands .
 This loss of prestige, as well as income, increased the number of the king’s critics . This loss . increased the . number of critics, including the king .
 The structures of absolute rule seemed inadequate to the task of managing and paying for the cumbersome French state, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . Sarkozy's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Following demonstrations and a spate of publications in support of the parlements, the twenty-year-old Louis XVI dismissed Maupeou and reinstated the parlement . Following demonstrations, the 20,000-strong army of Frenchmen was reinstated .
 Public opinion seems to have helped turn back what was popularly conceived as a despotic assault on restraints on absolute rule . Public opinion seemed to have turned back what seemed to be an assault of despotic .
 His goal was to cut away some of the web of privileges, thus making the monarchy more efficient . He wanted to make it easier for the monarchy to be efficient .
 Turgot convinced the young king to issue royal edicts, despite the opposition of the Parlement of Paris . The young king's edicts were issued despite opposition from the Paris Parlement .
 These ended noble and clerical tax exemptions, abolished guilds, freed the internal commerce of grain, and exempted peasants from having to work a certain number of days each year repairing roads . The reforms were introduced in 17th century .
 Economic liberalization would, he hoped, increase agricultural production and manufacturing, thereby augmenting tax revenue, he said . Economic liberalisation would increase production, he added .
 Nobles, with some significant exceptions, opposed the proposed financial reforms . Nobles—with some significant exception, stood against the proposed changes .
 The parlements, still smoldering over their treatment by Maupeou and Louis XV several years earlier, refused to register—and thereby give the status of law to—the reforms of Turgot, who had supported the reforms of Maupeo . The parlement refused to
 Ordinary people rose up in protest, blaming the freeing of the grain trade for the higher prices of flour and bread in a period of dearth . The free trade of grain has been blamed for the rise in prices .
 Grain riots swept across the country during the spring “flour war’’ of 1775 . Grain riots, in which women played the leading roles, swept around the country .
 Lawyers once again insisted on the difference between absolute and despotic rule . Lawyers also insisted that the difference was between despotic and absolute rule .
 The king ended the most significant reform effort on the continent by dismissing Turgot in 1776 . King ended the reform effort by dismissing the French revolutionary leader .
 This helped shift power within the nobility from the embittered “nobles of the sword’’ to ‘nobles . of the robe,’� ennobled through the purchase of office or title . The move was made to shift power from “
 The latter had a different way of looking at the world, even as they embraced aristocratic privilege . The former British Prime Minister's wife was assassinated in 1968 .
 The more recently ennobled families remained outsiders, their titles the result of worldly achievements, thus undercutting the essence of noble status passed down by heredity .
 In the meantime, the French monarchy slid into an even deeper financial crisis . The French monarchy is in a deep financial crisis.
 In other cases, movements for reform came from below . Other Movements for Reform came from within .
 Geneva native-born artisans during 1765-1768 demanded equality with the citizens possessing political rights . The Swiss Republic of Geneva was founded in 1768 .
 Genevans tried to placate them with reductions in their taxes . They were rebuffed by wealthy Genevians, who tried to pay them back .
 An uprising in 1782 unseated the ruling oligarchy before the intervention of France, Sardinia, and the Swiss canton of Bern put an end to it . France and Sardinia intervened to end the uprising .
 In 1761, an uprising on the Mediterranean island of Corsica in the name of “fatherland and liberty’’ ended rule by the northern Italian port city of Genoa . The uprising in 1761 ended Genoa rule .
 Greeks, with Russian assistance, rose up against Turkish domination in 1770 . In 1770, the Greeks rose up with Russian help to overthrow the Turks .
 Russia was eager to enter the world of Mediterranean politics because it desired ultimately to conquer Constantinople . Russia wanted to conquer the city of Constantinople in order to conquer it .
 Catherine the Great's accession in 1762 ended a long succession crisis, palace plots, and assassinations, bringing stability to the Russian Empire . The accession of the Russian Empress ended a succession crisis and palace plots . Catherine's reign brought stability to Russia and the Empire .
 She sent an army and a small fleet in the hope that Greek success might encourage other peoples to rise up against Ottoman rule . She sent army and small fleet .
 Turkish troops crushed the revolt, but the Greek movement for independence helped ignite Panhellenism . The special place of classical Greece in the development of Western civilization, classical Greece, was crucial to the revolution in Greece .
 In part, it was the inspiration of Johann Struensee, a German doctor, who convinced King Christian VII to undertake reforms to strengthen the state economically so that, with Russian support, Sweden’s residual Baltic ambitions could be thwarted .
 The king abolished censorship and the death penalty for thieves, extended religious toleration, and promised to undertake more agricultural reforms in the interests of creating a free peasantry .
 The king’s widowed mother and some nobles conspired against the reforms . But the king's widow and some of his relatives conspired with the reforms, he says .
 Struensee was tried and convicted of living “without religion or morality” and was executed in 1772 . He was convicted of, among other things, living ‘without religion and morality’
 A decade later, Struensee's reforms became part of a program for the future, a sign of the times . The reforms were part of the reform program for a decade, but a decade later they were a major problem .
 Political struggles in the Dutch Republic were followed by the emergence of extraparliamentary demands by ordinary people for political reform . The struggles between Whigs and the crown in Britain were similar to those in the Netherlands .
 The regents declared war on Britain in 1780 in the hope of weakening their commercial rival . They declared war against the British in the 1780s in a bid to weaken their commercial rivals .
 In 1785, in the midst of political crisis, the Dutch Republic allied with France . As the war dragged on, they also sought to undercut the monarchical pretensions of William V .
 The immediate goal was to counter the Austrian plan to reopen the Scheldt River and restore Antwerp to some of its former commercial glory, which would have undercut Amsterdam’s prosperity .
 The Estates demanded more democratic representation in the Estates . Influenced by the success of the American revolutionaries, they demanded representation .
 Prussian King Frederick William II sent an army to Amsterdam in 1787, ending the challenge to William V’s authority .
 France seemed on the verge of offering the Patriots assistance, but distracted by a mounting political crisis, it backed down against the opposition of Prussia and Britain, powers that supported William V . The balance of power had once again been preserved .
 Dutch Patriot refugees poured into the Austrian Southern Netherlands and France . The Dutch Patriot Refugees poured into Austria, France and Austria .
 Powerful nobles opposed to Austrian King Joseph II’s enlightened reforms threatened their privileges . Austrian troops drove out Austrian troops in 1789 .
 In the Austrian Netherlands, too, a movement for democratic reform emerged, calling for the transformation of the Estates into a representative assembly . The Austrian Netherlands has a history of democratic reform .
 The Dutch Patriots invaded the Southern Netherlands in October 1789, driving away the Austrians . The invasion was the first of its kind in the Netherlands since 1789 .
 Austrian rule appealed to the nobles even less than did Austrian rule . But a popular movement appealed less to the noble even less to Austrian rule.
 The nobles wrested control of the short-lived state from the urban-based reformers . Backed by the clergy and with the tacit support of most peasants, the clergy .
 The structure of international power in eighteenth-century Europe was not fundamentally changed by the quest for reform during the 1760s and 1770s . The Ottoman Empire and Poland were the most powerful countries in Europe .
 Ottoman Empire began to decline slowly but surely as its territories in the Balkans and Caucasus were eaten away by Austria and Russia . The Ottoman Empire, its power overextended and lacking a centralized structure of government, began to decay slowly .
 Russia, Prussia, and Austria divided up the state in three partitions in 1772, 1793, and 1795 .
 Ottoman Turkish sultans ruled indirectly, governing through Islamic or village officials . The sultan ruled indirectly through Islamic officials .
 Direct rule may have hastened the decline of Ottoman absolutism . The Sultan's rule of indirect rule may also hasten the decline .
 Like the Spanish Empire at its peak, the Ottoman domains were so extensive that they defied effective control . The Ottomans were so much in control that they defy effective control of their domains .
 Insurrections, including some by the janissaries, challenged the authority of the sultans . The once-loyal court militia now' increasingly subject to the influence of local elites . The sultan government in Constantinople became known as the Porte .
 Imperial officials, Muslim and Christian Orthodox alike, became notoriously corrupt . Greek-educated Phanariots, who served the sultans by collecting taxes, made their families very wealthy .
 As the system of indirect rule declined in effectiveness, some local Christian and Muslim leaders commanded their own military forces, virtually independent of the sultan’s authority in Constantinople .
 This was precisely the same phenomenon that the absolute monarchs of France, Prussia, Russia, and Austria had overcome . The absolute monarch was overcome by this phenomenon, the historian says .
 The Turkish sultans ruled indirectly over a vast network of domains, a tactic that may have hastened the decline of the Ottoman absolutism . Empire were free. empire were free .
 Turkish authority virtually collapsed in mountainous Montenegro and Bosnia, where the Turks battled Habsburg and Venetian forces . The Turks fought against Habsberg and the Venetians in Bosnia and Montenegro .
 Stop-gap measures, such as the debasement of the currency, failed to provide sufficient revenue . The country's economy has been hit by a slump in recent years .
 Incapable sultans unwilling or unable to impose reforms further weakened the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was plagued by a series of impenarian sultants who failed to reform .
 As boys they lived in virtual isolation in a world of uncertainty among court eunuchs and palace intrigue . As boys, the boys lived in a virtual isolation among court eunuchs .
 Peter the Great of Russia undertook Western military reforms, but the sultans did not . Peter the Sultans of Russia did not, and did not join the Western military reform .
 The Turkish economy, army, and navy could not keep pace with the Western powers . The country's military, army and navy were unable to compete with the world's top powers .
 Turkish cavalrymen, with curved swords and magnificent horses, fell before Western artillery . The Turkish cavalryman fell before the Westerners, and their horses .
 The advice of officials who had been sent to Vienna and Paris to study methods of state went unheeded in Constantinople . The advice was not heard by officials in the city .
 Long wars fought against Persia in the east made it more difficult to repress disturbances in the Balkans . The Balkans was a major source of instability in the Middle Ages .
 In some parts of the empire, a system of land inheritance replaced the old system, and new landowners began to force peasants into serfdom .
 Ottomans and the scholar class showed little interest in Western ideas or technology . As in the cases of China and Japan, Japan, showed little enthusiasm for Western ideas and technology . In the case of Japan and China, Japan showed little appetite for Western technology .
 The single printing press in the empire, which dated only from the 1720s, was shut down sixty years later . No newspaper was published until 1828, and that in Cairo, not Istanbul, not Cairo .
 The classical literary tradition, as in China and Japan, continued to hold sway .
 Ottoman power in Europe began when the Turks were turned back at the gates of Vienna in 1683 . The long decline of Ottoman power began with the fall of Ottoman rule in Europe in 1783 .
 Austria's subsequent conquest of Hungary and Transylvania was confirmed by the Treaty of Carlowitz in 1699 . Austria’s subsequent conquests were confirmed by a treaty of 1699 in Carlowitz, Austria .
 The Turks continued to control the Black Sea by virtue of holding Constantinople and the straits . However, the Turks still had control of the sea . The Turks still controlled the sea by holding Constantinople, the strait and the city of Constantinople .
 Major Ottoman defeats left the way open for continued Russian expansion . Ottoman defeat of the Ottoman Empire in 18th century left major gaps in Russia .
 Ottomans took advantage of inter-European wars to maintain their peripheral territories . In the 1760s this began to change, with the rise of the Sultanateate .
 In 1774, following the destruction of the Turkish fleet in the Black Sea, the Ottoman Turks granted Russia the right to oversee Turkish authority in the Danubian principalities and to serve as the official protector of Christians living within its empire .
 In Morocco, Algiers, Tripoli, and Tunis, which remained nominally part of the Ottoman Empire, local dynasties set up shop . In the meantime, in Morocco and Libya, the Ottomans had established their own dynastships .
 Ottoman Empire remained a power capable of effectively defending its interests well into the nineteenth century . Yet we should not exaggerate the decline of the Ottoman Empire, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Sejm, which met every two years but which the king could convene in an emergency, elected the king for life . It retained the right to pass laws, approve taxes, and ratify treaties .
 The king could not travel out of the country without the approval of the Sejm. The king was not allowed to travel outside the country . The king had to be accompanied by a passport to travel abroad .
 The ‘liberum veto’ accentuated the influence of the wealthiest nobles, who sometimes combined forces to block legislation . Moreover, the “liberum . veto” accentuates the . influence of wealthy . nobles .
 The rise of even more powerful aristocrats who owned vast estates exacerbated the impact of the ‘liberum veto’ within the Sejm . Poland's rise of aristocrats in power has prevented reforms from being strengthened .
 During the first decades of the eighteenth century, the kingdom became increasingly dependent on Russia . The kingdom's population was reduced by wars and bubonic plague to only 6 million people .
 The War of Polish Succession (17331735) began when Russia attempted to impose its candidate on the Polish throne over the opposition of the Polish nobles . Russia's candidate was chosen by the Polish nobility as the candidate for the throne . The Polish nobles opposed the decision .
 Polish leader hopes to advance manufacturing in Poland and looked to Britain as a model . Sensing the necessity of reform, he hoped to advance Polish manufacturing .
 He tried to end the liberum veto and to curtail the right of seigneurial courts to impose death sentences . He also tried to limit the right to impose a death sentence .
 Only by such measures, Poland could escape poverty and backwardness, he believed . Only such measures could be made to help Poland escape poverty, he said .
 Some of the more powerful Polish nobles, who resented Russian influence, now opposed Stanislas and his reforms . But some of them resented Russia's influence .
 They hoped that the French monarch or the Ottoman sultan might intervene on their behalf . They hoped they hoped that they might be able to get the help of the French king .
 Catherine feared Stanislas’s reforms might lead to a stronger, less subservient neighbor . Catherine, like the Prussian king, feared the reforms might end up leading to a weaker neighbor .
 Since 1764, Russia and Prussia had worked against an expansion of French influence in the Baltic, while preventing Poland from reviving its fortunes . Poland was defeated by the French in the 17th century .
 Catherine Catherine demanded that all non-Catholics be granted toleration in Poland . Catherine, in the interest of the Orthodox Church, demanded that the Poles be given toleration .
 When Polish nobles formed an anti-Russian and anti-Orthodox confederation, Catherine sent troops into Poland . Catherine also sent troops to Poland to protect her from Russian enemies .
 Ukrainian peasants took advantage of the chaos to rise up against their Polish lords .
 Catherine achieved Russia’s dream since Peter the Great by reaching the Black Sea, annexing several territories at Turkish expense . Catherine annexed Wallachia and achieved Russia's dream by reaching Black Sea . Catherine was the first woman to do so in the region .
 In 1783, the Crimean peninsula, too, became part of the Russian Empire . The Crimean peninsula was the first to become part of Russia .
 Austria and Prussia demanded territorial compensation from Russia . Alarmed by the expansion of the Russian Empire, Austria and Germany demanded compensation . The Empire was expanding in Russia's first century . Austria, Prussia and Austria were demanding territorial compensation .
 Catherine suggested that the three powers might help themselves to parts of Poland . Catherine suggested the three countries might help each other to help themselves .
 Maria Theresa of Austria ‘wept and then took her share’ of Galicia, Galicia . Galicia was a province between Russia and Austria . Maria Theresa ‘took her share,” the queen said .
 Prussia absorbed West Prussia, which had formed a corridor separating East Prussia from the rest of the kingdom . Prussia had been separated from the East Prussian kingdom .
 Poland is a constitutional monarchy, with the king naming ministers but with the parliament and Poland’s major towns retaining privileges . Reflecting the influence of the French Revolution, Poland became a monarchy .
 Poland’s days were numbered as an independent state, particularly given the fact that its old protector, France, was in the throes of revolution and had lost influence in East Central Europe . But Poland was not as independent as it had been in the past . Poland's days were
 Poles rose up in 1792 against Russian authority in the part of Poland that had been absorbed by Russia twenty years earlier . Russian troops intervened in the 1792 Polish uprising against Polish authority .
 The liberal constitution was backed by Polish nobles who opposed the liberal constitution . They were backed by . Polish nobles . They opposed the . liberal constitution.
 The Constitution of 1791, perhaps the most progressive constitution of the century, was torn to shreds . The Constitution was torn down in 1791 by the British Revolution .
 Russia’s new gains drew its interests farther into Central Europe, and it now shared a border with the Habsburg monarchy . The gains drew Russia's interests farther .
 In the lands acquired by Prussia, serfs gained some protection against abuses by landlords . In the case of lands absorbed into the Habsburg Empire, the Polish secondary-school system was ended, imposing the German language .
 Most widespread riots of the 1780s were the anti-Catholic Gordon riots . Even in Britain, after a contentious decade marked by demonstrations for political reform, the riots were the most widespread .
 In France, calls for reform were less an attack on the nobles, per se, than on privilege . Calls for reform in France were less than a attack on privilege, but on privilege in France .
 The institutions of the Old Regime in continental Europe demonstrated not only resiliency, but also some capacity to undertake reform . The institutions in Europe demonstrated resiliability, and some capacity for reform, the author says .
 Denunciations in France against privilege, shaped in part by Enlightenment thought, would be revived in 1780s .
 France entered a serious political crisis when critics of the monarchy accused the king of ruling despotically . Critics attacked layers of economic and social privilege that seemed to constrain effective government .
 The French Revolution of 1789 proclaimed the principle of the sovereignty of the nation . Demands for sweeping reform led to the French Revolution in 1789 .
 The roots of revolution extend back to the second half of the seventeenth century, an era of unparalleled absolute monarchical authority . It was a period of hitherto unparalleled absolute monarchy .
 The monarchs of France, Russia, Prussia, Austria, Spain, and Sweden had reinforced their authority to the extent that they stood clearly above any internal challenge to their power .
 Compliant nobles served as junior partners in absolutism, acknowledging the ruler’s absolute power to proclaim laws, assess taxes, and raise armies, in exchange for royal recognition of their standing and protection against popular revolts .
 The governments of Great Britain and the Dutch United Provinces stood in sharp contrast to absolute states . The Dutch and British governments were absolute states in the 1930s .
 In the English Civil War in the 1640s, Parliament successfully turned aside the possibility of absolute monarchy in England, leading to the execution of King Charles II . After some years of turmoil by the Restoration of constitutional monarchy, constitutional monarchy was established .
 In the Netherlands, the Dutch revolt against absolutist Spain led to the establishment of the Dutch Republic . The revolt in the Netherlands ended in the death of the Spanish Republic .
 Theory of popular sovereignty developed as alternative to absolute rule but also as an extension of constitutional rule . Popular sovereignty developed not only as an alternative to the absolute rule, but as a constitutional extension .
 In 1789, ordinary people helped bring about the downfall of absolute rule and then, three years later, the monarchy itself . The theory of popular sovereignty became reality in France .
 True popular sovereignty was a short-lived experiment, however, as counter-revolution and foreign intervention led to the dramatic centralization of state authority .
 Napoleon claimed that he was the heir of the French Revolution . Napoleon was an admirer of the Enlightenment, claiming he was heir to the revolution .
 Napoleon saw himself as a savior who carried “liberty, equality, and fraternity” abroad . But his conquest of much of Europe before his final defeat left a mixed legacy for the future . Napoleon's final defeat in France left him a legacy for future .
 More than a fifth of all the significant battles that took place in Europe from 1490 to 1815 occurred between the coming of the French Revolution and Napoleon’s final defeat in 1815 .
 Congress of Vienna created the Concert of Europe, the international basis of Restoration Europe, in the hope of preventing further liberal and nationalist insurrections in Europe . Napoleon’s defeat in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo was the impetus for the Concert .
 Liberal and nationalist movements could not so easily be swept away . But liberal and nationalist parties could not be so easily swept away from each other .
 “liberty” became the watchword for more and more people, particularly among the middle classes, in the 1980s . “Liberty’s” is now the focus of economic, political, and cultural life in the United States .
 Liberal movements were in many places closely tied to the emergence of nationalism . The belief in the primacy of nationality as a source of allegiance and sovereignty is key to national sovereignty .
 During the first half of the nineteenth century, the Industrial Revolution slowly but surely transformed the way many Europeans lived . In the meantime, the industrial revolution in Europe was the beginning of the modern world .
 Dramatic improvements in transportation, notably the development of the railroad but also road improvements, expanded the market for manufactured and other goods . Dramatic improvement in transportation led to increased demand for goods .
 Rising agricultural production, increasingly commercialized in Western Europe, fed a larger population . Rising production of agricultural products fed a growing population .
 Contemporaries, particularly in Western Europe, sensed profound economic, social, political, and cultural changes in the 1930s and '60s . Contemoraries sensed profound changes in Europe and the United States .
 A virtual prisoner in the Tuileries Palace by the first months of the year, he had secretly negotiated for possible intervention on his behalf by the Austrian king and other European monarchs . He was a virtual prisoner by the early months of this year .
 The royal family furtively left the Tuileries Palace late at night on June 20, 1791, disguised as the family and entourage of a Russian baroness riding in a large black coach with yellow trim .
 The postmaster recognized the king, whose image he had seen on a coin, from a coin . But in an eastern town, the postmaster recognizes the king's image .
 He rode rapidly to the town of Varennes, where the National Guard prevented the king’s coach from going on . The king's coach was stopped by the guard of the town .
 Three representatives of the National Assembly brought the royal family back to Paris . The royal family was brought to Paris by the French National Assembly .
 National guardsmen stood by the roadside with their rifles upside down, a sign of contempt or mourning . Near the capital, the crowds became threatening, and national guardsmen were threatening . The crowds were threatening near the capital and protesters were angry .
 The French Revolution mounted the first effective challenge to monarchical absolutism on behalf of popular sovereignty . The revolution was the first attempt to challenge absolutsism in France . It was the French Revolution's first attempt at freedom of expression .
 The creation of a republican government in France and the diffusion of republican ideals in other European countries influenced the evolution of European political life long after the Revolution ended . France's republican government was created in the wake of the Revolution .
 They occupied the attention of much of France during the revolutionary decade of 1789-1799 . They occupied much of the attention during that period .
 The political violence of that decade would also be a legacy for the future, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The legacy of the decade will be in the U.S.
 The revolutionaries sought to make the French state more centralized and efficient, as well as more just . The revolutionaries wanted the state to be more efficient and more just.
 Napoleon Bonaparte continued this process after his ascent to power in 1799 . Some historians consider him to be the heir to the Revolution and others believe he is its betrayer . Napoleon continued the process after he was elected to power .
 The revolutionaries enthusiastically proclaimed principles they held to be universal . They proclaimed principles that were universal .
 Among these were the sovereignty of the nation and the rights and duties of citizenship . Among them were the rights to the nation, and the duties of the citizen .
 The revolutionaries celebrated the fact that the Revolution had occurred in France . The revolution was celebrated by the French Revolution .
 Wars intended to free European peoples from monarchical and noble domination turned into wars of French conquest . French conquests of Europe turned into French conquest of Europe .
 The revolutionary wars, pitting France against the other great powers, contributed to the emergence or extension of nationalism in other countries as well . Great Britain, where sense of being British flourished in response to the French threat, to central and southern Europe, where some educated Germans and Italians began to
 Difficult economic conditions in the preceding two decades, combined with the growing popularity of a discourse that stressed freedom in the face of entrenched economic and social privileges, made some sort of change seem possible, perhaps even likely . Yet difficult economic conditions combined with a growing popularity with growing popularity .
 When a financial crisis occurred in the 1780s and the king was forced to call the Estates-General, the stage was set for the confrontation that would culminate in the French Revolution . The Estates General was created by the French king in 1783 .
 The increasing prevalence of the language of the Enlightenment, stressing equality before the law and differentiating between absolute and despotic rule, placed the monarchy and its government under the closer scrutiny of public opinion . Long-term Causes of the French Revolution include the rise of the monarchy .
 Louis XV exiled the Parlement of Paris in 1771 and tried to establish new law courts that were likely to be more subservient than the parlements . Opponents accused Louis XV of acting despotically .
 Opponents believed that the king was trying to subvert long-accepted privileges . Opponents thought that he was attempting to change the law by subverting privileges .
 Following Louis XV s death in 1774, the young Louis XVI reinstated the parlements . The parlements retained their right to register royal edicts . Following Louis XVI s death, they retained their rights to register edicts, which were registered .
 Enlightenment thought led to political action after complaints about noble privileges, guild monopolies, and corrupt royal officials .
 The decree abolishing the guilds, among other decrees, generated immediate hostility from nobles, the Parlement of Paris, and from ordinary people . The freeing of the grain trade had brought higher prices in hard times in 1775 .
 France remains a state of overlapping layers of privileges, rights, traditions, and jurisdictions . France remained a state that remained in an overlapping layer of privilege, rights and traditions .
 Nobles and professional groups such as guilds and tax farmers contested any plan to eliminate privileges . Tax farmers could pocket some of the taxes they collected from their offices .
 Social lines of demarcation between nobles and commoners had become less fixed over the course of the eighteenth century . At the same time, the social lines of . nobles and wealthy commoners became less fixed . The social lines were less fixed in the 17th century .
 In the 15 years before 1789 almost 2,500 families bought their way into the nobility . Despite increasing opposition from the oldest noble families who believed their ranks were being swamped by newcomers, the oldest families believed they were swamped .
 Many people of means, too, resented noble privileges, above all the exemption of nobles from most kinds of taxes . The exemption of noblemen from most kind of taxes was a source of resentment for many .
 Disgruntled commoners did not make the French Revolution, but their dissatisfaction helped create a litany of demands for reform . The French Revolution was created by disgruntled commoners in France .
 Among the ‘nobles of the sword’ were the oldest noble families whose ancestors had proudly taken arms to serve the king . Some had fallen on hard times and clung to any and all privileges as a way of maintaining their status .
 They resented the fact that the provincial parlements had filled up with new nobles who had purchased offices . The “nobles of the robe” resented that power had shifted within the nobility from the oldest noble families to those recently ennobled .
 The monarchy depended upon the sale of titles, offices, and economic monopolies for revenue and long-term credit . The monarchy was founded in 1881 .
 There were more than 50,000 offices in 1789 . But by creating more offices, it risked destroying public confidence and driving down value .
 Economic hardship compounded the monarchy’s financial problems by decreasing revenue while exacerbating social tensions . The monarchy's financial problems were compounded by social tensions in the country .
 A series of bad harvests in 1775 made conditions of life even more difficult for poor people . The worst was the worst of the year, 1775, when the worst was 1775 . Poor people suffered a series of years of hunger and disease .
 The harvests of 1787 and 1788, which would be key years in the French political drama, were also very poor . The Harvests were also key years for the French government .
 Such crises were by no means unusual—indeed they were cyclical and would continue until the middle of the next century . Such crises would continue to be cyclical until the end of the century, the author says .
 Many peasants believed that their hardship was being increased by landowners . Many peasants thought that they were being increased in hardship by landowners.
 Something of a ‘seigneurial reaction’ was under way as smaller agricultural yields diminished noble revenues, while inflation raised the costs of noble life . ‘Signeuria’ is under way in response to smaller yields and inflation .
 Many landlords tried to force sharecropping arrangements on peasants who had previously rented land . Many landlords raised rents and tried to impose sharecrops on peasants . Landlords raised rents, forced sharecroppers to sharecropper arrangements .
 Although the feudal system of the Middle Ages had long since passed, remnants remained . Although the medieval system of feudalism was long since gone, remnants of it still remained .
 Peasants were still vexed by seigneurial dues and cash owed to their lords . Peatsants were vexed with seigneeurial debts and cash .
 Many nobles still held some rights of justice over their peasants, which meant that they could determine guilt and assess penalties for alleged transgressions . Many peasants still had some rights to justice .
 Seigneurial courts were often used to enforce landlord’s rights over forests, lakes, and streams . Landlord's exclusive rights to hunt and fish on his estate were used in hunting and fishing .
 The political crisis that led to the French Revolution would provide ordinary people with an opportunity to redress some of these mounting grievances . The French Revolution was the result of a political crisis in France that would redress these grievances .
 The serious financial crisis that confronted the monarchy in the 1780s was the short-term cause of the French Revolution . The crisis was the first financial crisis to hit the French monarchy . The financial crisis was a precursor to the revolution .
 France had been at war with Britain, as well as with other European powers, off and on for more than a century . France and Britain were at war on and off for over a century.
 Almost three-fourths of state expenses went to maintaining the army and navy, and to paying off debts accumulated from the War of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years’ War .
 Nobles had traditionally enjoyed the privilege of being exempt from most, and the clergy from all, taxation . Nobles were exempt from all tax, including clergy, until now .
 There was a limit to how many taxes could be imposed on peasants, by far the largest social group in France . There was also a limit on how much taxes peasants could have to pay .
 In short, the financial crisis of the monarchy was closely tied to the very nature of its fiscal system . The financial crisis was closely linked to the nature of the fiscal system, says historian .
 The absolute monarchy in France collected taxes less efficiently than did the British government . France's absolute monarchy collected taxes in France less efficiently .
 In Britain, the Bank of England facilitated the government’s borrowing of money at relatively low interest through the national debt . In Britain the government could borrow money at low interest .
 In France, there was no central bank, and the monarchy depended more than ever on private interests . The monarchy suffered from a cumbersome assessment of fiscal obligations and inadequate accounting .
 French public debt already was much higher than that of Britain and continued to rise as the monarchy sought financial expedients . France's public debt was already higher than Britain's in the 1930s .
 The hesitant and naive Louis XVI was still in his twenties when he became king in 1774 . Louis XVI became king of France in 1772 .
 Louis knew little of his kingdom, venturing beyond the region of Paris and Versailles only once during his reign . Louis traveled to Paris only once in his reign, and never traveled beyond the capital once .
 He preferred puttering around the palace, taking clocks and watches apart and putting them back together . He spent most of his time at the palace .
 Marie-Antoinette was the daughter of the Austrian queen Maria Theresa . She was married to Louis to strengthen dynastic ties between Austria and France . Louis was the son of Maria Theresa, the daughter to Maria Theresa of Austria . Marie Antoinette married Louis in 17th century to
 Marie-Antoinette lived extravagantly and was embroiled in controversy . Unhappy in her marriage, she lived extravagantly . Marie Antoinette was embroiled with controversy .
 In 1785, she became entangled in a seamy scandal when a cardinal offered her a diamond necklace in the hope of winning favor . She became embroiled in the scandal when she was offered the necklace in an attempt to win favor .
 The necklace and some of the prelate’s money were then deftly stolen by plotters . Plotters included a prostitute posing as the queen . A prostitute posed as the Queen .
 The ‘‘diamond necklace affair,” as it was called, seemed to augment the public image of the king as a weak man, a cuckold . The 'diamond affair' was called . It seemed to add to the public .
 The queen's reputed indiscretions and infidelities seemed to undercut the authority of the monarchy itself . The queen’s reputed infidelity and infidelity seemed to undermine the authority .
 In 1781, some ministers and noble hangers-on convinced the king to dismiss Necker . Necker was dismissed by the king in 1781 after a revolt against him .
 Necker produced a fanciful account of the royal finances that purported to demonstrate that more revenue was coming to the state than was being spent . Necker's account was published in the 1930s, but it was never published .
 Bankers refused to loan the monarchy any more money until the state enacted financial reforms . Bankers, however, did not believe Necker’s figures and refused to lend the monarchy .
 The new finance minister, Charles-Alexandre de Calonne, demonstrated that Necker’s calculations of royal finances were far-fetched . Necker's calculations were farfetched, he said .
 Calonne spent even more money and put the royal treasury deeper in debt . He borrowed from venal officeholders to pay off creditors now gathered at the royal door . Yet he spent more and more money .
 The parlements were certain to oppose fiscal reform, which they believed would lead to an increase in taxation through a general tax on land . They believed they believed that they believed the increase in tax would be an increase .
 They distrusted Calonne, whom they identified with fiscal irresponsibility and governmental arrogance that some believed bordered on despotism . Some believed Calonne's government was arrogant . Calonne was a member of the Cabinet .
 The crown expected the Assembly to endorse its reform proposals, including new land taxes from which nobles would not be exempt . The crown is expected to end up endorsing its proposals .
 Calonne suggested that France s financial problems were systemic, resulting from a chaotic administrative organization, including the confusing regional differences in tax obligations .
 The monarchy’s practice of selling the lucrative rights to collect, or “farm,” taxes worsened the inefficiency of the tax system . The monarchy sold the right to collect the tax proceeds to collect .
 Calonne knew that the crown’s contract with the tax farmers would soon have to be renegotiated, and that many short-term loans contracted by the monarchy would soon come due, he said .
 Calonne proposed to overhaul the entire financial system . Denounced ‘the dominance of custom’ that had prevented reform and encumbered commerce .
 The Assembly of Notables rejected Calonne’s proposals for tax reform . The Assembly refused to countenance the idea that nobles should be assessed land taxes .
 The high clergy of the first estate, some of whom were nobles, also vociferously opposed Calonne’s reforms . Calonne's reforms were opposed by the high clergy .
 Nobles convinced the king to sack Calonne, which he did on April 8, 1788, in 1788 .
 Like his predecessor, Lomenie de Brienne asked parlements to register and approve several edicts of financial reform . He promised that the government would keep more accurate accounts .
 The Parlement of Paris refused to register some of the edicts, including a new land tax and a stamp tax . The edicts evoked the origins of the American Revolution .
 Some members of the Assembly of Notables had been willing to accept fiscal reform and to pay more taxes . But only with accompanying institutional reforms that would guarantee their privileges . The First Stages of the Revolution were the first stages of the revolution .
 They wanted the king to convoke regular assemblies of the Estates-General—made up of representatives of the three estates—which had not been convoked since 1614 . They wanted regular assemblies convoked, made up of members of the estates .
 He needed to reduce the privileges of the nobles to solve the financial crisis, but to do so without their approval would lead to accusations of despotism, or even tyranny, he says .
 On the other hand, capitulating to the demands of the privileged classes in return for new taxes would compromise his absolute authority and suggest that his word was subject to the approval of the nation .
 The ‘noble revolt’ began the French Revolution . Convoking the Estates-General began the revolution in 17th century France .
 In August 1787 Louis XVI exiled its members to Troyes, a town east of Paris . In response to the refusal of the Parlement of Paris to register the land and stamp taxes, the exiled members were exiled . Louis XVI was forced to relocate the exiled group .
 The Parlement of Grenoble refused to register the new stamp and land taxes and convoked its provincial estates (the assembly of nobles that represented the interests of the region) without royal authorization . The province's provincial estates were convoked by the province without royal permission .
 The “revolt of the nobility” against the monarchy’s attempt to force nobles to pay taxes spread . The ‘revolt’ against the . monarchy's attempt to . force nobles . to pay . taxes spread.
 The revolt was not directed against the institution of the monarchy itself, but against abuses of the rights and privileges of the nation committed by an increasingly despotic crown . This revolt was directed against what the nobles considered abuses .
 Lomenie de Brienne agreed to withdraw land and stamp taxes in exchange for maintaining the tax on income . nobles and other privileged people had first been assessed in the late 1750s to pay for the Seven Years’ War .
 The crown would be forced to settle its debts in paper money backed by royal decree . He made clear, however, that the crown would not be able to pay its debts .
 The king ordered new loan edicts registered without giving the parlement a chance to be heard . But the king ordered them registered without a chance of hearing .
 Louis XVI seemed to cross the line between absolutism and despotism . Louis XVI crossed that line in his reign .
 In May 1788, the king ordered the arrest of two of the most radical members of the Parlement of Paris . The king's arrest was ordered by the king of France .
 He then suspended the parlements, establishing new provincial courts to take their place . He then established a single plenary court that would register royal edicts .
 The Assembly of the Clergy had been summoned to decide on the amount of its annual gift to the crown . It protested the abolition of the parlements .
 Riots in support of the parlements occurred in several towns, including Grenoble . Crowds expressed support for their parlement by pelting soldiers with stones and roof tiles .
 On August 8, 1788, Louis XVI announced that he would convoke the Estates-General on May 1 of the following year . The Estates General convoke was convoked on August 8 of the year .
 He hoped that he could avert royal bankruptcy if Estates-General agreed to the imposition of new taxes .
 Two weeks later, he reappointed Necker as minister of finance . Necker believed he believed would appease nobles, investors, and holders of government bonds .
 The EstatesGeneral convoke was the first act of the French Revolution . That the nobles forced the crown to convoke the Estates General became the first Act of the Revolution .
 Many people believed that Estates-General, more than the parlements, would represent their interests and check royal despotism . Many believed that more than parlements would represent them and check their interests . Many people thought that the Estates General would represent .
 The question of how voting was to take place when the Estates-General met assumed increasing importance . The question was how voting would take place .
 On September 25, 1788, the Parlement of Paris, which had been reinstated amid great celebration, ruled that voting within the Estates-General would take place by estate . Voting had been the case when it had last met in 1614, when it was last called in 16
 Each of the three estates would have the same number of representatives and be seated separately . Each estate would have a different number of representative .
 The parlements lost their claim to defend the nation against despotism for having registered the royal decree that voting would be by estate . Henceforth, the parlements would be seen by many people as defending the prerogatives of their privileged members against the interests of the third estate .
 Popular political writers now began to salute the third estate (which made up 95 percent of the population) as the true representative of liberty and of the nation against royal despotism .
 Political publications transformed these debates into national political issues . Political debates transformed into national issues of the past and present .
 The Society of the Thirty, a group that included liberal nobles from very old families, met to discuss, debate, and distribute liberal political pamphlets . It included the Marquis de Lafayette, the hero of the American War of Independence .
 Third estate proposed twice as many representatives in Estates-General as the nobility and clergy . They proposed that the third estate be entitled to twice the number of representatives .
 In January 1789, Emmanuel Joseph Sieyes offered the most radical expression of a crucial shift in political opinion . Sieyes was an obscure priest who was a priest in the 17th century .
 He contrasted the ‘nation"" against royal absolutism and noble prerogative . He demanded a predominant role for the third estate in political life .
 The vast majority of the men elected to the Estates-General were residents of cities and towns . Two-thirds of these had some training in the law, and two-thirds had law training .
 Some of the younger noble representatives elected to the second estate were relatively liberal . Some of those elected were young noble representatives .
 They wanted institutional reforms in the organization of the French monarchy that would permit them to check the power of the king . The Parliament in England served as a check on the English crown, in much the same way as the Parliament in France .
 In December 1788, the king agreed to double the number of representatives of the third estate . But he declined to give all members an individual vote .
 The king asked the first two estates to draw up lists of grievances . The Estates-General would discuss grievances with the local assemblies . The list of grievances was drawn up by the first and second estates .
 Thousands of grievances offered the monarchy a wide variety of opinions, ranging from concrete suggestions for reform to the opinion that sheep's foul breath was ruining pastureland in Lorraine .
 Cahiers criticized monarchical absolutism and intransigence of seigneurs . They also called for the creation of a new national representative body .
 A few of the cahiers denounced as an abuse of royal power the so-called lettres de cachety documents issued in the name of the king that allowed a person to be arrested for any reason and imprisoned indefinitely . The letters were issued under the authority of the King .
 Some cahiers also reflected continued reverence for the king, while denouncing the rapacity and bad faith of his advisers and ministers . However, some cahsiers also reflect continued reverence to the king .
 The king greeted the first two estates, but kept the commoners waiting for two hours . The king kept the public waiting two hours for the first time .
 When he finished his speech, members of the third estate violated protocol by boldly putting their hats back on, a right reserved for the two privileged orders . The third estate broke protocol by returning their hats to the podium .
 The third estate now claimed legitimate sovereignty and authority parallel, if not superior, to that of the king of France . Third estate now claims legitimate sovereignty .
 Led by their president, Jean-Sylvain Bailly , an astronomer, the members of the third estate gathered in a nearby tennis court .
 The third estate demanded that defined limits be placed on the king s authority . With principled defiance, the third estate refused to give up .
 The French president agreed to convoke periodically the Estates-General . He agreed to abolish the taille and corvee and eliminate internal tariffs and tolls that interfered with trade .
 To radicalized members of the third estate, the king’s concessions were not enough . To the radicalized . members of . the . third estate . The . radicalized. third estate was not enough.
 Necker's contention in 1781 that the kingdom’s finances could be put on an even keel without raising taxes had increased his popularity, as had the fact that nobles were pushing for his recall . Necker: "The kingdom's finances can be put back to an even
 Most clergy and a number of nobles had joined the third estate . During these days, most of the clergy and many of the . clergy and . the clergy joined the . third estate.
 The king ordered clergy and nobles of the first two estates to join the third . Now, after threatening to dissolve the Estates-General by force, on June 27, the king ordered the remaining clergy and . nobles of . the first . two estates . join the . third .
 The gathering began to constitute itself as the National Constituent Assembly . The new gathering was formed as the new gathering .
 Many ordinary people now believed that a conspiracy by nobles and hoarders was to blame for shortages .
 The number of royal troops around Paris and Versailles seemed to be increasing .
 On July 11, the king once again ordered Necker, who remained unpopular with the court, into exile . Necker was ordered back into exile by the king .
 He and other ministers were dismissed because the king was convinced they were unable to control the demands for change coming from the Estates General .
 Bands of rioters attacked the customs barriers at the gates of Paris, tearing down toll booths where taxes on goods entering the city were collected, thus making foodstuffs more expensive .
 On July 14, 1789, thousands of people seized weapons stored in the Invalides, a large veterans’ hospital . Thousands of tradesmen, artisans, and wage earners seized weapons .
 Early that afternoon, the attention of the Paris crowd turned toward the Bastille, a fortress on the eastern edge of the city . The crowd believed powder and ammunition were stored in the fortress .
 For most of the eighteenth century, the Bastille had been a prison, renowned as a symbol of despotism . Some prisoners had been sent there by virtue of one of the king’s lettres de cachet y summarily and without a trial .
 On that hot summer day, the Bastille’s prisoners numbered but seven, a motley crew that included a nobleman imprisoned upon request of his family, a renegade priest, and a demented Irishman, who alternately thought he was Joan of Arc, Saint Louis
 The crowd stormed and captured the Bastille, which was defended by a small garrison . The Bastille was captured by a crowd in the French capital .
 A butcher decapitated the commander of the fortress, and the throng carried his head on a pike in triumph through the streets . The butcher was decapitated by a butcher and the crowd carried the head in triumph .
 The Bastille’s fall would be much more significant than it first appeared . Bastille's fall would have been much more important than it initially appeared .
 The crowd’s uprising probably saved the National Assembly from being dissolved by the troops the king had ordered to Versailles and Paris . But the king ordered troops to the capital, the French capital, to stay in the capital .
 The taking of the Bastille, July 14, 1789, prompted the recall of Necker to office . Now unsure of the loyalty of his soldiers, Louis sent away some troops he had summoned to Paris .
 On July 17, 1789, the king came to Paris to be received by the municipal council at the town hall, accepting and wearing an emblem of three colors, red and blue for the city of Paris, and white for the Bourbons .
 By doing so, Louis XVI seemed to be recognizing what became the tricolor symbol of the French Revolution .
 News of the convocation of the Estates-General had brought hope to many rural people that the king would relieve their crushing fiscal burdens . The Great Fear and the Night of August 4 .
 They had expressed such hopes in their grievances in the grievances they sent with their third estate delegates to Versailles . They sent them with their grievances to the French capital .
 Between July 19 and August 3 peasants attacked chateaux . Now, upon news of the fall of the Bastille, peasants attacked the French capital .
 In some places they burned title deeds specifying obligations owed to lords . Some of the deeds were burned in some places as a result .
 The rumor of an aristocratic ‘famine plot to starve or burn out the population, peasants and townspeople mobilized in many regions of France . Fueled by the rumor, peasants mobilized in France .
 New local governments and National Guard units were established to institute reforms and restore order . The effective authority of the state disintegrated .
 These events brought to local influence lawyers, merchants, and other ‘new men’ who had formerly been excluded from political life . Lawyers, merchants and other "new men" were formerly excluded from politics .
 On August 4, 1789, the National Assembly formally abolished the “feudal regime,’' including seigneurial rights . In an effort to appease the peasants, the peasants and to forestall further rural disorders, the French National Assembly abolished the "feud
 The Assembly abolished personal labor servitude owed to nobles, without compensation, in 1903 .
 The members of the National Assembly renounced privilege, the fundamental organizing principle of French society . The National Assembly thus renounces privilege," the French parliament says .
 Other reforms included the guarantee of freedom of worship and the abolition of the sale of offices, seigneurial justice, and the exclusive right of nobles to hunt .
 The provinces and cities, too, were required to give up most of their archaic privileges . Canada and the provinces were also required to have their privileges eased .
 In these ways, the National Assembly enacted a sweeping agenda that proclaimed the end of what soon became known as the Old Regime . The National Assembly became known for its sweeping agenda .
 The Assembly’s decrees destroyed absolutism by redefining the relationship between subject and king . The Assembly's decrees were designed to redefine the role of the subject to king .
 No longer would the king rule by divine right, or buy allegiance by dispensing privileges to favorites . Instead, the king would be allowed to buy allegiance with favorites . The king would not be able to buy loyalty by buying allegiance by giving favorites privileges .
 He would be constrained by powers spelled out in a constitution . Instead of a constitution, he would be limited to powers outlined in the constitution .
 The Assembly promulgated the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, a remarkable document that proposed universal principles of humanity . The Declaration was promulgated by the Assembly .
 It established a new relationship between church and state, creating a national church . It also established the clergy to swear allegiance to the nation . It created Catholic Church property “national property,"" and made Catholic Church "national property"
 The National Assembly then turned to the long process of framing a constitution for the new regime . It is therefore sometimes sometimes also known as the Constituent Assembly .
 Marie-Antoinette denounced the revolutionaries as “monsters,"" and some of the king's most influential advisers balked at accepting any weakening in royal authority . In the meantime, the queen denounced the revolutionists as "monsters"
 Fearing the influence of nobles at the court, crowds marched to Versailles early in October . Crowds returned to Paris with king and the royal family .
 As nobles and clergy led resistance to the Revolution, the Parisian clubs made more radical demands .
 Assembly promulgated Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen on August 26, 1789 . Declaration set out to create a constitutional monarchy . Declaration was promulgated by the Assembly .
 This set forth the general principles of the new order and intended to educate citizens about liberty . The order was intended to inform citizens of liberty, according to the order .
 The Declaration reflected some of the ideas that Thomas Jefferson had enshrined in the Declaration of Independence of 1776 . One of the most significant documents in Western political history .
 The Enlightenment’s influence is apparent in the document's concern for individual freedom, civic equality, and the sense of struggle against corporatism, unjust privilege, and absolute rule .
 No person could be persecuted for his or her opinions, including those concerning religion . No one could be persecuted for opinions concerning religion, including that concerning religion. No person should be persecuted for his or his opinions .
 The Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen clearly placed sovereignty in the French nation . Proclaiming universal principles, the Declaration was published in 1903 .
 The notion of rights stemming from membership in the ‘nation,’ as opposed to that in any corporate group or social estate, was a fundamental change . Rights stemming from members of the "nation" was a change .
 Laws were to reflect the notion of the ‘general will,” an Enlightenment concept, which would be expressed by national representatives . Laws would reflect the idea of the "general will," a concept of the Enlightenment .
 The assertion of equality of opportunity, however, was not intended to eliminate all social distinctions . Social distinctions were intended to be equal, not all social differences .
 The preservation of property rights assured that differences due to wealth, education, and talent would remain and be considered natural and legitimate . Wealth, education and talent differences would remain .
 The Declaration helped make wealth, not birth, blood, or legal privilege, the foundation of social and political order in modern France . Wealth not birth or blood, it was the foundation for the French social order .
 The Declaration did not espouse or foresee equality of the sexes . But at the same time, its authors excluded women from the Declaration . The Declaration was not intended to espouse equality of sexes .
 Some calls for women’s rights arose from the beginning of the Revolution. Indeed, some calls for such a thing came from the start of the revolution .
 The abolition of feudalism and the proclamation of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen were such monumental achievements that in 1790 people were referring to the Old Regime as having been that which existed before the representatives of the Estates-General constituted the National Assembly .
 The king's closest advisers rejected any constitutional arrangement that would leave the monarch without the power of absolute veto . The “court party’s’ rejection of constitutional arrangement was rejected by the court party .
 The Assembly defeated a motion that an upper chamber like the British House of Lords be created . The majority of the Assembly offered the king in September the power of a “suspending” veto over legislation .
 King would be able to delay a measure passed by the Assembly from becoming law for up to four years . Measure passed by Assembly could be delayed four years before becoming law . The king could also delay a law change by delaying it for four years.
 When the king refused to accept these provisions and the decrees of August 4, a flood of pamphlets and newspapers attacked his intransigence .
 The radical journalist Jean-Paul Marat quickly found a popular following for his new newspaper, The Friend of the People . Marat was born in France in 1961 . He is credited with revolutionizing France's economy .
 A physician beset by financial woes, Marat was like one of the ambitious, frustrated “scribblers” whom Voltaire, forty years earlier, had scathingly denounced as hacks . Voltaire was scathingly denouncing Marat as a hacks .
 Marat captured with stirring emotion and the colorful, coarse slang of ordinary Parisians the mood of those for whom he wrote . Marat captures stirring emotion .
 The rhetoric of popular sovereignty, some of it borrowed from the philosophe Jean-Jacques Rousseau, came alive in the outpouring of political pamphlets that undermined Louis XVI and even for the institution of monarchy itself .
 By October, some ‘patriots’ were demanding that the king reside in Paris, echoing a number of cahiers . The king's residence in Paris is expected to be in Paris .
 The “march to Versailles” began with a seemingly minor event . Like many of the most important events in the French Revolution, the ‘march’s’ began with an apparently minor event.
 The officers of the Flanders Regiment insulted the newly adopted tricolor emblem at a reception in their honor attended by the king and queen . The Flanders regiment was insulted at the reception in honor of the king .
 Women from the neighborhoods around the Bastille gathered in front of the town hall . They found little at the market, having found little to eat .
 10,000 people, mostly women, left on foot for Versailles, hoping to convince the king to provide them with bread . From there, some of the people hoped to convince him to give them bread, but he died .
 Some of the protesters occupied the hall of the National Assembly, where they claimed power in the name of popular sovereignty . Some of them said they wanted to take over the power of the country .
 Later in the day, a large force of national guardsmen led by Lafayette arrived at Versailles . They hoped to keep order and convince the king that he should return with them to Paris .
 St. Louis cordially greeted the women in the late afternoon, promising them bread . The women were promised bread by the city's mayor .
 That night Louis XVI announced his acceptance of the Assembly’s momentous decrees of the night of August 4 . Louis XVI was the first monarch to accept the decrees .
 When people tried to force their way into the chateau, royal guards shot a man dead . Crowds retaliated by killing two guards and sticking their heads on pikes . Two guards were killed and their heads were stuck on a pike in the crowd .
 The women's march to Versailles changed the course of the French Revolution . By putting the king and the Assembly under the pressure of popular political will, the women’s march changed course of French Revolution. The march was the first to put the king under pressure .
 National Assembly proclaimed Louis ‘the king of the French’ instead of the king of France . It was a significant change that suggested that he embodied the sovereignty of his people . National Assembly set about creating a constitution that would limit the authority of the King .
 Count of Artois went into exile after the October Days . He was soon followed by more than 20,000 other emigres, most of whom were nobles, other people of means and clergymen .
 Assembly looked to Church's wealth to help resolve state's mounting financial crisis . The decrees of August had ended the unpopular tithe payments to the Church .
 The primary beneficiaries of the sale were urban bourgeois and prosperous peasants who could marshal enough cash to buy the land put up for sale . The primary beneficiary was urban bourgeois .
 Assembly issued paper money ( assignats) backed by the value of the Church lands .
 Those who used assignats to purchase Church lands or pay debts received a windfall . Their value fell because of a lack of public confidence .
 Even poor peasants were able to reduce their debts with inflated currency . The inflated currency was used to reduce debts for peasants .
 Among the consequences of the sale of Church lands was that more land was brought under cultivation by peasants . The sale of lands owned by noble emigres led to more land being put under cultivation .
 The clearing of trees and brush to make room for crops and small-scale farming also put increased pressure on the environment . Small-scale farms and clearing trees and clearing of brush put pressure on environment .
 The Assembly altered dramatically the status of the Church itself . The Assembly then altered dramatically .
 On February 13, 1790, it decreed the abolition of the religious orders . The religious orders were deemed politically suspect by many reformers . The abolition was decreed in 1790 .
 On July 12, the National Assembly passed the Civil Constitution of the French Clergy . The Constitution was passed by the French parliament .
 The Assembly redefined the relationship between the clergy and the state, creating, in effect, a national church . It was created in order to create a "national church"
 Bishops could now only publish pronouncements with the authorization of the government . Bishops were to be elected by local assemblies at the local level .
 King reluctantly accepted the measures affecting the Church . Ten days later, the king reluctantly accepted these measures . The king was forced to accept them .
 The Church became essentially a department of the state, which henceforth would pay clerical salaries, the expenses of worship, and poor relief . The Church would become a state-funded department of state .
 In November 1790, the National Assembly proclaimed that all priests had to swear an oath of loyalty to the Revolution, and thus accept the Civil Constitution of the French Clergy . All priests were required to swear allegiance to the revolution .
 Pope Pius VI denounced the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen in March, and in April 1791 he condemned the Civil Constitution of the French Clergy . His authority was challenged by the Pope .
 The Civil Constitution of the French Clergy altered the course of the Revolution, largely because it was widely resisted . It contributed directly to the growth of a counter-revolutionary movement .
 Between one-half and twothirds of parish priests refused the oath . The Assembly prohibited these disloyal, “non-juring” priests from administering the Church sacraments .
 In some provinces, violence mounted against ‘non-juring’ priests . In others, refractory priests received popular support and protection . Violence mounted in some provinces against “non-Juring” priests .
 Many Catholics, Louis XVI among them, believed themselves obliged by faith to refuse to take sacraments from the clergy . Such issues were no small matter .
 Although the king retained only the power of a suspending veto, he would still direct foreign policy and command the army . The king would still be able to veto the decision .
 In sweeping away the Old Regime, the Revolution had redefined the relationship between the individual and the state . The Revolution had stripped away hereditary legal privileges .
 Although all citizens were to be equal before the law, when the Assembly abolished titles of hereditary nobility in June 1790, it carefully distinguished between ‘active’ and ‘passive” citizens .
 Critics such as Marat and the populist orator Georges-Jacques Danton denounced the restrictive franchise, claiming that the Assembly had merely replaced the privileged caste of the Old Regime with another .
 English Dissenters and Catholics could not hold public office and were excluded from certain professions . In Hungary and the Catholic Rhineland, Protestants faced discrimination . In Britain, English Dissents and Catholics were not allowed public office .
 Jews faced intolerance and persecution in much of Europe, excluded from certain occupations or forced to live in specially designated places . Jews were excluded, excluded, or forced, from certain jobs or places .
 In some parts of Eastern Europe and Ukraine, they suffered violence as well as violence . In some of the world's most violent cities, Ukraine and Russia suffered violence .
 The Le Chapelier Law prohibits workmen from joining together to refuse to work for a master . The law was passed in 1791 . It subsequently banned workmen joining together .
 The National Assembly abolished slavery in France in France, but not in the colonies . The French National Assembly did not abolish slavery in colonies .
 The exception led to a rebellion by free blacks on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola in October 1790 against the French sugar plantation owners, many of whom were nobles . Many of the owners of the plantations were French nobles .
 It was led by Toussaint L’Ouverture, a former slave who had fought in the French army . It was the first African-American to fight in France .
 The National Convention (which would replace the Assembly in September 1792) abolished slavery in the colonies in 1794, hoping that the freed slaves would be freed from slavery .
 The map on the left indicates the provinces and provincial capitals in France before the Revolution . France before and after 1789 was ruled by the French Revolution .
 The map on the right indicates the administrative districts created in France in 1790 . The map is based on the map of France's first administrative districts .
 In 1791, the daughter of a butcher, Olympe de Gouges published The Rights of Women . The rights of women were first made explicit in France in 1791 . The call for equal rights for women was first made in France .
 She called on the Assembly to acknowledge women's rights as mothers of citizens of the nation . Encouraging women to demand their natural rights .
 She insisted on women’s right to education and to control property within marriage and to initiate divorce proceedings . She insisted that women should have the right to the education and control property in marriage .
 Men would remain unfree unless women were granted similar rights, stopping short of demanding full political rights for women . Olympe de Gouges defined the nation as ‘the union of Woman and Man’
 On July 14, 1790, the first anniversary of the fall of the Bastille, an imposing Festival of General Federation took place on the Champ-de-Mars .
 In the south, nobles had already begun to organize resistance against the Revolution, and militant Catholics attacked Protestants, who tended to support the Revolution . In the southern part of the country, Protestants attacked nobles who supported the revolution .
 By the summer of 1791, as the Assembly promulgated its constitution, open resistance to the Revolution had broken out in parts of the south and west and in Alsace .
 Some revolutionaries did not accept the distinction between active and passive citizens . Some of the revolutionaries called for more democratic participation in political life .
 The monarchical state rested on an intertwining network of groups, each with a set of privileges, at virtually every level of society . The monarch's state had rested on a network of people, each having their own privileges .
 These included judicial, professional, administrative, and clerical groups, ranging from provincial Estates to artisanal guilds . Estates, provinces and professional groups were among the groups .
 The first clubs were established by political factions among the deputies to the National Assembly . The first club was established by members of political factions in the Assembly .
 Some of the Assembly’s most radical members split off to form the Jacobin Club . The club met in the house of the religious order of the Jacobins .
 The Cordeliers Club brought together radicals of Paris, while supporters of the cause of constitutional monarchy gathered at the Club of the Feuillants . Its members broke with the Jacobins in July 1791 .
 Some women began their own political clubs, such as the Club of Knitters, or joined the Fraternal Society of Patriots of Both Sexes . Some women also began political clubs .
 During the first years of the Revolution, there was little in France that was not political . The political clubs were not the only place where political debate occurred .
 In Paris, there were also meetings of neighborhood “sections” which had first been defined as electoral districts for the convocation of the Estates-General .
 They defined themselves by what they were without: the fancy knee britches, or culottes . The culottees were associated with the aristocracy .
 The sans-culottes were shopkeepers, artisans, and laborers who stood against unearned property . They stood against those who seemed to have too much property, or who did not work for a living .
 Bread alone absorbed more than half of the earnings of the average working family . Bread is the bread most common bread in the world, according to the study .
 Even aristocrats could be sans-culottes if they supported the Revolution . The Revolution was a French revolution in France in 1881 .
 A female sans-culotte would be called "aristocrats" if they seemed to seem to belong to an aristocratic group . Likewise, laborers or peasants could be called 'aristocrats'
 In a world in which symbols played a crucial political role, sansculottes could be identified by the Phrygian cap, a symbol of freedom drawn from the Roman Republic .
 The language of the sans-culottes quickly indicated who they were . They called everyone ‘citizen’ and used the familiar (tu and never vous) y egalitarian form of address .
 The political ideal of the sans-culottes was that popular sovereignty had to be practiced every day in direct democracy, in revolutionary clubs and in the sections . The sans-councilottes' ideal was to practice popular sovereignty every day .
 Louis XVI and his family tried to flee France in June 1791 . The Flight to Varemtes was the first of its kind in France .
 The king’s goal was to throw his support behind the foreign enemies of the Revolution and return to France to revoke the concessions that he had made . The king was trying to throw support behind foreign enemies .
 The royal family was prevented from continuing their journey into exile and freedom . Apprehended by the National Guard in Varennes, they were prevented from leaving .
 The king’s attempt to flee turned public sentiment further against him, and strengthened support for a republic . The king tried to flee, turning public sentiment against him and turning it into a state .
 The day after his flight, the Cordeliers Club called for the establishment of a republic, but the majority of the Assembly feared civil war . The majority of those who voted for an independent republic feared war .
 Bailly, the moderate mayor of Paris, and Lafayette, the commander of the National Guard in Paris, declared martial law . Bailly declares martial law in response to the protests .
 Even Louis XVI's formal acceptance of the constitution on September 14, 1791, could not stem the popular tide against the monarchy . Louis XVI accepted the constitution in 1791 .
 The Revolution now entered a new, more radical phase . War and the Second Revolution is on the rise .
 The king’s flight seriously weakened the constitutional monarchists within the Assembly . The monarchistists in the Assembly have been weakened by the king's flight .
 The leaders of the Parisian population were Jacobins who had given up on the idea that a constitutional monarchy could adequately guarantee the liberties of the people . Danton, Marat, and Maximilien Robespierre, were the Jacobins' leaders .
 Elections brought to Paris a Legislative Assembly, which met on October 1, 1791 . Elections brought the Assembly to Paris . The Assembly met in Paris .
 It replaced the Constituent Assembly, which had dissolved following the proclamation of the constitution the previous month . The new parliament replaced it, which was dissolved in March .
 Republicans, now identified with the “left” as monarchists, became a majority in March 1792 . Republicans were now identified as the ‘left’ as monarchs were with ‘right” monarchists .
 In the meantime, French emigres at the Austrian and Prussian courts were encouraging foreign intervention to restore Louis XVI to full monarchical authority . In the future, the French were encouraged by foreign intervention .
 The republican followers of Jacques-Pierre Brissot called for a war to free Europe from the tyranny of monarchy and nobility . The republican supporters of Brissots called for an end to the monarchy .
 The members of this faction became known as the Girondins because many were from the district of Gironde, in which the major Atlantic port of Bordeaux is located . Many of them were from Gironde - the region of which is located in the French capital . The Girond
 Under Girondin leadership, the Assembly’s proclamations took on a more aggressive tone . The Assembly took on an aggressive tone.
 The early work of the National Assembly, particularly the abolition of feudal rights and the establishment of a constitutional monarchy, found considerable favor among educated people in Britain, the Netherlands, and some German and Italian states . The National Assembly abolished feudal rights .
 Some lawyers and merchants in other lands applauded measures taken to reduce the independence of the Catholic Church .
 The promulgation of the principles of national sovereignty and self-determination, however, threatened the monarchies of Europe . It threatened the sovereignty of Europe's monarchies .
 The threat posed by the French Revolution brought about a rapprochement between Austria and Prussia, rivals for domination in Central Europe, as well as a wary alliance between Great Britain and Russia . Great Britain was wary of Russia and Great Britain .
 In Vienna, Habsburg emperor Leopold 11 was initially preoccupied with demands from the Hungarian nobility for more power . In Vienna he was also preoccupied by demands from Hungarian nobility .
 In 1789, a rebellion drove Austrian forces out of the Southern Netherlands and led to the establishment of a republic . The republic survived only until Austrian troops returned in force in 1790 . In 1790, Austrian forces returned to the southern Netherlands .
 Some radical Whigs greeted with enthusiasm the fall of the Bastille and the first steps toward constitutional monarchy in France . In London, some radicals greeted the news with enthusiasm . The revolution in France was the first step toward a constitutional monarchy .
 Edmund Burke attacked the French Revolution in 1790 in Reflections on the Revolution in France . Edmund Burke wrote a book about the revolution in which he attacked the revolution .
 He contended that the abstract rationalism of the Enlightenment threatened the historic evolution of nations by undermining monarchy, established churches, and what he considered the "natural" ruling elite .
 Thomas Paine wrote pamphlets denouncing monarchical rule and unwarranted privilege . Paine was the Englishman who wrote against monarchial rule .
 The Rights of Man defended the Revolution against Burke’s relentless attack on the Rights of the Revolution . The rights of man defended the revolution against Burke's relentless attack .
 Political societies supporting the Revolution, in which artisans played a major role, sprang up in Britain during the early 1790s . Artisans played major roles in the political revolution .
 A small group of English women also enthusiastically supported the Revolution . The Revolution was the first to take place in France in 1777 .
 Mary Wollstonecraft traveled to France to view events firsthand . She was a teacher and writer who traveled to see firsthand .
 Vindication of the Rights of Woman was the first book in Britain demanding the right for women to vote and hold elected office . She was angered that the Assembly limited the right to education to men only .
 The rulers of the other European states felt threatened by the proclamation of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen . The Declaration was proclaimed by the French Revolution .
 The Revolution posed the threat of French expansion, now on behalf of carrying the revolutionary principles of “liberty, equality, and fraternity” to other lands . The Revolution also posed the . threat of . French expansion . Now on behalf .
 Mary Wollstonecraft's Vindication of the Rights of Woman was published in the 18th century . It detailed the notion of equal rights that she would take up in the next year in Britain .
 Popular respect for the British monarchy and probably also for nobles soared as anti-French and anti-Catholic feelings came to the fore . Popular respect also soared for British monarchs and nobles .
 Pitt the Younger’s government lashed out at the development of popular politics in Britain . Suspended freedoms of association, assembly, and press, as well as the writ of habeas corpus .
 Louis XVFs virtual imprisonment in the Tuileries Palace in Paris and thunderous speeches in the Assembly proclaiming the necessity of “a war of peoples against kings” worried the crowned heads of Europe . Louis XVF was imprisoned in France .
 On August 27, 1791, Emperor Leopold II of the Holy Roman Empire and King Frederick William II of Prussia promulgated the Declaration of Pilnitz . The Declaration was the result of a meeting between Marie-Antoinette and her brother .
 It expressed their concern about the plight of the French monarchy . Both sovereigns in the common interest of seeing order restored in France .
 The Assembly declared war on Austria in April 1792 . Despite Robespierre’s speeches, the Revolution must first deal with its enemies within France before waging war abroad .
 The stated reason was fear that an Austrian invasion from the Southern Netherlands was imminent . It was fear of an invasion of the Netherlands from the Netherlands .
 Early stages of the war produced French defeats at the hands of the Austrian and Prussian armies . The early stages of this year's war produced numerous defeats .
 The war sealed the fate of the monarchy and the royal family . A Second Revolution was a second attempt to overthrow the monarchy .
 The fear that aristocrats and clergymen were betraying the Revolution brought down the monarchy . As France faced the possibility of foreign invasion by Austria and Prussia, the popular fear of betrayal led to the monarchy's downfall .
 Early defeats on the northern frontier by Austrian troops and soaring bread prices compounded popular anxiety and led to a new revolutionary groundswell .
 In early April 1792, women marched through the capital demanding the right to bear arms . The women's march was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Strident calls for the end of the monarchy echoed in clubs and sections . Calls for an end to monarchy echoed by clubs and in sections of sections .
 On July 11, the Assembly officially proclaimed the patrie y or nation, to be “in danger,” calling on all citizens to rally against the enemies of liberty within and outside of France . The Assembly called on citizens of France to rally in the name of the nation .
 The Assembly encouraged the sections to admit the ‘passive’ citizens who had previously been excluded because they had failed to meet tax requirements .
 Troops from Marseille, among volunteers called up to defend the front, sang a new revolutionary song, “The Marseillaise,” penned by Rouget de Lisle .
 Jacobins pressed their attack against the monarchy . In the meantime, the Jacobins continued their attack on the monarchy.
 Austria and Prussia warned the French that they would be severely punished if the royal family were harmed . The Brunswick Manifesto was signed by the Austrians and Prussians in Brunswick .
 All but one of the forty-eight sections of Paris responded by demanding that the king be immediately deposed . The king was deposed by the end of the 18th century .
 A radical committee overthrew the city council and established a revolutionary authority, the Commune of Paris . The Commune was established by a radical committee of revolutionaries .
 On August 10, sans-culottes from the Paris sections attacked the Tuileries Palace . Sans-culoties attacked the palace on August 10 .
 The royal family escaped and found protection in the quarters of the Legislative Assembly . They were protected by the government of South Africa .
 The Assembly immediately proclaimed the monarchy suspended and ordered the royal family’s imprisonment . The Assembly then proclaimed the monarch suspended . The royal family was immediately imprisoned .
 The popular revolution doomed France’s first experiment in constitutional monarchy . France's first constitutional monarchy was overthrown by the popular revolution .
 Prussian army entered French territory and captured the eastern fortress town of Verdun in 1792 . On September 2, 1792, the French army entered the eastern part of French territory .
 The proximity of the allied armies and the fear of betrayal at home led to the imprisonment of many people suspected of plotting against the Revolution . Many people were imprisoned in Paris after the revolution .
 When a rumor circulated that the prisoners were planning to break out of prison and attack the army, mobs dragged the prisoners from their cells and killed them . mobs dragged them from their cell and killed the prisoners .
 A ragtag army of regular soldiers and sans-culottes stopped the Prussian and Austrian advance with effective artillery barrages on September 20, 1792, near the windmill of Valmy .
 The Revolution had been saved by the same people who had first made it . The revolution had been made by the people who made it. The Revolution was saved .
 Delegates to a new assembly called the National Convention were selected by universal male suffrage in elections . The National Convention was elected by universal suffrage .
 Their first act was unanimously to abolish the monarchy and proclaim the republic on September 21, 1792, even before news of Valmy had been learned . The republic was abolished in 1792 .
 The revolutionary armies of proud, loyal citizen-soldiers pushed Prussian troops back across the Rhine and entered Mainz .
 Parisian factory produced 30,000 pounds of gunpowder every day . To supply French troops, arms manufacturers turned out 45,000 guns in one year . Parisian factories turned out more than half a million guns a year .
 Dut&fi 1793 Itfcrwinden 1793 Hondschoote 1793, » /jg z Le Havre Amiens ' "" ouen Reims; Parish Valmy Rennes . Fleet Angers ,794*-BOHEMIA 1792
 The map indicates French revolutionary army offensives and foreign anti-revolutionary forces . The map was created in 1792-1799 and shows the extent of the French revolution .
 It also shows areas annexed by the French, areas occupied by France, and dependent republics established by revolutionary France . It also includes areas occupied and annexed by France .
 They declared them within the ‘natural frontiers’ of France, a claim that contradicted the principles of popular sovereignty and self-determination contained in the annexation decrees themselves . The annexation decree declared the annexation of the Crimean Islands within the French borders .
 On December 15, 1792, the Convention abolished all feudal dues and tithes in those territories occupied by French armies . The Convention abolished feudal dues in those areas .
 The governments of Britain and the Dutch Republic viewed the occupation of the Austrian Netherlands as a great threat . The occupation of Austria Netherlands was seen as a threat to the Netherlands .
 Convention declared war on Britain and the Dutch Republic on February 1, 1793, declaring war on France . The Convention was formed in response to the threat posed posed posed by France . Austria and Prussia declared war in 1793 .
 Spain and the Kingdoms of Sardinia and Naples joined this First Coalition against France . Spain joined the coalition against France in 17th century .
 When correspondence between Louis XVI and the Austrian government was discovered, his trial became inevitable . Louis XVI's trial was inevitable after correspondence between him and the government was found .
 He called on the Convention to look after his family as he had tried to watch over those of France . The Convention will look after the family, he said .
 The Convention condemned the king to death . The words “one cannot reign innocently” rang in the hall, the Convention condemned him to death.
 The executioner held up the severed royal head, symbol of the Old Regime, for all to see . The huge throng roared its approval as the executioner carried out the act .
 As the Convention and the more radical Paris Commune vied for authority, the French Republic, still at war, began to split apart . The Convention, the more . radical Paris . Commune, was the most radical in France .
 The Girondins were popularly identified with the economic liberalism that characterized the port cities . They were associated with the desire to carry the Revolution aggressively beyond the frontiers of France .
 The deputies of the far left, principally the Jacobins and their followers, sat on the raised side of the Tuileries Hall where the Convention met . The Jacobins were mainly Jacobins .
 The Jacobins insisted on the necessity of centralizing authority in the capital to save the Revolution from internal subversion and foreign armies . Backed by the Parisian sans-culottes, the Jacobins demanded centralizing power in Paris .
 The Girondins, more moderate, believed that the Revolution had gone far enough . They were more moderate .
 Jacobins accused Jacobins of secretly supporting the monarchy . Jacobins demanded swift punishment for traitors . The Jacobins were accused of supporting the monarch .
 From the point of view of the Jacobins, those who were not for them were against the Revolution . Those who weren't for the Revolution were against them, says the Jacobinists .
 "The sense of vulnerability and insecurity was heightened by reverses in the field," says the author .
 The armies of the First Coalition defeated the French in the Austrian Netherlands in March 1793 . The French were defeated by the Coalition armies .
 Dumouriez fled across the border to join the Austrians and other emigres . When his army refused to follow him, he fled the border . He was killed by the Austrian army .
 In the meantime, the allies recaptured the left bank of the Rhine River . In the past two years, the German capital has been occupied by NATO forces .
 The unpopularity of military conscription in defense of the republic also generated resistance . Conscription was unpopular in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 South of the Loire River, the counter-revolutionary forces emerged from the relatively isolated bocage, or hedgerow country, where the old noble and clerical elites had been relatively unaffected by the economic changes of the past few decades .
 In Brittany, Brittany had enjoyed a relatively light tax burden during the Old Regime . The revolutionary government was hated for having ended that privilege, thereby increasing taxes .
 Map indicates areas of federalism and counter-revolutionary activity, including major uprisings . The Counter-Revolution map was created by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 In 1793-1794, perhaps a quarter of the population perished, perhaps as many as 250,000 people . In part because the revolutionary troops, facing local civilians, saw local civilians as potential threats .
 Jacobins further centralized government authority and implemented the ‘Terror’ against those considered enemies of the Revolution . The Terror was implemented by the Jacobins in response to foreign invasion and civil insurgency . The Jacobins implemented the "Terror" against enemies .
 On March 19, 1793, the Convention passed a law permitting the immediate trial of armed insurgents without a jury . The Convention passed the law allowing the trial of insurgents without trial without jury .
 The Jacobin-dominated Convention established a Committee of Public Safety of nine and then twelve members . The Committee gradually assumed more and more power as it oversaw the Terror .
 Convention also decreed a special war tax, including a forced levy on wealthy people . In May 1793 imposed the “Maximum”—a maximum price on grain . The Convention also declared a war tax .
 Jacobins believed in state controls and government interference in the economy led to an irreversible break between the Jacobins and the Girondins, who believed in economic freedom . The Jacobins believe in centralization and state controls, which led to the break .
 Society of Revolutionary Republican Women took to the streets in Paris . They are demanding laws against hoarding and calling for women to be granted citizenship . In Paris, they are demanding that women be given citizenship .
 A group called the enrages demanded that bakers be penalized if they charged more than the maximum price for bread . A group of bakers demanded that they were penalized .
 In June, Girondin deputies expelled twenty-nine deputies, accusing them of supporting hoarders . The Convention expelled some of the deputies and ordered the arrest of some .
 Insurgents in Toulon turned over half of the French fleet to the British . The French fleet was taken over by the British in 1877 .
 In July, Charlotte Corday, a royalist noblewoman, stabbed Marat to death in his bathtub . Marat was stabbed to death by a noblewoman in July .
 Assignats, more of which rolled off the government presses as the financial crisis continued, plunged further in value . The government had rolled off many of them off the presses during the crisis .
 Two young radical Jacobin leaders strode forward to take charge of the Terror . Terrorists took control of the terror state in the wake of the fall .
 Louis Antoine Saint-Just was a precocious, icy young deputy whose mother had once had him incarcerated for running off with the family silver . He waged war on royalists, hoarders, and Girondins .
 Maximilien Robespierre emerged as the leading figure on the Committee of Public Safety . He was a leading figure in the committee of public safety . He died in 17th century .
 He knew that the Mountain drew its support from the sans-culottes, some of whom supported the Terror . "Some of the folks in France supported the terror," he said .
 He also believed that Jacques-Louis David’s The Death of Marat was the inspiration for the novel . But he also thought that the popular Jacques-Lavard's The Death Of Marat should have been published .
 Historians have offered interpretations of Robespierre that range from the view that he was a popular democrat who saved the essence of the Revolution from counter-revolutionaries to the suggestion he was actually a precursor of totalitarianism .
 Robespierre was the son and grandson of lawyers from the northern town of Arras . He was born in Arras, France, in 17th Century France . He died in 18th century in France .
 At age 11, he was chosen to read an address in Latin to the royal family at his school in Paris . At age eleven, he read the address to the Royal family at school . He was also chosen to speak to the Queen at age 11 .
 It was raining and the royal family, it was said, without acknowledging the young student, ordered their driver onward . It was said to have been ordered to go on with the driver .
 After completing his law degree, Robespierre defended a number of poor clients, including a man unjustly accused of stealing from an abbey . He defended the poor, including an unjustly convicted man of theft from a monastery .
 Robespierre established a reputation in Paris for his well-organized and thoughtful but colorless speeches . After he was elected to the third estate, he became known for his thoughtful speeches . He died in 18th century .
 Contemporaries noted the prissiness of the impeccably dressed, slight man with very pale skin and chestnut hair .
 A favorite of the Parisian sans-culottes, the man they nicknamed ‘the Incorruptible” called in 1793 for “a single will” of the nation to save the Revolution . He called for a single will of the . nation to .
 Insurrections by supporters of the Girondins against the Jacobins and the authority of the Convention broke out in Lyon, Marseille, Bordeaux, and Caen . merchants and lawyers played prominent roles in failed “federalist revolts” against centralized revolutionary
 Lyon fell to Jacobin troops on October 9, 1793, and bloody reprisals followed . Lyon was taken over by the Jacobin army in 1793 .
 The “Law of Suspects” was promulgated by the Convention in September . It deprived those accused of crimes against the nation of most of their remaining rights . The law of Suspect’s remaining rights were stripped by the convention .
 Jacobins instituted a new calendar in October 1793 . The Jacobins were so intent on destroying the Old Regime that they instituted the new calendar .
 Jacobins adopted new revolutionary symbols to take the place of Old Regime symbols . The Jacobins used the symbols to help maintain revolutionary enthusiasm . Jacobins took up the name of the Jacobins after the revolution .
 Following the execution of Louis XVI, the revolutionaries chose a female image for liberty and the republic, which was ironic in light of their denial of political rights to women . The revolutionaries chose the image of a woman as a symbol of liberty .
 Contemporaries contrasted republican virtue with the abuses of power that seemed to have characterized the Old Regime . Contemorators contrasted republican . virtue with abuses that seemed . to have been characterized by the Old . Regime.
 Jacobin representatives of the Revolution imposed their will wherever they were resisted in the provinces . They did so even as Jacobin representative representatives of . the Revolution . The Revolution was overthrown by the French Revolution .
 During the ‘year II’ , radical revolutionaries undertook an ambitious campaign of “de-christianization,” a war on religious institutions and symbols . During the 'Year II” of the '60s, radical revolutionaries took aim at ‘de- christ
 They closed down churches and removed crosses standing in public places . They removed crosses from public places in order to remove public crosses .
 The campaign failed, unable to overcome centuries of firmly implanted beliefs and traditions, even among many people who supported the Revolution . Even among many of the Revolution supporters, the campaign failed .
 It also turned many clergy who had accepted the Civil Constitution away from the Revolution, generating further resistance . Many clergy members of the Revolution were turned against the Revolution .
 “Representatives on mission” armed with dictatorial authority in the name of the Convention, tried to maintain order . Outside of Paris, “representatives on . mission’s on mission,’ armed with . dictatorial . authority, they tried to . maintain
 They worked with local ‘surveillance committees’ and ‘revolutionary tribunals’ of Jacobins . The Jacobins were involved in the revolution of the French Revolution in France .
 Some of these revolutionary officials sent counter-revolutionaries to the guillotine . Counter-revolutionary officials sent some of these revolutionaries to the Guillotine. Some of them were sent to prison .
 Between 11,000 and 18,000 people perished at the hands of the Committee of Public Safety . The Committee was a fraction of the deaths that had resulted from the Thirty A Revolutionary Tribunal .
 About 300,000 royalists, Girondins, or other “enemies of the Revolution’’ were imprisoned for some period during the Terror . The Terror was the French Revolution's first uprising .
 Artisans and peasants constituted by far the largest number of those dispatched by the revolutionary tribunals . Artisans, peasants and artisans were dispatched to the revolutionary tribunal .
 Most were arrested near the northern and eastern frontiers that had been invaded by foreign armies or in the counterrevolutionary west where civil war raged .
 As many as several thousand prisoners were taken into the waters of the Loire River in boats that had holes bored in them and drowned at the orders of a cruel revolutionary official .
 In the meantime, the tide of the war had turned in favor of the aggressive French armies .
 French victories on the battlefield undercut the argument that the Terror was necessary because of the immediate external threat to the republic . Significant French victories in the battle undermined the idea that the terror was necessary .
 A French army defeated the Austrians in the Austrian Netherlands in June 1794, forcing them out of Belgium . The Austrians were defeated by the French army .
 The Terror struck the enrages leaders in March 1794 after they demanded even more economic controls and an intensification of the ‘dechristianization’ campaign . The Terror then struck the . leaders in 1794 .
 They were brought before the Revolutionary Tribunal of Paris, condemned, and guillotined . They were condemned, condemned and guilledotined.
 Real and imagined conspiracies provided the justification for the Terror, which now seemed without end . Real and real conspiracies were provided the basis for the 9/11 terror attacks .
 Robespierre sought to establish a secularized “Cult of the Supreme Being’� that would serve as a “constant reminder of justice’’ Robespiere wanted to bind the people to the new values of republicanism . The French revolutionary leader sought
 Opera singer dressed as Liberty, wearing a Phrygian cap and holding a pike, bowed before the flame of reason . A popular female opera singer dressed up as Liberty .
 The painter Jacques-Louis David constructed huge statues of monsters like Anarchy and Atheism made of pasteboard . The painter constructed giant statues of the monsters using the same material .
 After Robespierre set fire to them, a statue of Wisdom rose out of the ashes . The statue of the Wisdom rose from the ashes of the destroyed buildings .
 The Marquis de Condorcet was arrested for alleged counterrevolutionary activity . The Jacobins arrested him for alleged anti-revolutionary activities . He was later executed in prison .
 Condorcet, an influential philosophe of the late Enlightenment, was elected to the Assembly in 1791 . He was a member of the Assembly of the French National Assembly .
 He believed that all people should have a voice in approving acts of government, albeit indirectly, and that all citizens should be equal before the law .
 He had campaigned against the death penalty and slavery . He defended political equality and the rights of women .
 Condorcet died of apoplexy in his cell in the spring of 1794, shortly before he was to be executed . He was executed in 1794; his execution took place in 1796 .
 The Revolution seemed to have turned on and destroyed the enlightened reason that had arguably helped bring it about . The Revolution seems to have destroyed the reason that helped bring about it .
 Moderate Jacobins feared they might be next in line to be purged, overthrew the Jacobin dictatorship . Jacobins and other members of the Convention overthrew Jacobins .
 They established a new government called the Directory, which ended the Terror . The Directory was established by the end of the Terror, ending the terror .
 The period of the Directory was marked by great political instability, ongoing wars abroad, and economic hardship at home . Caught between staunch Jacobins on the left and monarchists on the right .
 The Directory consolidated some of the gains of the Revolution, but it too would be overthrown by conspirators led by the Abbe Sieyes and one of the rising stars of the revolutionary army, Napoleon Bonaparte . The Directory was the first to consolidate the gains made by the French
 Revolutionary Tribunal of Paris used new powers granted by Committee of Public Safety in June 1794 to send 1,376 people to their deaths over a six weeks .
 moderates in the Convention began to plot against Robespierre and his allies . Afraid that they would be next on Robspierre’s list, moderates began to plan against him . The plot was thwarted by the Convention and the Convention .
 On July 27, 1794, Robespierre haltingly addressed the Convention, calling for one more purge . On July 28, the Convention held in Paris, France, for the first time since 1794 .
 Robespierre and Saint-Just were arrested at the virtually unguarded town hall of Paris that night . The arrests took place at the town hall, which was virtually unassailable .
 Robespierre and the others were executed without trial . Their fate was as swift and pitiless as that of the Terror’s victims . The executioner's fate was the same as the victims of the French Terror .
 They were followed to the scaffold by more than a hundred of their allies . More than 100 allies followed them to scaffold .
 In the provinces, particularly in the south, the revenge against the Jacobins by their enemies was swift and brutal . In the province, especially in the southern provinces, it was brutal .
 The war effort desperately needed his administrative talent, he said . He was a key figure in the war effort .
 After dismantling the Paris Commune, the victors of Thermidor set about establishing a new national government . The name is the name taken from the period in the revolutionary calendar in which Robespierre fell . The Parisians dismantled the Commune and established a new government .
 The Thermidorians greatly reduced the powers of the Committee of Public Safety on July 31, 1794, and then abolished it completely . The Committee was abolished completely .
 Thermidorians produced a constitution in 1795 that created a bicameral legislative assembly and collective executive of five directors . The Thermidorian constitution was created by 1795 . It was created to create a collective executive and legislative assembly .
 The latter provided the name ‘the Directory’ for this period of the Revolution . The latter was the name "the Directory" for the period .
 The Council of the Ancients discussed and voted on legislation proposed by the second assembly, the Council of Five Hundred . The two assemblies included two assemblies, one of which was held in England .
 Two-thirds of the new councils were elected from among the members of the existing Convention . The new councils will be the first of its kind in the world .
 Two councils elected five directors who formed the collective executive authority, or Directorate . The two councils elected the five directors . The five directors were elected by the two councils .
 One-third of the members of each council and one of the five directors were to be replaced each year . Beginning in 1797, one third of the council members were replaced .
 By 1795, all male taxpayers could vote, but they selected electoral assemblies for which only about 30,000 men were eligible . The Constitution of 1795 allowed men to vote for the first time .
 The system of indirect election favored the selection of the wealthiest citizens to serve in the assemblies . About 2 million men could vote, but about 2 million could not vote .
 The period of the Directory was marked by a decided turn against the asceticism associated with Robespierre’s Republic of Virtue .
 The jeunesse doree y or gilded youth, drawn from the bourgeoisie and old nobility, set the social and cultural tone of the day . The jeune dorey y set the tone of France's society and culture .
 Wearing square collars and fancy clothes, wealthy young men smashed busts of Marat . Wealthy men smashed Marat busts in their fancy clothes and smashed them .
 The red-colored symbols of the sans-culottes quickly disappeared . The Phrygian cap, such as the Phrygian cap, quickly disappeared in France .
 Women who could afford to do so wore long flowing white robes of opulence and sensuality . The plunging necklines would have horrified Robespierre .
 The familiar form of address, identified with section and club meetings, gave way to the formal vous more characteristic of the Old Regime . The familiar  address was identified with sections and clubs meetings, but was replaced by formal vou .
 Crowds in which women played a prominent part demanded churches be reopened . Crowds demanded that churches be re-opened . Women played prominent roles in some of the world's largest churches .
 Only those with a relative who had perished in the Terror could be admitted to a ball to which only those with the same name could attend . The dance of the Victims was a macabre dance to which the victims' relatives could not attend .
 Under the Directory, the comforts of the wealthy, some of whom had made their fortunes during the Revolution, contrasted sharply with the deprivations of the poor .
 The abolition of the Maximum spelled the end of cheap bread, which rose in price by 13 times that spring in Paris . Bread rose by thirteen times in Paris in the spring of that year .
 Near Paris, people scrambled to eat the carcasses of dead army horses . In mountainous areas, people searched for berries and edible roots while trying to stay warm .
 The Directory may have ended the Terror, but it brought neither stability nor peace to France . Despite peace agreements concluded with Prussia in April 1795, peace was never achieved .
 French armies continued to press forward against the Austrian armies in Central Europe and Italy . In the meantime, the French army continued to push forward against Austria .
 That spring, the Directory repressed two small popular demonstrations by crowds demanding a return to controls on the price of bread . The Directory represses two small protests by crowds .
 Encouraged by the Convention’s move to the right, royalists also tried to seize power . Royalists were encouraged to take control of the Convention .
 The count of Provence, Louis XVI’s brother, was now heir to the throne . Louis XVI's son died in a Paris prison in June 1795, and so so the count of provence died in 1795 . The king's son had died .
 An army of nobles supported by the British landed at Quiberon Bay in Brittany on June 27, but French forces turned back the invaders with ease . The invasion was a French invasion of the area .
 On October 5, 1795, royalists attempted an insurrection in Paris . They found support in the more prosperous districts of the city .
 Franois-Noel Babeuf plotted to overthrow the Directory . Babeuf was called Gracchus . He plotted to topple the French Directory .
 Rousseau concluded that a small group of committed revolutionaries could seize power if they were tightly organized and had the support of the poor . Rousseau was influenced by Rousseau and espousing social egalitarianism .
 Babeuf organized the ‘Conspiracy of the Equals’ in Paris . Babeuf found support among a handful of Parisian artisans and shopkeepers .
 Babeuf and his friends were guillotined a year after a trial in 1796 . Babeuf was the leader of the French Revolution in France . He was guilledotined after a year of trial .
 The Directory took advantage of the discovery of the plot to purge Jacobins once again . The Directory used the discovery to purge the Jacobins .
 The Directory’s difficult tightrope act grew more precarious in an atmosphere of uncertainty, intrigue, and rumors of coups d’etat . Caught between the intransigent, dogmatic followers of Robespierre and the Jacobins on the left and the royal
 In 1797, elections returned many royalists to the Council of Five Hundred . Many royalists were returned to the council .
 The Directory government annulled the election results . Fearful that they might press for peace with France’s enemies in the hope of obtaining a restoration of the monarchy, the Directory .
 The coup d’etat of the 18th Fructidor (September 4, 1797) eliminated two of the directors, including Carnot . Carnot was a member of the French Revolution .
 In May of the next year, the directors refused to allow recently elected deputies to take their seats on the Council of Five Hundred . The directors refused the deputies' seats in May of that year .
 For all its failures, the Directory did provide France with its second apprenticeship in representative government . For all the failures of the Directory, it provided France with a model of government .
 The Constitution of 1795 was an important transition between the political system of the Old Regime and modern representative government grounded in the sanctity of property . It was a transition between monarchical absolutism and noble privilege .
 The Directory rejected cautious British suggestions that a workable peace might be forged without France having to give up its conquests of the Rhineland and the Austrian Netherlands .
 The French fought on, perhaps fearful that a more bellicose ministry in Britain might replace that of William Pitt the Younger if such a peace were signed . Perhaps fearful that such a deal might be struck, they fought on . The French government fought on.
 The Treaty of Campo Formio left France the dominant foreign power in Italy . The Treaty left France dominant foreign powers in Italy after it was signed in 1903 .
 Napoleon’s boldly independent diplomatic negotiations in the Italian campaigns made him the toast of Paris . This victory, and Napoleon's boldly independent diplomacy in the . Italian campaigns, led him to the victory .
 Austrians recognized French absorption of the left bank of the Rhine River and annexation of the Austrian Netherlands . The Austrians joined the Prussians in recognizing French absorption .
 Much of the north of Italy became a feeble pawn of France in 1797 . Reorganized in July 1797 as the Cisalpine Republic, much of Italy was a weak pawn .
 Years of war had exhausted the French nation and damaged the economy . Despite these victories, years of war exhausted the country and damaged its economy .
 Inflation was rampant, and the collection of taxes was sporadic at best . The collection of tax was sporadic, and inflation was rampant .
 Many bourgeois were dissatisfied, having lost money when the Directory cancelled more than half of the national debt in 1797 . Many bourgeois lost money after the French government cancelled half of their debt .
 Napoleon hoped to strike at British interests in India . In May 1798, Napoleon sailed with an army to Egypt, over which Turkey was sovereign .
 Fearing that France sought to break apart the Ottoman Empire and extend its interests in an area Russia had always wanted to dominate, Russia allied with Britain . Fearing the break-up of the Ottoman empire and extending its interests, Russia joined with Britain.
 Austria hoped to undo the Treaty of Campo Formio and to prevent further French expansion in Italy . French forces had sent the pope into exile and established a Roman Republic . Austria wanted to stop French expansion of Italy, where the pope had been exiled .
 The combined strength of the Coalition powers for the moment proved too much for the overextended French armies .
 In Switzerland, a combined Russian and Austrian army defeated a French force . The Russians and Austrians defeated the French army in Switzerland . The French army was defeated in Switzerland by a combined force .
 When Irish rebels rose up against British rule in 1798, France sent an invasion force to aid the insurgents . The French invasion force was in the hope of launching an invasion of England .
 A French fleet attempting to land more soldiers was defeated off the coast . After the defeat of the Irish insurgents and French troops who landed ashore, the French fleet was defeated . The French fleet attempted to land a larger number of soldiers .
 British troops crushed a series of Irish rebellions in a bloody struggle in which 30,000 people were killed . The British navy captured one of the French ships and turned back the rest of the rest .
 In the meantime, coalition members quarreled over strategy and eventual goals . Coalition members are still trying to find out what their goals are .
 Russian Tsar Paul withdrew from the Second Coalition in October 1799 . He was irritated with the British for insisting that the Royal Navy had the right to stop and search any vessel on the seas .
 The wily Abbe Sieyes once replied “I survived” when asked what he had done during the Revolution . He became a director in the spring of 1799 .
 France needs a government with stronger executive authority, he said . He said he believed France needed a strong government with strong executive authority .
 In the face of endemic instability, Sieves decided in 1799 to overthrow the French Directory .
 On November 9, 1799, General Bonaparte announced to the hastily convened councils that another Jacobin conspiracy had been uncovered . A new constitution had to be framed to provide France with a stronger executive authority .
 Napoleon’s response was incoherent and ineffective, but the quick thinking of his brother, Lucien, president of the lower assembly, saved him from one of his few moments of indecision .
 Lucien rejected the call for a vote to outlaw Napoleon, and he ordered troops to evict members who opposed him . Luciens rejected the vote for an outlawment .
 Those who remained delegated complete power to Sieves and General Bonaparte . Sieves was one of those who remained in control of the government .
 In France, it marked a significant break with the past, although, to be sure, important continuities from the Old Regime helped shape the modern world . The French Revolution was the first of its kind in France .
 These included in some places the abolition of feudalism, curtailment of clerical privileges, and establishment of a more centralized governmental structure .
 Some people welcomed the export of the French Revolution, others did not, viewing ‘liberation’ by the French as indistinguishable from conquest . Some people viewed “Liberation” by the . French as . indistinguishable from . conquest . Others did not view “liberation
 Spain and some of the German and Italian states contributed to the emergence of nationalist feeling there . Spain, Germany and Italy were contributing to the rise of nationalism in Spain .
 Like the contemporaries who witnessed the Revolution, modern historians have had a variety of interpretations of it . Modern historians also have had different interpretations of the Revolution .
 Many still disagree as to the causes, effects, and significance of the Revolution, debating the dramatic events with some of the same passion as those who experienced it firsthand . Many of them still disagree on the causes and effects of the revolution .
 In Piedmont, French control reduced the influence of the nobility and left a heritage of relative administrative efficiency . The French control of the region left a legacy of relative efficiency .
 The abolition of feudalism in some of the conquered German states, northern Italy, and the Kingdom of Naples increased the number of property owners .
 The French conquerors proclaimed the rule of law and curtailed some of the influence of the clergy . The French conquered the area in 17th century .
 The French faced the realities of almost constant warfare and, increasingly, local resistance . But the French faced an almost constant, almost constant battle against the French .
 As the wars dragged on and the economic situations of the ‘republics’ grew worse, the benefits brought by the French seemed less important . The benefits of the French seem increasingly less important, writes the historian .
 Ruined merchants and former officials joined nobles and clerics in opposing rule by France or its puppets . The French Revolution was founded in 17th Century France .
 The Civil Constitution of the French Clergy led to a violent reaction against the Revolution in France . Anti-Semitic measures in the occupied territories had the same effect as the Civil Constitution .
 The peoples of the Rhineland, the Netherlands, and Flanders bitterly resented the revolutionaries’ de-christianization campaign . The people of those regions resented their de- christianization campaigns .
 Bavarian, Dutch, Piedmontese, Austrian, and Swiss patriots found willing listeners to listen to .
 French occupation gave rise to general opposition and a new wave of national feeling among the conquered . The French occupation of the French occupied Palestine in 1940s led to a wave of anti-French feeling .
 The French conquests in Europe were themselves an exercise in statemaking, largely unanticipated and unwanted by the local populations . The conquests were themselves themselves a exercise in statemaking .
 Between 1795 and 1799, the Directory established satellite ‘sister republics’ directly administered by France . France established satellite "satellite republics" in France .
 Only the Cisalpine Republic generated any local enthusiasm for the French invaders, and then only briefly briefly . But in the Italian states, only the Italian Republic generated enthusiasm for French invaders . The French invasion of Italy was only briefly successful .
 People ‘liberated’ from the rule of kings and princes found themselves governed by a revolutionary bureaucracy administered from Paris . The French Revolution was a revolutionary state of power .
 The French found support and hired officials principally from the middle class . The middle class had already provided officials in the old state structure . The French state was founded in 1903 .
 The French invasions gradually generated a hatred for the revolutionary invaders . But in some places a concomitant nationalist response was a hatred .
 Many writers and other people in the upper classes hoped one day that “Germany” would one day be politically unified . This was especially true within the German states, where many writers and others in the Upper classes hoped .
 Marxist historians dominated the historiography of the French Revolution . Marxist historians long dominated the history of the revolution .
 They have described the Revolution as the inevitable result of a bourgeois challenge to the Old Regime, dominated by nobles . The Revolution has been described as inevitable as the result of bourgeois challenge .
 Marxists have interpreted the Revolution in terms of the rise of the bourgeoisie and its struggle for social and political influence commensurate with its rising economic power during the eighteenth century . Marxists say the Revolution was the result of a struggle for the social, political influence of the bourgeois .
 Marxists have insisted that the nobility compromised the authority of the absolute monarchy by refusing to be taxed . The emboldened bourgeoisie allied with urban artisans and workers to bring down the monarchy, Marxists say .
 They have described the emergence of the bourgeoisie as the dominant social class in France, insisting on its growing role in the country’s increasingly capitalist economy .
 This traditional Marxist economic interpretation of the French Revolution has been largely discredited . The French Revolution was a major source of inspiration for the revolution .
 Historians have noted that differences between aristocrats and bourgeois, and within both social groups, had become considerably blurred during the eighteenth century . Most of the ‘bourgeois’ members of the Estates-General were drawn from commerce and manufacturing but rather from law .
 Thus, one cannot accurately depict the Revolution as having been simply a victory for the bourgeoisie . The Revolution was not a triumph for the bourgeois, but it was a victory against the bourgeoisie, says Lenin .
 Views critical of ‘bourgeois revolution’ thesis have also emphasized that within France the complex nature of local political power, divided among provincial Estates and parlements, limited the actual prerogatives of absolute monarchy .
 Many historians now see the Revolution as affirming the victory of men of property over titled nobles born into status and power . The Revolution was a victory for both nobles and bourgeois, including both noble and bourgeois .
 A related interpretation has seen the Revolution as part of an essentially democratic ‘Atlantic Revolution’ stretching across the Atlantic Ocean . The Revolution was part of the essentially democratic "Atlantic Revolution," according to some interpretations .
 The American War of Independence was the first manifestation of an essentially political quest for popular sovereignty . By this view, the war was an attempt to achieve popular sovereignty in the U.S. The American Revolution was the result of a popular uprising against tyranny .
 It influenced, in turn, the French Revolution and subsequent attempts in other European countries to gain political rights, as well as movements for independence in Spain’s Latin American colonies early in the nineteenth century .
 Revisionist school has argued that a new political culture was already in place in the last decades of the Old Regime . More recently, another revisionist school argues that such a political culture has been established in the past .
 An extreme version of this interpretation sees the French monarchy as a state well on the way to reforming itself through the collaboration of liberal nobles before the Revolution interrupted this process . The French monarchy is thought to have been on the verge of reforming itself before the revolution .
 One view sees in the 1750s and 1760s the origins of this new, revolutionary political culture, seen in the political and ideological opposition to Louis XV and particularly in the rhetorical violence of the Revolution s first year . Another view sees the beginnings of the new political culture in the
 The French Revolution was the first modern European democratic experience . The revolution was the birth of the French Revolution in France and revolutionized Europe .
 Napoleon’s career was shaped by and reflected the breathtaking changes brought by the French Revolution . Napoleon's career reflected the changes brought in by the revolution . Napoleon was the most powerful person in the world, but was also the most influential figure in Europe .
 Statemaking and the emergence of nationalism, accompanied by the increased secularization of political institutions, slowly but surely transformed the European continent . The rise of nationalism and secularization led to the creation of nationalism .
 Napoleon claimed that he was the true son of the French Revolution . Napoleon was an admirer of the Enlightenment . Napoleon claimed to be Napoleon's true son to the revolution .
 He personally supervised the writing of the new constitution, which made wealth, specifically propertied wealth, the determinant of status . The constitution was written by him personally, and he personally supervised its constitution .
 Napoleon saw himself as a savior who carried “liberty, equality, and fraternity” abroad . Napoleon freed the European peoples from sovereigns who oppressed them . Napoleon was Napoleon’s savior in Europe .
 Napoleon claimed to have created European unity in his final exile on the island of Saint Helena . Napoleon's final exile was in exile on Saint Helena, the island he was exiled from .
 In the process of “liberating’s other nations from the stranglehold of old regimes, he also conquered them . But in the process, "liberating" other nations also conquer them, he says .
 Napoleon’s rise to power should be seen in the context of the French Revolution . Napoleon should have been seen as a leader of the revolution in France . Napoleon was born in 18th century .
 During the Directory, generals became increasingly powerful arbiters in political life . The French Directory was founded in 1903 .
 Napoleon manipulated consuls and ultimately overthrew the Directory . Napoleon manipulated the consuls in order to overthrow the French Directory .
 Corsican patriot Pascale di Paoli had managed to evict the Genoese from Corsica . The year before, the Corsican patriot had evaded them from the island of Corsica.
 Carlo Buonaparte, one of Paoli’s followers, remained on the island rather than join Paoli in exile in England . Paoli's followers remained in exile rather than joining him in exile .
 On August 15, 1769, Buonaparte’s wife gave birth to a son, Napoleon, named after a cousin who had been killed by the French . Napoleon's family could trace its noble origins back to fourteenth-century Lombardy .
 Napoleon would have been British had his father followed Paoli into exile . Napoleon's father followed his father into exile in Italy . Napoleon would be British if his father had followed him into exile.
 In 1770, the French government accepted the Buonaparte family as nobles . The family became a French noble family in 1770 .
 Napoleon entered the royal military school at Brienne, in Champagne, in 1779 . The island’s governor arranged for the young Buonaparte to receive an appointment to the school .
 He was exposed not only to a rigorous program of study but also to the humiliating condescension of the other students, he says .
 Napoleon’s first language was the patois of his island, a mix of Genovese and Tuscan . He was an outsider, and the other students mocked his strong Corsican accent . Napoleon was the son of a wealthy Corsican family .
 French were portrayed as murderous exploiters and tormenters, and Corsicans their victims . During the summer of 1789, he penned a history of his island in which he portrayed the French as murderous .
 Antoine-Jean Gros passed the Napoleon in Bonaparte examinations in a single year . He earned appointment to the artillery section of the national military academy .
 Corsica became part of France in the 1920s . Corsica is now part of the French Republic . The island is home to the National Guard and the National Assembly .
 Napoleon distanced himself from those Corsicans who wanted independence . In this way, Napoleon parted ways with his hero Paoli, who had returned from England and joined the islands royalists . Napoleon was a royalist in Corsica .
 He commanded a volunteer force that on Easter Sunday, 1792, fired on rioters supporting the cause of the Catholic Church . He commanded the volunteer force .
 When Paoli’s victorious forces turned the island over to the English, the Buonapartes were forced to flee . Paoli's victorious forces turn the island into a British colony .
 Napoleon planned the successful artillery siege of the port of Toulon, which was held by British forces in December 1793 .
 Useful political connections and the lack of direct involvement in the bitter factional struggles in Paris may have saved Napoleon from execution in the Terror or during Thermidor .
 Napoleon’s star continued to rise (with the help of his own determined campaign to construct a heroic public image of his exploits) while some of his Jacobin friends went to the guillotine . The result was that Napoleon's star kept rising, while his Jacobi friends went
 Napoleon helped put down a royalist uprising on October 6, 1795 . In the Paris of Thermidor, Napoleon helped to put down an uprising against the French monarchy .
 He attracted the attention of—and soon married—Josephine de Beauharnais, the lover of Paul Barras, one of the directors . She was the widow of a member of the National Assembly who had been guillotined during the Terror . He attracted her attention and
 Buonaparte became Napoleon Bonaparte . It now seemed appropriate to eliminate the Italian spelling of his name .
 Napoleon was the toast of Paris after a series of successes against the Austrians and their allies in Italy . He fought at the Battle of Arcole and was the most successful commander of the French army .
 He later recalled that, after victory over Austrian forces at the Battle of Lodi, “I realized I was a superior being and conceived the ambition of performing great things, which hitherto had filled my thoughts only as a fantastic dream .
 Napoleon then turned his attention to the Middle East . Dreaming of an eastern empire, Napoleon turned his eyes to the region . Napoleon then went on to build a European empire .
 In 1798, he set off on a spectacular voyage to Egypt, part of the Ottoman Empire, thus undertaking the first try by a Western power to occupy a country in the Middle East . He set off in 1798 on the first attempt to occupy Egypt .
 He was accompanied by 35,000 soldiers and a shipload of scientists, including mathematicians, physicians, zoologists, and engineers . A few of the latter were dreaming of carving a canal through the Isthmus of Suez that would give the French an overwhelming advantage .
 In Cairo he founded the Institute of Egypt, which greatly influenced the origins of Egyptology . In Egypt he founded Egyptology, Egyptology and Egyptology in Egypt .
 Napoleon defeated Egyptian forces at the Battle of the Pyramids in July 1798 . After pausing en route long enough to capture the island of Malta, Napoleon captured the island .
 Horatio Nelson trapped and destroyed the French fleet on August 1, 1798, in the Battle of the Nile . Nelson could see out of only one eye, had lost an arm, and had few teeth left .
 Russia and Austria formed a Second Coalition against France, which Turkey also joined . The coalition was formed in response to French campaigns in the east . Turkey and Russia joined the coalition .
 Napoleon was temporarily stranded in Egypt because of the naval defeat . His officers had to use Herodotus’s Histories as their guide to Egypt . The undaunted Napoleon set off to conquer Syria after the defeat .
 In Palestine his army stopped at Jaffa, where it massacred the population . In Palestine, the army killed the population. In Palestine he killed his troops .
 Napoleon was forced to retreat to Egypt by dwindling supplies and disease . Napoleon achieved a final victory there over the Turks with the annihilation of several more villages and their inhabitants . Napoleon's final victory in Egypt saw the annihilation .
 In Paris, Abbe Emmanuel Sieyes was plotting to overthrow the Directory . In Paris he planned to take over the French government .
 Such a venture now required the participation of one of the powerful, popular young generals whom the incessant warfare had catapulted to prominence . The venture now requires participation of the popular young general .
 Napoleon helped piece together a political constituency from among the quarreling factions of the Directory . Napoleon could be portrayed as the potential savior of France . Napoleon helped build up a constituency among the factions .
 With the coup d etat of the 18th Brumaire, Sieyes and Napoleon overthrew the Directory . Sieyes overthrew Napoleon with the help of Napoleon .
 After the overthrow of the Directory, the conspirators established a new government, the Consulate . The Consulate was established by the French government .
 Napoleon oversaw the drafting of a constitution and made peace with the Catholic Church . Napoleon was Napoleon's first French president in 18th century .
 Napoleon was designated "consul for life" in 1802 . Napoleon crowned himself emperor two years later . Napoleon was the first French president of the French Revolution .
 France continued to wage wars against Britain, Austria, Russia, and Prussia . In the meantime, he continued to fight against Britain and Austria .
 Napoleon Bonaparte, at the age of thirty, became first consul in 1799 . He was the most powerful man in France in a new, stronger executive authority .
 The Constitution of 1799, promulgated in December, gave lip service to universal suffrage, but reflected the authoritarian character Sieyes intended . Sieyes wanted the Constitution to reflect an authoritarian character he intended .
 Indirect election for each political institution reduced the political body of the nation to a small number of notables . Indirect elections were held for each of the political institutions .
 A Senate, appointed by the consuls, chose men from a list of 6,000 ‘notabilities” to serve in a Tribunate . A Senate of men, chosen by the Consuls, is appointed by a Senate of six,000 .
 A Council of State, whose members are appointed by the first consul, would propose legislation . The first council of state would be made up of consul's members .
 The Tribunate would discuss the proposed legislation, and a Legislative Body would vote on the laws . The Legislative Body could not debate the laws but could vote on them .
 Consulate provided political stability by institutionalizing strong executive authority . The Consulate was established by the U.S. government .
 France’s districts each received an appointed prefect, whose powers, delegated by the central government in Paris, surpassed those of the intendants of the Bourbon monarchs .
 Napoleon’s brother Lucien extended effective executive authority to the most distant corners of the nation, curtailing royalist and Jacobin opposition . Napoleon's brother was the minister of interior, extending executive authority .
 Napoleon ruthlessly suppressed the press, reducing the number of newspapers in Paris from seventy-three to thirteen . Napoleon cowed survivors with threats, or won their allegiance with bribes . Napoleon reduced number of French newspapers to 13, cowing them with threats .
 The Concordat Napoleon made peace with the Catholic Church, bringing it under state supervision . Napoleon's first war with the church was in 18th century . Napoleon was in charge of the state's Catholic Church .
 Deep hostility remained between priests who had sworn allegiance to the nation during the Revolution . The “juring’ clergy’s” clergy refused to join the revolution .
 Napoleon believed the Church should not have an institutional role in the affairs of state . Napoleon was influenced by the Enlightenment, and the Enlightenment .
 Society cannot exist without some being richer than others, and this inequality can't exist without religion . This inequality cannot exist in society without religion, and religion cannot exist as well .
 An agreement with the Church also was intended to undercut popular support for the monarchist cause . The agreement was aimed at restoring some of the Church's prerogatives, but not any that would threaten the government’s authority .
 Napoleon sought to detach the Church from the quest for a restoration of the monarchy . Napoleon thus shrewdly sought to withdraw from the Church's role in restoring the monarchy, he said .
 With the death in 1799 of Pope Pius VI , who had refused any accommodation with the Revolution, his successor, Pius VII , was eager to end a decade of religious turmoil .
 In 1801, Napoleon signed a Concordat with the papacy that helped solidify some of the changes brought by the Revolution . The Concordat declared Catholicism “the religion of the majority of citizens” in France .
 The pope would henceforth appoint new bishops, but on the recommendation of the first consul, that is, Napoleon . Napoleon would then appoint bishops, not bishops . Napoleon's first appointment would be made on recommendation by the first .
 The Church abandoned all claims to ecclesiastical lands that had been sold as ‘national property’ during the first years of the Revolution . The Church also abandoned all . claims to those ecclesiastical . lands that were sold as . “national . property” during the . first
 The Concordat helped restore ecclesiastical influence in France, reflected by an increase in religious observance and in the number of people entering the clergy .
 Napoleon also pleased the Church by abandoning the confusing official calendar put in place in 1793 . Napoleon also reestablished Sundays and religious holidays .
 Napoleon promulgated Organic Articles without consulting the pope . Organic Articles regulated the Gallican Church’s status in France and reduced the pope's authority . Napoleon's Organic Articles were promulgated without consulting pope .
 Napoleon and Pope Pius VII signed the Concordat in 1801, reconciling the Catholic Church with France after the Revolution . Church would now be subject to virtually the same administrative organization and policing as any other organization .
 No papal bull could be read in France’s churches without permission of the government . Clergy would have to read official government decrees from the pulpit .
 Under Napoleon, the Church gained the freedom of religious practice, but at the expense of some of its independence . The Church gained some independence under Napoleon, including freedom of freedom of religion .
 We owe him fervent prayers for his safety and for the spiritual and temporal prosperity of the State . We also owe him prayer for the safety of his safety .
 Napoleon granted Protestants and Jews state protection to practice their religion . Napoleon granted them state protection for practice of their religion in France .
 An imperial decree in 1808 organized Judaism into territorial consistories . Rabbis, unlike priests and Protestant ministers, were not to be paid by the state .
 Napoleon’s settlement with the Church alienated some of his cautious supporters on the left, notably the group known as the Ideologues . Napoleon was known as Napoleon Napoleon Napoleon, the French President of France .
 A general put it bluntly to Napoleon: “A fine monkish show.” Napoleon . The Concordat was a solemn ceremony at Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris .
 Napoleon seemed to absorb every bit of information that arrived in his office or field headquarters . Napoleon quickly mastered subjects related to military or administrative concerns . Napoleon was Napoleon's first president of the United States .
 He often ignored matters that did not particularly interest him, such as economics and naval warfare . France lagged behind Britain in naval warfare, he often ignored .
 He believed that his wildest dreams of conquest and empire would inevitably become reality . "He believed that he believed that His wildest dream would become reality," he said .
 Everyone feared his rages, but he could be surprisingly understanding and generous toward subordinates when they erred .
 He delegated very little meaningful authority, mistrusting even his closest advisers, but tolerated opposing viewpoints . He trusted even the closest advisers but tolerated opposition viewpoints .
 In February 1800, when Austria turned down his overtures for peace on the basis of the Treaty of Campo Formio, Napoleon returned to the battlefield . In June 1800, Napoleon retook Milan and defeated an Austrian army in June 1800 .
 The Peace of Amiens was signed by the British government in March 1802 . With Austria defeated and Russia tied up by a war against the Ottoman Empire, the peace was signed .
 France kept all of its significant gains on the continent, and Britain returned all of the French colonies it had captured .
 Napoleon was now free to dismember the Holy Roman Empire and to dictate the territorial reorganization of the small German states . Napoleon was freed to dismemorise the Holy. Roman Empire .
 Prussia and Austria had to be compensated for the expansion of Austria and Prussia . The expansion came at the expense of these two powers . The two powers had to compensate for this .
 By the oddly named Imperial Recess of 1803, the two most powerful German states absorbed a number of small, independent German states, ecclesiastical territories, and most of the free cities . By the end of the war, the German states were able to take over many of the independent
 The rulers of Baden, Bavaria, Hesse-Kassel, and Wurttemberg, the other largest German states, added to their domains .
 Napoleon named himself president of the Italian Cisalpine Republic . Piedmont remained a French possession, with Napoleon naming himself President Napoleon .
 Napoleon forced a defensive alliance on that strategically important country . Napoleon imposed a Federal Constitution on the cantons of Switzerland that transformed them into the Helvetic Republic .
 Napoleon Napoleon had brought his nation to a position of dominance in Europe not seen since the time of Charlemagne a thousand years earlier . Napoleon's success in Europe was unprecedented in Europe's history .
 In 1802 Napoleon became ‘consul for life,” a change approved by another plebiscite . Napoleon was the first consul to hold the title ‘first consul’
 Napoleon then prepared the establishment of a hereditary empire in France . Napoleon then established the French empire . Napoleon was Napoleon's first French president .
 Thousands of emigres took advantage of a declared amnesty to return to France . An alleged conspiracy against Napoleon’s life by a group of royalists in 1804 led him to act against the Bourbons .
 Napoleon accused Louis de Bourbon-Conde, the duke of Enghien, of involvement in the conspiracy . Napoleon accused him of being a member of the Bourbon family who emigrated to Baden .
 The duke was hurriedly tried and executed near Paris, despite the lack of evidence of any evidence of his involvement in plans to assassinate Napoleon . He was found guilty of trying to kill Napoleon .
 The Tribunate, Senate, and another plebiscite quickly approved the change from the Consulate to an empire . The change was quickly approved by the Senate, Tribunates and the Senate .
 Napoleon snatched the crown from the pontiff and placed it on his own head . Napoleon was crowned by the pope at the end of the 17th century . Napoleon died in 1877 .
 Napoleon was no more temperamentally suited to live with peace than with defeat . Napoleon was a better suited for peace than defeat, says historian .
 Napoleon restored French control of Haiti and reinstituted slavery in the French colonies in 1802 . In 1802, in response to pressure from sugar planters, Napoleon restored control of the country .
 French troops captured L’Ouverture and took him to France, where he soon died . The French captured him and he died .
 Tropical disease killed most of the French troops occupying Haiti . The British prevented the arrival of reinforcements from the French .
 The French army surrendered, and in 1804 Haiti, which had been France’s richest colony, again became independent . Haiti was once the richest colony in France and had been the richest .
 In retrospect, this was a paltry sum for a territory that virtually doubled the size of what was then the U.S. The U.N. was nearly doubled in size by the time it was .
 Napoleon's hope that its former colony would emerge as a rival to Britain also lay behind the sale . Napoleon s hope that the sale would be a success was behind the purchase of the colony .
 In July 1805, Russia and Austria joined Britain in form the Third Coalition against Napoleon . The coalition was formed in 1805 to defeat Napoleon .
 Napoleon readied an army and ships at the port of Boulogne on the English Channel for an invasion of Britain . Undaunted, Napoleon readies army, ships and troops for invasion of France .
 A French decoy fleet lured Horatio Nelson’s fleet into pursuit, hoping to inflict a crushing defeat on the Royal Navy . The decoy was a French fleet that captured Nelson's fleet .
 French fleet sailed from Spanish Mediterranean port of Cadiz on October 21, 1805, it sighted the Royal Navy . French fleet sighted Royal Navy in 1805 .
 French vessels were left vulnerable to attack by two columns of ships that succeeded in breaking the French line . Turning to sail back to port, the French vessels left vulnerable .
 Nelson's fleet earned one of naval history’s most decisive victories at Cape Trafalgar, not far from Gibraltar . As Nelson lay dying of a wound, his shiny medals and epaulets attracted a French marksman's eye .
 They defeated the Austrians at Ulm in October 1805, capturing 50,000 troops . They defeated them in Ulm, capturing more than half a million .
 Napoleon tricked his opponents into an attack on his intentionally weakened right flank . At Austerlitz on December 2, 1805, Napoleon tricked opponents into attacking him intentionally weakened left flank .
 He then divided the two armies with a crushing attack at their vulnerable center . He then attacked the vulnerable center of the army .
 When the dust cleared after the battle, the Russians and their Austrian allies had suffered 30,000 casualties, the French fewer than 9,000 . The Russians and Austrian allies suffered more casualties than the French .
 Austria asked for peace, giving up remnants of imperial territories in Italy and Dalmatia . Austria gave up the remnants of the imperial territories . Austria was victorious in the war, and Austria was forced to give up the territories .
 Napoleon’s allies, Bavaria, Baden, and Wiirttemberg, once again gained Habsburg territories . Bavaria and Baden also gained territories .
 In the wake of Austerlitz, King Frederick William III of Prussia abandoned his tentative agreement to join the Third Coalition, instead signing an alliance with France . King William III (ruled 1797—1840) signed an alliance to France .
 Napoleon named himself “Protector’ of the Confederation, whose members agreed to accept French garrisons in southern Germany and to support Napoleon if war broke out again . Napoleon named the Confederation of German Confederation in 1881 .
 This made the Holy Roman Empire even more irrelevant than it had been for a very long time . This made it even more relevant than it was for a long time, says the historian .
 In 1806, Francis II (Francis I of Austria) simply dissolved the clumsy entity by abdicating as Holy Roman emperor . Francis II abdicated in 1806 as Holy German Emperor .
 British government convinced Frederick William to join the alliance against Napoleon . Frederick William joined the British government in the fight against the French .
 Napoleon*s forces humiliated the Prussian army at Jena near Nuremberg on October 14, 1806, and then occupied Berlin . But Napoleon*'s forces humiliated Prussian forces at . Jena . Then occupied Berlin.
 In February 1807, the French and Russian armies fought to a bloody draw in a Polish snowstorm . The Russian and French armies were drawn in a bloody battle in the Polish town of Warsaw .
 Had Austrian and British troops been sent to support the Russians, Napoleon might well have been soundly defeated . Napoleon was soundly beaten by the Russians .
 Austria was still reeling from the defeat at Austerlitz, and the British were preoccupied with defending their commercial interests in the Western Hemisphere . The British were still preoccupied by defending their Western Hemisphere, and Austria was reeling from its defeat . But Austria was not ready to accept the
 Napoleon sent for fresh troops from France and added 30,000 Polish soldiers . Some were attracted by speculation that the emperor might create an independent Polish state . Napoleon sent fresh troops to Poland in 1877 .
 Napoleon met with Tsar Alexander I on a raft in the middle of a river . After defeating the Russian army at the Battle of Friedland, Napoleon met the Tsar .
 Amiena is the name of the first city in the world's history . The city was founded in 17th century . It was the first major city to be built in Vienna .
 By the Treaty of Tilsit, Prussia lost territory in western Germany and in Poland, which became, respectively, the Kingdom of Westphalia and the Grand Duchy of Warsaw . The latter annexed by Napoleon’s ally, Saxony .
 The king of Saxony became the grand duke of Warsaw by virtue of a personal union with the king . The king became a grand duked of Warsaw in the 17th century .
 Russia was forced to accept the territorial settlements in Western Europe as definitive . Russia accepted the settlement as a result of the Treaty of Versailles .
 The tsar received a promise of French support in Russia’s current quarrel with the Ottoman Empire . In return, the tsar was promised support from France .
 France tacitly agreed to back Russia’s long-standing ambitions in southeastern Europe . France thus tacitly . agreed to . back Russia's long-running ambitions in southeast Europe .
 When Austria challenged Napoleon by invading Bavaria in 1809, Napoleon moved rapidly against Vienna . Napoleon captured Vienna, capturing the Habsburg capital . Austria's invasion of Bavaria prompted Napoleon to invade Bavaria .
 He crossed to the left bank of the Danube River and defeated the Habsburg army in July at Wagram . 300,000 men participated in the battle, and 80,000 were killed or wounded . He then crossed the border, crossing to Wagram, defeating the Haps
 Defeat forced Austria to surrender Illyria to France and other territory to Bavaria and Russia . Austria was still technically but uneasily allied to France .
 With Austria defeated and weakened, Prussia discouraged and dismembered, Russia neutralized, and Britain once again left alone to challenge France, Napoleon’s position in Europe seemed invincible .
 Napoleon had constructed a vast empire through conquest, the establishment of satellite states, and alliances with smaller powers . Through conquest, he had constructed an empire in Europe .
 Napoleon Napoleon was considered one of the most brilliant military leaders in modern history . Napoleon was a Corsican Warrior from 18th century Corsican . Napoleon is considered to be the most successful military leader in history .
 His talents lay not in originality but in his stunningly innovative adaptations of military strategies and tactics developed in the eighteenth century and during the Revolution, he says .
 Before mass military conscription, warfare had usually involved relatively limited numbers of soldiers . Before mass conscription of soldiers, warfare was usually limited to very few soldiers .
 Old Regime armies had consisted largely of mercenaries commanded by nobles . Old Regimes armies consisted mainly of mercenaries, commanded by noble men .
 Most battles had been fought in precise, drilled ranks, by two relatively small armies in line formation directly facing each other . Most battles were fought by two small armies, with two armies in front of each other, in precise and drilled ranks .
 In the eighteenth century, technological improvements and tactical improvements in artillery augmented its importance in warfare .
 Artillery pieces became lighter and therefore could be moved more easily . Artillery items became lighter in order to move more easily.
 Improvements in roads also helped expedite the movement of cannon, as well as troops . Roads also helped speed up the movements of cannon and troops .
 Properly positioned artillery, launching powerful shells, could now play a decisive role against infantry . Properly . positioned artillery could now be a decisive . role against . infantry .
 The artillery became a more respected part of the army . talented officers, Napoleon not the least of them, found a chance for promotion that they would not have had .
 committed sans-culottes were first mobilized as citizen-soldiers in the levee ert masse proclaimed in August 1 792 . The French Revolution was the first French Revolution to mobilize citizens as citizens .
 The Revolution inaugurated a period of warfare in Europe in which more soldiers entered battle than ever before . The Revolution in France was the beginning of a period that saw more soldiers enter battle than any other European war .
 Between 1800 and 1815, perhaps as many as 2 million men served in or allied with Napoleon’s armies . Napoleon's armies were one of the world's most successful military campaigns .
 Napoleon harnessed French nationalism to win the commitment of his armies . Napoleon harnesses French nationalism with the support of his army .
 Karl von Clausewitz (17801831) described how warfare had changed . He defined warfare as ‘an extension of state policy by other means” as an extension of policy .
 Napoleon’s genius was his ability to organize, oversee, and assure the supplying of and communication between larger armies than had ever before been effectively assembled, and to move them more rapidly than anyone before him . Napoleon was able to organize and oversee the supplying and communication of and . communication
 Napoleon built on the French innovation in 1792—1793 of using combat divisions that combined French citizens drawing lots to determine who would be conscripted to fight in Napoleon s wars .
 Napoleon refused to delegate responsibility for crucial strategic and tactical decisions to his subordinates . As in the administration of the . empire, however, Napoleon refused responsibility for . crucial strategic . decisions to be made by subordinates .
 Napoleon perfected the “mixed order” formation developed in the eighteenth century . Napoleon combined troops across the field in a thin line about three men deep and bunching them in columns not only for marching but also for attack .
 Napoleon kept some battalions in columns, others in lines, which allowed battlefield flexibility . Napoleon kept troops in columns and columns, allowing them to maneuver .
 When he saw the opportunity, he launched an attack by outflanking his opponent and striking against the enemy’s lines of communication . He launched his attack on the enemy, striking against his enemy's lines of communications .
 skilled marksmen threw the opponent s advance forces into disarray . When he confronted an army stretched out before him, skilled marksman threw the enemy's advance forces in disarray.
 The concentration of deadly artillery fire prepared the way for the assault of the infantry columns . Napoleon once referred to the twelve-pound cannons as his “beautiful daughters”
 Napoleon could attack and defeat part of an enemy army before reinforcements could arrive . The speed of his army’s movements was such that Napoleon could rapidly attack . Napoleon could defeat an enemy before reinforcements were able to arrive .
 Napoleon sent his troops, particularly the cavalry, to pursue the enemy . Instead of stopping to celebrate victory, Napoleon decided to send his troops to pursue . Napoleon sent the cavalry to chase the enemy.
 Napoleon’s armies, unlike the professional armies of the Old Regime, lived off the land, simply requisitioning what they needed . Napoleon's armies lived off land, and requisitioned what they had . Napoleon was the most successful soldier in the world, and his armies
 This did not make French troops very popular, even in those lands officially incorporated into the empire . French troops were not popular with many of the French troops .
 The imperial army was able to march up to twenty miles a day . But it did allow the imperial army to travel far afield in great numbers .
 Each infantryman carried with him about sixty pounds of equipment . Such speed seemed incredible for the period, since each infantryman was carrying about 60 pounds .
 Napoleon enjoyed loyalty from his officers and troops, even up until the bitter end . Napoleon enjoyed intense loyalty from officers and soldiers, even until the end of his life . Napoleon was the most successful Napoleon ever was .
 He took to the field with his troops and rewarded good work with promotions and decorations, sometimes given on the field of battle .
 The emperor’s own courage was also a source of inspiration to his troops . The emperor's own courage also was also an inspiration .
 Napoleon's Imperial Guard refused to fight until Napoleon had moved to a safer place . During one battle, the Imperial Guard would not fight until he had moved away from the battle . Napoleon died at the age of 50 in 1881 .
 "He treated his soldiers with demonstrable respect and even affection," he said . "They seemed willing to die for him," he added .
 Napoleonic adventure offered even the most humble soldier a chance for glory . Napoleomans had a chance to glory in the French Revolution .
 Jacques-Louis David s Oath of the Army after the Distribution of Standards shows the eagerness of the army to defend Napoleon and the empire . even some meat, and drank wine or rum, was drank .
 After defeat, soldiers were fortunate just to find enough food to survive . But after defeat, or when they were far inside inhospitable territory, they were lucky just to get enough .
 Medical care remained inadequate, despite improvements that included caring for wounded soldiers w'hile the battle was still raging, rather than afterward .
 Major surgery, including amputations, occurred after each major battle, often fatal . Major surgery was often fatal, with many amputations occurring after each battle .
 Napoleon was far more concerned with able-bodied soldiers than with the wounded or sick . Napoleon, however, remained more concerned about the wounded and sick than the sick .
 Napoleonic empire was a significant episode in the long story of statemaking in Europe . The Foundations of the French Empire is a look at the French empire's foundations .
 Napoleon sought to make state administration more efficient and uniform . Napoleon wanted state administration to be more uniform and efficient . Napoleon was Napoleon's first monarch of the French Revolution .
 His aggressive conquests brought centrally controlled, bureaucratic government and a centralized legal system to much of the continent . He also brought central government and central legal system into Europe . The result of his conquests was centralized and centralized government and law .
 It is possible to see him as the embodiment of “enlightened absolutism” awaited by the philosophe Voltaire . For this reason, it is possible . It is also possible to think of him as an embodiment of Enlightenment ideals .
 Napoleon created a new social hierarchy based not on blood but on service to the state, particularly in the army and bureaucracy, and on ownership of property . Napoleon's social hierarchy was based on service for the state rather than blood and property .
 Napoleon made his relatives and marshals heads of state . The empire was based on an imperial system in which Napoleon made relatives head of state.
 Napoleon’s daunting will imposed change. Everywhere that French armies conquered, Napoleon's daunting will forced change . Napoleon's will imposed new rule of law everywhere .
 Napoleon’s Council of State was the most important administrative body of the empire . It oversaw finance, interior affairs, and war . Napoleon was Napoleon's first president of the French Empire .
 Members advised emperor and drew up laws and regulations for approval by the Legislative Body . Members advised the emperor . They drew up legislation and regulations .
 Napoleon attached to the council a corps of young, bright, apprentice bureaucrats . Napoleon attached them to important administrative posts in the future . Napoleon said they would assume important posts in his administration .
 Napoleon completely eliminated the Tribunate in 1807 . The Senate, Legislative Body, and Tribune lost all but their ceremonial roles . The Tribuneate was abolished by Napoleon .
 Even the members of the Council of State found their influence on the emperor increasingly reduced .
 Napoleon established the Bank of France in 1800, which facilitated the state’s ability to borrow money . Napoleon set up the bank in 1800 to help the state borrow money from the state .
 He followed the Directory’s policy of abandoning the grossly inflated paper money of the Revolution .
 He facilitated the assessment and collection of taxes . He ordered a land survey of the entire country upon which direct taxes were to be based . The land survey was based on the land survey .
 He expanded the number of taxes collected on salt, tobacco, and liquor, as well as goods brought into any town of over 5,000 inhabitants .
 The empire followed the Revolution, and particularly the Directory, in making higher education the responsibility of the state .
 Napoleon believed schools could create patriotic citizens through teaching secular values that would ultimately link education to nationalism . Napoleon believed that schools could help create patriotic and obedient citizens through .
 Napoleon established state secondary schools in France in 1802 . In 1802, Napoleon established thirty-seven of which were operating six years later .
 Napoleon wanted to be known to history as the new Justinian, the Roman lawgiver . The Napoleonic Code was created by Napoleon Napoleon in the French Revolution . Napoleon wanted the code to be the new law-giver of the law .
 The Civil Code of 1804, which became known as the Napoleonic Code, may have been the emperor’s most lasting legacy . It was the first civil code of its kind .
 Many of the cahiers, or lists of grievances submitted to Louis XVI on the eve of the Revolution, had asked that French laws be uniform . Many of those lists were submitted to the French king on eve of Revolution .
 There were many different legal codes in France . The fundamental division in French law was between Roman law in the south and customary law based upon regional and local traditions .
 Napoleon ordered the Council of State to seek advice from a battery of lawyers to codify the laws of the land . Napoleon ordered that the laws should be codified in the French Revolution . Napoleon died in 1803 .
 Napoleon personally participated in many critical discussions and debates with Napoleon . Napoleon was a member of Napoleon's circle of advisors .
 The code, over 2,000 articles long, enshrined the equality of all people before the law . It also granted the freedom of religion and granted the right to freedom of expression .
 The “freedom” guaranteed in relations between employers and workers left workers legally subordinate to their employers and unable to strike . The ‘freedom’ of relations between employer and worker relations left workers subordinate to employers . Workers were able to strike, but were not allowed to do so
 Workers were required to carry small passports that had to be handed over to municipal officials, police, or employers when requested . Workers were also required to hand over small passports to authorities .
 The Napoleonic Code reflected Napoleon’s traditional attitudes toward the family . Napoleon's traditional attitudes to the family were reflected in the code . The code was published in France in 1817 .
 He considered the family the most important intermediary between the state and the individual . The family was a means of guaranteeing social order, he said .
 The code reaffirmed the patriarchal nature of the traditional family . Rejects scattered demands during the Revolution for the equality of women .
 It made women and children legally dependent on their husbands or fathers . Women and children were made legally dependent by their fathers or husbands .
 A woman could not buy or sell property or begin a business without her husband’s permission . Any income she earned would pass to his descendants, not hers, according to the law .
 A woman worker’s wages, too, went to her husband, too . Women had no control over their children's savings, and no control of children's money .
 As during the First Republic, the state recognized divorce, but it was now more difficult to obtain . The state now recognizes divorce as a form of form of separation .
 Napoleonic Code established conditions for the sale of cattle than addressed the legal status of women . More articles in the code were established in the 18th century than addressed women's rights .
 In cases of adultery, w'omen risked penalties that were far more severe than those for men . W'omen risk penalties for adultery in cases of such an offense .
 As in the Old Regime, parents could put their offspring in jail and retained authority over their children’s marriages . Parents could also retain authority over children's marriages and jailing them .
 The code required equal inheritance of all children (the parents could dispose of a certain percentage, based on a sliding scale, as he or she wished). It ended primogeniture (inheritance by the eldest son) in northern France, where it still existed .
 Siblings often found ways to keep the family property together . One brother could buy out his brothers’ shares in an inherited property .
 French couples have few'er children in an effort to avoid further division of property . The end of primogeniture also may have provided an impetus for French couples to have fewer children .
 He considered the end of social distinctions by birth to be one of the most lasting accomplishments of the French Revolution .
 The elimination of legal barriers to social ascension left wealth, largely defined by the ownership of property and service to the state, as the main determinant of status . Wealth was largely defined as ownership of the state (rewarded by grants of property, titles, and pensions)
 It took wealth to acquire background, education, and reputation to take one’s place in the imperial hierarchy . Wealthy people acquire background and education to acquire status, education and reputation .
 Napoleon created an elite of “notables,” as they were called, rewarding those who served him well with prestigious titles and lucrative positions . Napoleon created a group of elite "notables" who were loyal to him . Napoleon was assassinated in 1818 .
 At the pinnacle of the new hierarchy were eighteen marshals, appointed in 1804 from the ranks of the Senate . They included generals who had earned fortunes waging war . At the end of the 1804 they would be the first marshals to be appointed .
 The titles, which could be hereditary, were awarded for service to the state . But unlike the titles of the Old Regime, these titles did not stem from the ownership of a certain estate or chateau .
 Napoleonic notables totaled only one-seventh of the number of the nobles in France on the eve of the Revolution . Napolesomans were one-in-three of the most important aristocrats in France in France .
 Some of the new notables had already become rich through purchase of ecclesiastical and emigre lands sold during the Revolution . Some of these lands were purchased during the revolution .
 More than half of all men granted titles by the emperor had rendered service in the military . The emperor granted titles to men who had served in military .
 The civil service was the second most important avenue to a Napoleonic title . Civil service is the most important way to win a French title .
 Some Italians, Dutch, Germans, and others from conquered lands found that the French Empire offered them dignified and sometimes even lucrative careers .
 Napoleon established the Legion of Honor in 1802 to reward those who served with distinction . Napoleon established it in May 1802 .
 It was, predictably enough, organized along military lines, with commanders, officers, and knights . It was organized in the same way as the Knights of France .
 97 percent of those so decorated by Napoleon served in his military forces . Napoleon was Napoleon's most decorated soldier .
 The subjects of territories incorporated into the empire were eligible to receive the Legion of Honor . The subjects were eligible for the honour .
 In fierce old times, they balanced loss By hanging thieves upon a cross. By hanging . thieves upon the cross .
 French rule generated resistance in countries absorbed into Napoleon's empire through conquest . The Tide Turns Against Napoleon: Napoleon's French rule generates resistance in some countries .
 Napoleon manipulated factional splits in some countries, co-opted local elites where he could . He brushed aside rulers as he pleased, and tried to establish compliant new regimes, some handed over to his brothers . Some of the world's most powerful men were assassinated in 18th century .
 Napoleon kept his major enemy in the field, or more appropriately, on the high seas . Napoleon s failure to force British submission by strangling its economy with his “Continental System’s . System, aimed to cut off Britain from its continental markets, kept him in the
 In Spain, resistance against French rule became a full-fledged rebellion that, with British assistance, sapped imperial resources . The Spanish resistance became a rebellion that sapped British resources .
 French occupation of some of the German states gave rise to German nationalism, solidifying resistance . The occupation of several German states also solidified resistance .
 Prussian and Austrian military reforms led to stronger opponents in the field . Austrian and Prussian military reforms in the 1930s led to greater opposition .
 Napoleon in 1812 decided to invade Russia in a final ill-considered expansion of imperial aggression . Napoleon's invasion of Russia was one of the most ill-conceived of his imperial ambitions .
 The destruction of his ‘Grand Army’ in the snowdrifts and howling winds of Russia was the beginning of the end . The destruction was the end of the Soviet Union, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Napoleon announced his Continental System in November 1806 . The Continental System was designed to save the British government money . Napoleon announced the system after the end of the war .
 It prohibited trade with Britain, which he hoped would strangle the British economy . He hoped to close all continental ports to British ships . It was hoped to strangle British economy by closing ports to Britain .
 French merchants and manufacturers, as well as the state, would earn fortunes supplying the captive markets of the continent . The French state would also benefit from its role in Europe .
 The blockade of the continental ports was far easier said to done than done . But the blockade of continental ports is far more difficult said than done.
 France's relative lack of available coal and iron ore, its lack of capital accumulation and investment, and the overwhelming allocation of the nation’s material and human resources to war prevented French merchants from taking up the slack left by the absence of British goods .
 The British government’s “Orders in Council’ of November and December 1807 demanded that trading ships under all flags purchase a license in a British port . In response to Napoleon's Continental System, the British government demanded that all trading ships had a license .
 Britain at loggerheads with the United States, one of France’s principal trading partners . This decision placed Britain at a disadvantage to the U.S. It is one of the most important trading partners in France .
 Napoleon threatened to seize any ship that had traded with Britain or accepted a search by British authorities . Napoleon retaliated with the Milan Decrees, threatening to seize ships that had even accepted a British search .
 In 1809, British imports could still be readily found on the continent .
 The French, suffering a sharp decline in customs revenue, began tolerating violations of the Continental System . The French sold special licenses and placed hefty taxes on the importation of British goods to bring in more revenue .
 The blockade came apart in the midst of an economic depression that began in 1811 . The blockade was the first to come apart from the blockade in the past .
 Napoleon counted on Britain’s deepening crisis with the U.S. government, which opposed the boarding and searching of its vessels by British British PM William Pitt the Younger and Napoleon carve up the world .
 Even the War of 1812 between the British and the United States, which ended with the exhausted British capitulating, could not destroy the British economy . The British economy was not destroyed by the war, but by the end of the war .
 The fact that French agents had encouraged an Irish insurrection against British rule in 1798 lingered in the memory of the British upper class, adding to their resentment of France .
 Tory governments governed Britain throughout the revolutionary and Napoleonic periods . They remained committed to defeating Bonaparte (and repressing dissent at home) despite the staggering economic cost of the war .
 Napoleon's obsession with bringing Britain to its knees led him into the disastrous Peninsular War in Spain . Napoleon’s obsession led him to the disastrous war in Spain in 1877 .
 A French army marched on Lisbon, Portugal, and the Portuguese royal family fled to Brazil . The royal family was forced to flee to Brazil after the French invasion of Lisbon .
 An insurrection in March 1808 led to the abdication of Charles IV and the succession of his son Ferdinand VII to the throne . Charles IV abdicated and Ferdinand VII was succeeded by Ferdinand VII .
 Napoleon forced Ferdinand to abdicate that same year, and summoned his older brother, Joseph Bonaparte, from his wobbly throne in Naples to become king of Spain . Napoleon believed that Ferdinand was about to fall like an apple into his hands .
 Ecclesiastical reforms imposed by Joseph and Napoleon angered the Church . The reduction in the number of monastic convents by two-thirds and the abolition of the Inquisition angered the church .
 Napoleon found some allies among the urban middle class, but the Spanish nobility joined their old allies, the clergy, in opposition to the invaders . Napoleon found allies among urban middle-class, but some of his old allies joined the clergy .
 French forces were easy targets for the small, mobile groups of Spanish guerrillas, who attacked and then quickly disappeared into the Spanish landscape . The small groups of small groups attacked French forces and disappeared from the landscape .
 British troops led by Arthur Wellesley, later duke of Wellington, arrived to help the Spanish and Portuguese fight the French .
 By 1810, about 350,000 French troops were tied up in the Iberian Peninsula . The Iberan Peninsula was the focus of the French invasion .
 Spaniards sustained what arguably was the first successful guerrilla war in modern Europe . Fighting for ‘Church and king,’ Spaniards fought for the church and king .
 One of the lasting effects of the Napoleonic period was the quickening of German and, to a lesser extent, Italian national identity . The Napoleom period was one of the longest periods of European history .
 French revolutionaries called for a war against the tyrants of Europe . The French revolutionaries had called for war against Europe .
 The French discovered that nationalism was a double-edged sword . Gradually the French learned that nationalism had to be accepted as a nationalistic .
 Some people in states conquered by French armies resented the occupation of their lands . They also began to long for the existence of a territorial state organized around their own nationality .
 Napoleon sought to curry favor in each conquered state in exchange for support against his enemies . Napoleon sought the support of each of his conquered states in exchange with support against enemies .
 Westphalia was created by the Treaty of Tilsit out of former Prussian territories and other smaller states that had fought against him . Napoleon may indeed have intended that WestPHalia would become a model state .
 He ended serfdom and gave peasants the right to own land, to move through the kingdom as they pleased, and to send their children to school . He also gave peasants a right to be able to move around the kingdom and to move their children as they desired .
 His principal goal was to bolster the Confederation of the Rhine’s north flank against possible attacks against his interests . But his principal goal is to bolster his interests in the region of Germany .
 Napoleon considered conquered territories as sources for military conscripts and raw materials, or as potential markets for French goods . Napoleon considered conquests as sources of military conscription, raw materials and potential markets .
 In Italy, French authorities forbade the importation of textile machinery and imposed disadvantageous tariffs, fearful of competition with their own industries . In France, the government forbade textile machinery imports and imposed a ban on textile machinery .
 In the Netherlands, the French occupation virtually brought the Dutch trading economy to a standstill . The French occupation of the Netherlands brought the country's trade to a halt .
 Poles soon began to doubt Napoleon’s promise to reestablish Polish independence . Some Polish nobles began to look to the Russian tsar for help . Others looked to the king of Prussia for help, others to the tsar .
 Among those territories conquered by Napoleon, open insurrections were relatively rare . In the Austrian Tyrol, peasants sang nationalist songs as they fought against the French in 1813 .
 The French armies waged war brutally against those who dared oppose them, burning villages and executing civilians, particularly in Spain, Tyrol, and southern Italy .
 The impact of the French invasions on nationalism was perhaps clearest in the numerous German states . The impact on nationalism in Germany was particularly clear in Germany .
 At first, some German intellectuals had praised Napoleon, but that soon changed . Napoleon was assassinated in 1818 .
 That year, the French executed a Nuremburg bookseller accused of selling anti-French literature . The bookseller was executed by the French in 1945 .
 German writers espoused the view that people of the German states shared a common culture based upon language, tradition, and history . Gradually German writers said people of Germany shared a shared culture based on language and tradition .
 Only in the middle of the eighteenth century had German writers begun to write in their own language . Before then, they considered French the language of culture .
 Like some composers, they began to discover elements of a common culture . They drew on language, literary texts, folk traditions, and other German cultural traditions .
 This emotional quest for cultural and political institutions that would define ‘Germany’ reflected some rejection of the rational tradition of Enlightenment thought identified with France, says historian . The quest to define “Germany” was rejected by some, he says .
 Some German nationalists believed that the multiplicity of states in Central Europe stood in the way of eventual German unification . Some of the states in central Europe were considered to be a barrier to eventual unification of Germany .
 Napoleon destroyed the religious settlement imposed by the Treaty of Westphalia, which in 1648 had ended the Thirty Years’ War . The religious settlement was the result of the 1648-1648 war .
 Napoleon may have helped the cause of German nationalism by eliminating some tiny states . Napoleon increased the territory of the middle-sized states at the expense of the former . Napoleon helped to eliminate some tiny German states, increasing the territory .
 About 60 percent of the population of the German states passed from one ruler to another during the revolutionary and Napoleonic eras . About 60 per cent of Germany's population passed to another ruler during those eras .
 In states such as Hanover and Wiirttemburg, German particularism was considered part of being German . Yet in states such a particularism, local identity, was seen as part of Germany .
 Baden, Bavaria, and Wurttemberg emerged from the period with their independence and separate traditions intact . Baden was much smaller and less powerful than Austria and Germany .
 Johann Gottlieb Fichte called on “the German nation/' which he defined as including anyone who spoke German, to discover its spiritual unity . He defined the German nation as including people who speak German, and anyone who said German .
 In Spain, as we have seen, people of all classes came to view the French as invaders, not liberators . In Spain people came to terms with the French, not the Spanish, as they did with France .
 A constitution proposed by the Spanish Cortes in 1812 at Cadiz reflected the influence of the French Revolution . It was not under French control at the time . The constitution was proposed in the Spanish city of Cadiz .
 It proclaimed freedom of the press, established an assembly to be elected by a relatively wide electorate . It abolished the Inquisition, proclaimed freedom for the press and established a new assembly .
 The constitution was never implemented because of the eclipse of Spanish liberals in the wake of conservative reaction . It was also a self-consciously nationalist document .
 Some Spaniards, too, were becoming more aware of their own shared linguistic, cultural, and historical traditions . Spaniards are becoming aware of shared shared linguistic and cultural traditions .
 Napoleon's successes in Napoleon's armies led Prussia to enact military reforms . Prussia and Austria enacted military reforms in view of the devastating Prussian defeat at Jena in 1806 .
 In 1807, a royal decree abolished serfdom in Prussia, with military efficiency in mind . The decree was made by the Prussian royal court in 1807 .
 Peasants were now free to leave the land to which they had been attached and to marry without the lord’s permission . Peasant were now able to leave their land and marry without permission from the lord .
 A decree three years later allowed peasants to convert some of the land they worked into their own property . The decree was signed by the government in 1981 .
 The Prussian military commander Baron Heinrich Karl vom und zum Stein appointed some commoners to be officers and cashiered some of the more inept noble commanders . Baron Heinr Heinrich Karl vom undzum Stein cashiered some of the most inept noble 
 Stein established a ministry of war, taking away some important decisions from the whims of the king and his inner circle . Stein took over some of the most important decisions in the country's history .
 In 1807, the Stein ministry abolished serfs’ ties to the land, but the labor obligations and seigneurial dues of serfs remained in effect . The Stein ministry also abolished serfers’ labor obligations, dues and labor obligations .
 Stein called for greater patriotic participation in the national affairs of Prussia . Stein was a member of the Communist Party of Germany . Stein: Prussia is a nation of patriotic citizens .
 Many statesmen who resisted Napoleon continued to think in Prussian, not “German” terms . Thus he and many other statesmen . resisted Napoleon, not "German" terms .
 The elimination of most forms of corporal punishment enhanced troop morale, as did the rewarding of individual soldiers who served well . The elimination was part of the Army's first major reorganization of the military .
 Stein organized a militia, which provided a proud, patriotic reserve of 120,000 part-time soldiers . Stein also organized a civilian militia, providing a proud patriotic reserve . Stein organized the militia .
 Napoleon now confronted the fact that he still had no legitimate children to inherit his throne . Napoleon faced the problem of having no legitimate heirs to the throne . The Empire’s Decline and the Russian Invasion
 Napoleon arranged for a bishop in Paris to annul his marriage . The pope refused to do so, allowing him to remarry with the Church’s blessing . Napoleon's marriage was annuled by a bishop .
 Napoleon arranged a marriage in 1810 with Marie-Louise, the daughter of Austrian Emperor Francis I . She had never even met Napoleon . The Archduke Charles stood in for Napoleon at the wedding ceremony while he remained in Paris .
 Napoleon entered into a de facto alliance with the Habsburgs, Europe’s oldest dynasty . Napoleon thus entered into an alliance with Europe's oldest dynasty. Napoleon's son Napoleon was born in France .
 For the first time since Napoleon’s remarkable rise to power, dissent also began to be heard openly inside France . For first time, dissent was heard openly in France for first time in Napoleon's reign of power .
 Deserters and recalcitrant conscripts dodged authorities in increasing numbers beginning in about 1810 . Deserterters and re-arrested conscripters dodged authorities by increasing numbers .
 Royalist and Jacobin pamphlets and brochures circulated, despite censorship . Jacobin and Royalist pamphlets circulated .
 Royalists objected to Napoleon’s disdainful treatment of the pope . The pope excommunicated the emperor after France annexed the Papal States in 1809 .
 Napoleon responded by placing Pius VII under house arrest, first near Genoa, and then near Paris in Fontainebleau . Napoleon responded to the situation by simply placing him on house arrest .
 Napoleon had become increasingly unable to separate options that were feasible or possible from those that were unlikely or indeed impossible to achieve . Napoleon became increasingly unable of separating options from those impossible or impossible . Napoleon had to choose between possible and unlikely .
 Napoleon’s advisers now expressed their doubts about the emperor's endless plans for new conquests . Napoleon's advisers now express doubts about his endless plans to conquer .
 Talleyrand had resigned as foreign minister in 1807, after the execution of the duke of Enghien . He had resigned after the death of the king's duke .
 Talleyrand now symbolizes the ‘party of peace,” which opposed extending the empire past limits . Talleyand now symbolized the party of peace . The party now opposes extending the Empire past limits that could be effectively administered .
 In 1809, he began to negotiate secretly with Austria about the possibility of a monarchical restoration in France should Napoleon fall . Napoleon began to begin negotiations with Austria in 1809 about a possible monarchial restoration .
 Napoleon’s interest in expanding French influence in the eastern Mediterranean and his marriage to a Habsburg princess virtually assured war with Russia . Russia had reopened its ports to British and neutral vessels carrying English goods .
 Napoleon believed he could enforce the continental blockade by defeating Russia . Austria and Prussia agreed to assist him . Napoleon prepared for war, forcing vanquished Austria to join him .
 In the meantime, the tsar signed a peace treaty with the Ottoman Empire, freeing Russia to oppose Napoleon . The tsar was able to defeat Napoleon in Russia .
 Napoleon’s ‘Grand Army’ crossed the Niemen River from the Grand Duchy of Warsaw into Russia in June 1812 . Over 600,000 strong, the “Grand Army,” over 600,00 strong, crossed into Russia from Poland .
 The Russians retreated, drawing Napoleon ever farther into western Russia in late summer . The Russians, however, simply retreated . Napoleon continued to advance, drawing him into Russia .
 The quality of Napoleons army had declined since 1806 through casualties and desertions . The Grand Army may have been the largest army ever raised up to that time, but the quality had declined .
 Half of the Grand Army consisted of Prussian, Italian, Austrian, Swiss, or Dutch conscripts . The Grand Army was formed from around the world .
 Napoleon's Grand Army was almost constantly at war, there was no chance to rebuild it to Napoleon’s satisfaction . Napoleon was not satisfied with the size of the Grand Army .
 In Russia, disease, heat, and hunger took a far greater toll on Napoleon’s army than did the rearguard action of enemy troops . Disease, heat and hunger also took a greater toll than did enemy forces .
 Napoleon pushed on until his army reached Borodino, sixty miles from Moscow . Tempted by the possibility of capturing Moscow, he pushed on . Napoleon died at the age of 60 .
 The two armies fought to a costly draw in the bloodiest battle of the Napoleonic era, with 68,000 killed or wounded . The Russian army continued its retreat before the French army continued their retreat .
 Fires, probably set by Russian troops, spread quickly through wooden buildings . Fires spread quickly among wooden buildings in the Russian capital .
 Napoleon decided to march the Grand Army back to France . Over 1,500 miles from Paris, without sufficient provisions, and with the early signs of the approaching Russian winter already apparent, he decided to return the army .
 The Russians were waiting for Napoleon’s beleaguered armies at the Berezina River, where they killed thousands of French soldiers . Thousands of soldiers were killed by the Russians in the battle .
 The freezing winter then finished off most of what was left of Napoleon’s Grand Army . Napoleon's Grand Army was finished off by the freezing winter .
 The retreat from Moscow was one of the greatest military debacles of any age . Russia's retreat from the Soviet Union is one of Russia's greatest military failures of all time .
 In the wake of a military disaster of such dimensions that press censorship and duplicitous official bulletins (the expression “to lie like a military bulletin” became current) could not gloss over it, the mood of the French people soured .
 This call, coming at a time of great economic hardship, was greeted with massive resentment and resistance . This call was greeted by massive resentment, resistance, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This call ... is greeted with resentment"
 Napoleon planned new campaigns and further expansion . Instead of negotiating a peace that could have left France with the left bank of the Rhine River, he wanted to expand his empire .
 Napoleon now faced allies encouraged by his devastating defeat . Napoleon's defeat was the beginning of a new era for the French Empire .
 In February 1813, Russia and Prussia signed an alliance, agreeing to fight Napoleon until the independence of the states of Europe was restored . Russia and Germany agreed to fight against Napoleon until independence was restored in 1813 .
 Napoleon earned two costly victories over Russian and Prussian troops in the spring of 1813 . His casualties were high, but his casualties were low .
 Great Britain, still fighting in Spain, formally joined the coalition in June . Great Britain still fighting the French in Spain .
 Napoleon rejected Austrian conditions for peace, which included the dissolution of the Confederation of the Rhine . Austria joined the coalition in August 1813, and Austria joined in 1813 .
 In August 1813, Napoleon defeated the allies at Dresden, but then learned that Bavaria had seceded from the Confederation of the Rhine . Bavaria joined the coalition against France and joined the French army .
 Napoleon suffered a major defeat at Leipzig and retreated across the Rhine River into France . In October, his troops outnumbered two to one, Napoleon's troops were outnumbered 2 to one . Napoleon retreated into France in October .
 His armies, ever more filled with reluctant, raw recruits, lacked adequate supplies . His armies were ever more full of reluctant recruits, lacking adequate supplies, he said .
 An insurrection in the Netherlands followed by an allied invasion restored the prince of Orange to authority there . The prince was restored to authority by allied forces in the Dutch .
 The duke of Wellington’s English forces drove the French armies from Spain and back across the Pyrenees . The French armies were driven from Spain to Spain .
 Napoleon’s discouraged armies were greeted with hostility when they tried to live off the land as they had abroad . Forced to fight on French soil for the first time, Napoleon's discouraged armies faced hostility . Napoleon was greeted by hostility when he tried to .
 Opponents of Napoleon, including some for whom a Bourbon restoration seemed a possibility, now spoke more openly in France . Some of Napoleon's opponents now speak more openly about Napoleon .
 Early in 1814, the allies proposed peace (perhaps insincerely, assuming the French emperor would refuse) if Napoleon would accept France’s natural frontiers of the Rhine River, the Alps, and the Alps .
 In Paris, the Legislative Body approved a document that amounted to a denunciation of the emperor, though it never reached the public . The document was approved in Paris, but never received the public approval .
 Napoleon’s normally dutiful older brother Joseph encouraged the members of the Council of State to sign a petition calling for peace . Napoleon's brother Napoleon encouraged the signing of the petition . Napoleon was assassinated in 1817 .
 Arthur Wellesley, the duke of Wellington, was the main Allied force to defeat the French . The main allied force overcame stiff French resistance to take command of the British army .
 Tsar Alexander 1 of Russia and King Frederick William III of Prussia rode triumphantly into the city . The Russian Tsar and Prussian monarchs rode into the Russian capital .
 At Fontainebleau, Napoleon’s marshals refused to join in his frantic plans for an attack on the allies in Paris and pressured him to abdicate . Napoleon's marshals were also pressured to abandon his plans to attack the allies .
 The allies refused to consider Napoleon’s abdication in favor of his three-year-old son . Napoleon was the son of Napoleon, who died in 1803 .
 Napoleon abdicated on April 6, 1814, and then took poison, which failed to kill him . Without an army and, perhaps for the first time, without hope, he was forced to abdicate .
 The allies sought the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy . Napoleon’s return was Napoleon's return to the throne .
 By the Treaty of Fontainebleau (April 11, 1814), the allies exiled Napoleon to a Mediterranean island off the coast of Italy . Napoleon was exiled to the island of France by the allies .
 Marie-Louise refused to accompany him, preferring to be duchess of Parma . She received the title by virtue of being a member of the Austrian royal family . Marie Louise was a duke of the Parma from the Austrian monarchy .
 Talleyrand’s skilled diplomacy helped the allies work out a gracious peace treaty with France . The allies worked out a surprisingly gracious peace deal with France, largely thanks to his skilled diplomacy .
 The Treaty of Paris, signed on May 30, 1814, left France with Savoy and small chunks of land in Germany and the Austrian Netherlands . France of November 1, 1792 was the France of 1792 .
 Louis XVIII signed a constitutional “Charter” that granted his people “public liberties,” promising that a legislature would be elected . The king of the French signed a constitution that grants his people liberties .
 A coterie of fanatical nobles convinced the king to enact some measures, however, that were highly unpopular . The Ultra-royalists convinced him to enact measures that were unpopular with the king .
 Many in France disapproved of the substitution of the white flag of the Bourbon family for the tricolor, the description of the Charter as a “gift" from the king to the French people, the retiring of 14,000 officers .
 French were exhausted from years of wars and sacrifice . But most of the French were simply exhausted . The French were tired of years of war and sacrifice, the historian says .
 Marshal Ney promised to bring Napoleon back to Paris in a cage . Marshal Ney had offered his services to the Bourbons, who had offered him his services .
 With Bonaparte nearing Paris, Louis XVIII and his family and advisers fled to Belgium . Belgium had become part of the Kingdom of Holland and later became part of Holland . The family and friends of the French king fled to escape .
 Napoleon again paced frenetically through the Tuileries Palace, making plans to raise new armies . Soon Napoleon was back in the saddle with the French army .
 The allies quickly raised an enormous army of more than 700,000 troops . The allies raised an army of over 700,00 troops in just days .
 Napoleon led an army of 200,000 men into the Austrian Netherlands, engaging Prussian and British forces south of Brussels on June 16, 1815 . Napoleon led a 200,500-strong army of men into Austria in June 1815, and engaged Prussian, British forces .
 He forced the Prussians to retreat and ordered one of his generals to pursue them with his army . The Prussianians were forced to retreat, forcing one of their generals to chase them .
 Napoleon then moved against the British forces commanded by Wellington, his old nemesis . Napoleon then fought against Wellington, who was Napoleon's nemesis in the battle .
 Wellington had skillfully hidden the extent of his superior infantry behind a ridge . Wellington's troops were hidden behind the ridge . The battle was a success for the British Army .
 Napoleon watched as Prussian army arrived to reinforce Wellington . Napoleon watched in horror as the Prussian forces arrived in Germany .
 The general sent in pursuit of the Prussians had been taught to follow Napoleon’s directives to the letter and not to improvise . The general was taught to be careful of Napoleon's instructions and to follow him closely .
 When the imperial guard broke ranks and retreated, much of the rest of the French army did the same . The imperial guard retreated from the French capital in Paris, France, in 1777 .
 He surrendered to British forces near the western coast of France, while hoping to find a way to sail to America . He hoped to sail on to America, but was captured by British forces .
 The allies packed Napoleon off to the small island of Saint Helena, in the South Atlantic, 1,000 miles away from any mainland . Napoleon was sent to the island, Saint Helena .
 He died of an ulcer, probably a cancerous one, despite stories that he was poisoned by arsenic . Despite this, he died of a likely cancerous ulcer .
 Napoleon’s testament, a masterpiece of political propaganda, tried to create a myth that he saved the Revolution in France . Napoleon's testament is an attempt at creating a myth of his role in the French Revolution . Napoleon was assassinated in 1818 by Napoleon III .
 Napoleon was indeed the heir to the French Revolution . Napoleon was the son of Napoleon III, who was born in France .
 Napoleon's Napoleonic Code proclaimed the equality of all people before the law . Napoleon's Legacy 5 11 over women . Napoleon favored men, women, women .
 Napoleon furthered the myth, and to some extent, of the ‘career open to talent,” which aided, above all, the middle class, but even peasants in some cases . Napoleon’s success in Napoleon's career aided the middle-class, but also
 He consolidated the role of wealth, principally property ownership, as the foundation of the political life of the nation . Property ownership is the basis of the national political life, he says .
 This increased the number of citizens eligible to participate in political life, however limited by imperial strictures . It also increased the amount of people who could participate in the political life .
 Napoleon helped turn nationalism into an aggressive secular religion . Napoleon manipulated patriotic energy into an ideology inculcated by French schools . Napoleon turned nationalism into a secular religion, manipulating patriotic energy .
 Napoleon's reforms, built upon those of the French Revolution, extended into states conquered by his imperial armies . Napoleon built on those of those states, including France and Germany .
 The French imposed constitutions and state control over the appointment of clergy, standardized judicial systems, and abolished ecclesiastical courts . The French impose constitutions .
 Napoleon created new tax structures, standardized weights and measures, ended internal customs barriers, abolished guilds . Napoleon created state bureaucracies that were extensions of French rule in the ‘sister republics” founded by the Directory .
 French occupation ended residual peasant seigneurial obligations virtually everywhere . French occupation also abolished noble and ecclesiastical courts in northern Italy and the Netherlands .
 Napoleonic Code proclaimed freedom of worship . French conquest of other European states, including Baden, Bavaria, and the Netherlands, helped remove restrictions on Jews .
 Napoleon also reestablished slavery in Haiti under pressure from French planters in 1802 . Napoleon re-established slavery under pressure by planters .
 Napoleon's success in implementing reforms varied from place to place, depending on existing political structures, the degree of compliance by local elites, and the international situation . Napoleon was able to implement reforms in several countries, including France and Germany .
 Napoleon’s armies conquered relatively late and where the structures of state authority had always been particularly weak, the French presence had little lasting effect . In southern Italy, for example, where Napoleon's armies fought relatively late, the structures had never been particularly strong .
 As the Napoleonic wave subsided, nobles and clergy regained domination over the overwhelmingly rural, impoverished local population .
 Napoleon claimed from Saint Helena that he was trying to liberate Europe, but he had actually replaced the old sovereigns with new ones— himself or his brothers . Napoleon claimed that he had liberated Europe .
 Wagons returned from Italy full of art and other treasures, which became the property of Napoleon and his family, his marshals, or the state . Napoleon's family, marshals and the state own the art and treasures .
 French conquests helped awaken nationalism in the German states and Spain . France's conquests in Germany and Spain helped awaken nationalistic tendencies .
 Napoleon “regarded a human being as an action or a thing . . . Nothing existed but himself. Napoleon, the daughter of the banker Jacques Necker, Louis XVI's minister .
 Napoleon’s armies may have suffered as many as 1. million casualties, says historian . Napoleon's armies suffered up to 1.million casualties during his reign in France . Napoleon may have been involved in the deaths of 1.1 million people .
 Napoleonic Wars killed about one in five of all Frenchmen born between 1790 and 1795 . One in five Frenchmen were born in France during the war . Napoleons were born during that period .
 The rise of romanticism helped make the story of Napoleon, the romantic hero, part of the collective memory of Western Europe after his death . Napoleon's story was made into a collective memory in Europe after he died .
 Long after Waterloo, peddlers of songs, pamphlets, lithographs, and other images glorified Napoleon’s life as earlier they had the lives of saints . Napoleon's life was glorified long after Waterloo .
 Rumors of his miraculous return to France persist long after his death . Rumors were persistent long after he died .
 So powerful was his legend that even the most improbable seemed possible . Even the most unlikely seemed possible, it was impossible to imagine .
 Industrial Revolution arguably had more important social, political, and cultural consequences than the Industrial Revolution . Of the changes in the post-Napoleonic period that profoundly transformed the way Europeans lived, none arguably had been more important than the industrial revolution .
 It is thought to have begun in England in the middle decades of the eighteenth century . It accelerated in that country during the first decade of the nineteenth century .
 It spread to Western Europe in particular, but affected regions as well as other places as well .
 Industrial Revolution and its critics would help shape the modern world . The Industrial Revolution was the beginning of the industrial revolution .
 The economy of every region had depended on some extent on the production of clothes, tools, pots, and pans . The economy had depended upon some of the products produced in the region .
 Most production was carried out by men and women working in small workshops, hammering and shaping household goods . Country women weaving or knitting clothes .
 During the first half of the nineteenth century, the Industrial Revolution slowly but surely transformed the way many Europeans lived . The Industrial Revolution was the beginning of the modern world .
 In Western Europe, it became easier for entrepreneurs to raise money for investment . Banking and credit institutions became more sophisticated in Western Europe . Entrepreneurship has become easier to raise funds for investment as banking, credit institutions become more sophisticated .
 Dramatic improvements in transportation, notably the development of the railroad and steamship but also the construction of more and better roads, expanded markets . Dramatic improvement in transportation also led to expansion of the world's markets .
 Rising agricultural productivity, increasingly commercialized in Western Europe, fed a larger population . Rising agricultural production fed a growing population .
 Mechanized production slowly revolutionized the textile and metallurgical industries . It brought together workers, including women and children, in large workshops and factories .
 Rural producers lost out to more efficient urban, factory-based competitors . Rural producers in much of France, the uplands of Zurich in Switzerland, and Ireland, among others, lost out .
 Factory production revolutionized the way Europeans worked and lived in the 1930s and 1940s . Factory production was a key part of the industrial revolution in Europe .
 Many contemporaries were amazed and impressed by factory production of goods and watched and rode trains in wonderment and appreciation . Others were shocked at what seemed to be the human costs of such a transformation .
 Artisans lost protection when guilds were abolished under the influence of the French Revolution . At the same time, large-scale industrialization undercut many artisans .
 At the same time, lurid but not inaccurate accounts of the awful conditions of workers in factories and mines began to reach the public . At the time, there were lurid reports of the appalling conditions in factories .
 Calls for state-sponsored reform from state officials and middle-class moralists echoed far-wide . Calls for reform echoed far from far-right moralists .
 Many skilled workers in Western Europe not only protested harsh conditions of work and life but began to see themselves as a class with interests defined by shared work experience .
 During the 1830s and 1840s, workers began to demand social and political reform . During the 1840s and 18th century, workers were demanding social reform .
 The first socialists challenged the existing economic, social, and political order . Proclaiming the equality of all people, the dignity of labor, and the perniciousness of unrestrained capitalism, the first socialists .
 Early histories of the Industrial Revolution tended to emphasize the suddenness of the changes it brought . Historians sought to identify the exact period of industrial ‘take-off’ in each country .
 Historians had an emphasis on “victors” and “laggards” in the quest for large-scale industrialization . Historians blinded historians to the complexity of the manufacturing revolution, they say .
 Recent work, however, has de-emphasized the suddenness of these changes . Recent work has also emphasized the importance of these sudden changes .
 The first Industrial Revolution was largely the intensification of forms of production that already existed . Despite the importance of inventions such as those that gradually transformed textile manufacturing, the first industrial revolution was largely a form of production .
 Most industrial work still was organized traditionally, using non-mechanized production . Most of the industrial work was organized in the traditional way .
 Rural industry and female labor remained essential components of manufacturing . Rural industry was essential to manufacturing in the 1930s .
 Steam power came to prominence in Western Europe in the mid-nineteenth century . Industrial manufacturing left behind traditional forms of production in the early 1900s .
 For example, the growth of the linen industry in Porto, Portugal, stemmed not from factories, but from the work of villagers in the countryside . Villagers were paid for spinning and weaving per piece .
 The cradle of large-scale industrialization, craft production and rural “outwork” remained important until the second half of the nineteenth century . Even in England, the cradle of industrialization and craft production remained important .
 Even in Britain at mid-century, the majority of British industrial workers were not employed in factories . The majority of the British workforce was not employed at factories .
 In Germany there were twice as many ‘home workers’ as workers employed in factories . In Germany, there were double as many home workers as those employed in factory jobs .
 In the Paris region in 1870, the average manufacturer still employed only seven people . The average manufacturer in the region of Paris employed only 7 people .
 The Industrial Revolution could not have occurred without increased agricultural productivity . Agricultural productivity sustained a dramatically larger population . The industrial revolution was the result of increased productivity .
 In turn, population generated greater consumer demand for manufactured goods, now transported in many places by trains and steamships . Increase in population generated increased consumer demand .
 The rise in population in Europe that began in the eighteenth century accelerated during the first half of the nineteenth century . Demographic Explosion in Europe began during the early 19th century .
 Europe was then the most densely populated of the world’s continents, with about 18 people per square kilometer in 1800 (compared to approximately 14 people in Asia and fewer than 5 in Africa and the United States), rising to about 26.50 years later . Europe was the
 Estimated Populations of Various European Countries from 1800 to 1850 . Country 1800 1850 Denmark 0.0.0 . Denmark is the smallest country in the world to have a population of 0.5 million .
 Sweden's population more than doubled over the course of the nineteenth century . Russia’s population also grew substantially from about 36 million in 1796 to about 45 million in 1815 to at least 67 million in Russia .
 The population of the Balkans rose from about 10 million in 1830 to four times that ninety years later . The population rose from 10 million to four million in the Balkans in 90 years .
 Cholera tore a deadly path through much of Europe in the early 1830s and reappeared several times until the 1890s . Disease and hunger continued to interrupt cycles of growth well into the twentieth century .
 During the Irish potato famine in the late 1840s, between 1 and 2 million people died of hunger in Ireland . During the famine in Ireland, 1 to 2 million died .
 Tuberculosis (known to contemporaries as “consumption”) still killed off many people, especially workers and particularly miners . Tuberacy was still known as "consumption" by contemporaries, known as ‘consumption .
 The mortality rate fell rapidly in the first half of the century . Overall, however, the mortality rate has fallen rapidly in recent decades .
 Municipal authorities in some places paid more attention to cleanliness, sewage disposal, and the purity of the water supply . Sand filters and iron pipes helped make water more pure .
 Improvements in reservoirs, the first of which was built in 1806, increased availability of clean water .
 Preconditions for Transformation 5 17 Life expectancy increased in all classes . Life expectancy also increased in the United States .
 Individuals surviving their first years could anticipate living longer than their predecessors . Individuals surviving first years expected to live longer than those of previous generations .
 Fewer women died young, thus prolonging the period during which they could bear children . Fewer deaths young prolongs the period when women could have children .
 Wives were less likely to suffer the loss of their partner during this same period, and therefore were more likely to become pregnant . Furthermore, wives were also likely to be pregnant during this period .
 Poor people in cities are far more vulnerable than people of means to fatal illness . Poor people, above all, in cities, are more vulnerable to death than those in the United States .
 In Liverpool, half of all children born to the poorest families died before the age of five . Half of all those born to poor families die before age of 5 .
 In eastern and southern Europe, mortality and birthrates continued to be quite high until late in the century . The deaths of people in the region continued to rise in the late 1800s .
 The chances of a baby surviving his first year of life rose because of improvements in sanitation, such as a safer water supply and better waste disposal . Infant mortality rates remained high until the 1880s .
 Mothers would not have sent their babies to wet nurses if keeping them at home did not also pose a risk . Mothers, particularly poor ones, would not send them to wet nurse if they were at risk .
 Many mothers needed to work to help keep the family economy afloat . Not all mothers were, in any case, healthy enough to breast-feed or able to supply enough milk .
 Substituting cow's or goat’s milk could be lethal, and also had been a cause of high mortality rates during the warm summer months . Substituted cow's milk has been a problem in recent years . Substitute cow's may have been found to be lethal .
 Fresh milk became more readily available, and by the end of the century people were aware that it must be sterilized . Fresh milk was easier available, but people became aware of its sterilization requirement .
 The decline in mortality, particularly among infants, preceded and encouraged the fall in the birthrate in Western Europe .
 With more adults surviving childhood, the subsequent decline in birthrates had much to do with choice . The decline of birthrates was largely due to the fact that more adults survived childhood .
 The French birthrate, in particular, gradually fell, and then plunged dramatically beginning with the agricultural crisis of 1846—1847 . The birthrate in France fell dramatically in 1846, 1847 .
 Many farming families in France had fewer children so that inheritance would not be spread too thin . Farming families in the country had fewer kids to avoid spreading too much wealth .
 Europe enjoyed nearly a century of relative peace, broken only by brief and limited wars . Europe also enjoyed nearly 100 years of relatively peace, with brief but limited wars only brief brief wars .
 It also permitted the accumulation of capital, which could be reinvested in commercialized farming or in manufacturing . It also allowed the . accumulation of . capital .
 Capital-intensive production (larger-scale and market-oriented farming) underlay the agricultural revolution . Capital intensive production underlined the revolution in agriculture .
 Between 1750 and 1850 in Britain, 6 million acres— or one-fourth of the country’s cultivatable land -- were incorporated into larger farms . The farms took up one-in-four acres of land in Britain .
 England produced almost three times more grain in the 1830s than in the previous century . England produced three times as much grain in 18th century than in previous century.
 The elimination of more fallow land (land left untilled for a growing season so that the soil could replenish itself) helped . The elimination helped .
 Some farmers raised cattle or specialized in vegetables and fruits for the burgeoning urban market . Some farmers raise cattle or specialize in vegetables for the city market .
 Farmers increased yield by using more intensive agricultural techniques and fertilizers, which, in turn, accentuated demand for sturdier manufactured agricultural tools .
 During the first half of the century, continental visitors to England were surprised to find that, in contrast to the world they knew, relatively few small family farms remained .
 With the ongoing consolidation of plots, the number of rural people dependent on wage labor for survival rose . The number of farmers dependent on wages for survival also rose .
 Farm work in 1831 remained the largest single source of adult male employment in Britain, employing almost a million men . Farm work was the largest source of employment in the country, employing nearly a million people .
 The English countryside was peopled by a relatively small number of ‘gentlemen’ who owned most of the country . Many yeomen (independent landowners and tenant farmers of some means) moved from place to place in the search for any kind of farm work .
 The tough lives of the rural poor reflected a too-often forgotten human dimension of the agricultural revolution, which increased the vulnerability of rural poor . The tough life of the latter reflected a . too often forgotten human aspect of the . agricultural revolution .
 On the continent, there was not as much consolidation of land as in England . But there, too, productivity rose as more land was brought into cultivation .
 French agricultural production rose rapidly after 1815 . Northern farmers with fairly large plots began to rotate their crops three times a year .
 In the south, where the soil was of a generally poorer quality, the land more subdivided, and much of it rocky, peasants planted vineyards . The wine they produced hardly caused the owners of the great vineyards of Burgundy or the Bordeaux region to lie awake at
 Farmers terracing hillsides, goats climbing up steep slopes, and the sounds of silkworms munching mulberry leaves as peasants anticipated the harvest of raw silk . Some Mediterranean regions are known for their silk production .
 A modest increase in agricultural production occurred in Central Europe and parts of Eastern Europe, too, too .
 Agricultural productivity rose more than twice as fast as the population between 1816 and 1865 . In the German states, agricultural productivity rose double the population growth rate .
 Prussian agricultural productivity jumped by 60 percent during the first half of the century . The increase was partly because of improved metal plows and other farm implements .
 Root crops, such as turnips and potato, added nutrition to the diet of the poor . Root crops were added to Britain and France as well as France and France .
 In much of Europe, two-thirds of the land was not cultivated, and the Balkans and Greece, subsistence agriculture continued as it had for centuries . Yet in much of the continent, subsistence farming continued in many areas .
 In Russia, the rich Black Earth region, covering the middle Volga River area and much of Ukraine, still was undeveloped . The rich region was covered in rich soil, but still was still unspoiled .
 During the first half of the nineteenth century, some of the larger estates began to produce and export more wheat and rye . The larger estates benefited from fertilizer and even some farm machinery .
 The yield of potatoes and sugar beets increased dramatically during the 1830s and 1840s . Potato and sugar beet yields increased dramatically in this period of the period .
 Russian farms could barely feed the empire’s huge population in good times, and their output was grossly inadequate in bad times . Yet Russian farms were able to feed the population in a good time, and output was inadequate .
 Improvements in transportation contributed to the transformations of the Industrial Revolution . Trains and Steamboats were the key to the industrial revolution .
 The first railroad train began hauling coal in northern England in 1820 . Passenger train service began between Liverpool and Manchester in 1830 .
 Some observers compared the building of rail lines to the construction of the pyramids of ancient Egypt, as embankments, tunnels, and bridges transformed the countryside . Some observers have compared the project to the Egyptian pyramids .
 In England railroad terminology was swiftly incorporated into the teaching of the alphabet . Board games and puzzles quickly embraced the train .
 Paintings and lithographs, drawings, and engravings took the magic of the railroad and the wonders of travel as themes . Paintings, lithographs and drawings were inspired by travel .
 The railroad’s development served as a significant catalyst for investment, catching the imagination of the middle classes . The middle classes identified the railway with progress that could be seen, heard, and experienced .
 Private investment completely financed British railways during this period . Private investment was completely funded by the railways .
 Earlier investments in businesses had been largely the preserve of patricians . Smaller companies undertaking railroad construction attracted middle-class investors .
 Railway booms accustomed more middle-class people to the benefits , as well as the risks, of investment . Railways boomed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The value of the London and North Western Railway had outstripped that of the East India Company by the mid-ninnineteenth century .
 Rail transport reduced shipping costs by about two-thirds, dramatically increasing consumption and, in turn, production . Rail transport reduces shipping costs and increases production .
 Stockton and Darlington Railway opened in 1825 . Trains carried ‘railway milk’ from the countryside and frozen meat from the port of Darlington .
 50,000 people were displaced in Manchester during a seventy-five year period, and many times that in London . Yet, at the same time, railways also entailed the destruction of large swaths of major city centers .
 Railway construction also brought continental states into the realm of economic decision making . In France, the government and private companies cooperated in building a railway system .
 Greenwich time, or “railway time,” had become standard in Britain in the 1850s . The relatively rapid pace of travel arguably helped spread the sense of being “on time .
 Trains brought places much closer together, carrying newspapers and mail more rapidly than could ever have been imagined . Trains were used to carry newspapers, mail and more rapidly .
 First trains could speed along at twenty-five miles an hour, three times faster than the finest carriages . The first trains were capable of travelling at around 25 miles per hour .
 Railroad companies were quick to divide their cars into first-, second-, and third-class service . At first the luxuries were limited to foot-warmers in winter . First-class rail cars were divided into first, second and third class .
 For people of more modest means, secondor even third-class carriages had to suffice . Train wagons were not even sheltered from the elements until the mid-1840s .
 English seaside resorts lured middle-class visitors and some craftsmen and their families . English seasides resorts lured some of the world's most wealthy .
 More railway lines existed in the north than in the south of Europe, as industrialization proceeded more quickly in northern France, Belgium, the German states, and the northern Italian states .
 Some contemporaries feared the environmental costs of the iron tracks and black soot pouring from locomotives . Yet some contemporaries already feared the costs of iron tracks .
 After mid-century the use of steel rails, more powerful locomotives, and innovations in engineering eliminated excavations and earthworks, meaning less damage .
 Speed was also brought to rivers and oceans . Speed was brought to the surface of rivers and seas .
 In 1816, a steamship, combining steam and sail power, sailed from Liverpool to Boston in 17 days, halving the previous best time for the journey . It was the first steam-powered ship to sail from Liverpool in over 17 days .
 Steamboats began operating on Europe’s rivers in the 1820s and 1830s . Steamboats revolutionized travel and transport in Europe .
 By 1840, the transport of Irish cattle and dairy products to England alone fully engaged eighty steamships . The transport of Ireland's cattle and milk products to the UK alone was fully engaged .
 A constant procession of steamships traveled the Rhine River from Basel, Switzerland, to the Dutch seaport of Rotterdam . The Dutch city was the hub of the world's largest shipping hub .
 The contribution of paved roads to the Industrial Revolution should not be forgotten . At the same time, the contribution of improved, paved roads should be forgotten, says the BBC .
 The Industrial Revolution was based upon an innovative expansion of technologies and ways of doing things that were already in place . Here, too, the story of European economic development involved continuity as much as innovation, the author says .
 Belgium emerged with continental Europe’s greatest concentration of mechanized production and factories . This was true in Belgium, newly independent since 1831 .
 Belgium seemed to offer a blueprint for rapid industrial development . While Belgium’s northern neighbor, the once-great trading power of the Netherlands, continued its relative economic decline . The Netherlands, once a dominant trading power, is now a relative relative leader in Europe .
 Like the Netherlands, it was densely populated and urbanized, which provided demand for manufactured goods and labor . The Dutch city of Amsterdam was heavily populated and densely populated .
 Flanders had for centuries been a center of trade and the production of fine textiles . Flanders was a center for trade and textiles in the region .
 Belgium’s railroad construction advanced rapidly, facilitating the transport of goods from Belgian ports to Central Europe . Blessed with rich coal deposits, the country's coal deposits were used to transport goods .
 Britain was well on the way to becoming the ‘workshop of the world’ in the second half of the eighteenth century . It was the “workshop of Britain’s ‘work of the World’
 The Industrial Revolution in Europe, 1815-1860 . Areas of industrial concentration and growth in Britain and on the continent .
 Britain was blessed with coal and iron ore deposits located near water transportation, which made it possible for raw materials to be transported to factories with relative ease .
 British commercial domination, built in part on rich colonial trade, provided capital for investment in manufacturing . Britain's commercial domination was built on colonial trade .
 British entrepreneurs relied heavily on self-finance, and at first banks played a relatively small role in long-term investment . At first, banks were not involved in long term investment .
 Government did encourage a precocious banking system that would assume a greater role later in the century .
 After 1840, any number of people could form a company in Britain simply by registering with the government . It was far easier to begin a company here than on the continent .
 The structure of British society also proved to be conducive to economic development . British society is also a model for economic development in the country .
 There were fewer social barriers between wealthy landowning nobles, prosperous gentry, and eager entrepreneurs . There are now fewer barriers between rich and poor .
 Dissenters (nonAnglican Protestants) were afforded basic toleration, and some became manufacturers . Some became manufacturers of clothing and shoes .
 The British government adopted a general policy of non-interference in business . The UK government has a policy of not interfering with business .
 Parliament was able to reduce tariffs in the 1820s, shrugging off foreign economic challenges . Parliament had protected British manufacturers by enacting tariffs in eighteenth century .
 Parliament allocated funds for England’s burgeoning transportation network . The funds were intended to aid merchants and manufacturers . Parliament allocated the funds to help merchants, manufacturers .
 Parliamentary acts of enclosure (facilitating the consolidation of arable strips of land and the division of common lands) helped wealthy landowners add to their holdings, augmenting the productivity of their land .
 English cotton manufacturing, gradually transformed by mechanization, led the Industrial Revolution . The Industrial Revolution led to other industries in its wake . The cotton industry has been transformed into a modern industry .
 The popularity of cotton clothing spread rapidly, allowing poor people to be more adequately clothed . Cotton clothing was widely popular in the early 1900s .
 Cotton fabric could be more easily cleaned and was less expensive than wool, worsted, and other materials . Cotton fabric was more commonly used in the fabric industry in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Cotton clothing joined silks and linens in the wardrobes of the wealthy . Cotton clothing was first worn by the wealthy in the early 1900s . Cotton was worn in the clothing of the rich and wealthy .
 The cotton manufacturer became the uncrowned king of industrial society in Britain, revered as the epitome of the successful entrepreneur . He enriched himself while embellishing Britain's reputation .
 British production of cotton textiles increased from 40 million yards per year to 2,025 million yards . During the same period, British textiles production rose from 40m yards a year to more than 2,000 yards .
 Cotton goods accounted for about half of all British exports through the first half of the nineteenth century . Cotton goods were British exports for the first six decades of the 19th century .
 Number of power looms in England multiplied rapidly from 2,400 in 1813 to 85,000 in 1833 to 224,000 . In 1850, the number of power lofts in England was 224,500 .
 France was the world s second leading economy, although the wars during the revolutionary and Napoleonic periods had interrupted economic development . Industrialization in France began in 18th century .
 The revolutionary government had eliminated some hurdles for French businessmen by ending the tangle of regional customs barriers and tax differences .
 France's coal deposits were less rich and more dispersed and were far from iron ore deposits and canals . France’s coal deposits are less rich, more dispersed .
 Demand was also less in France than in Britain because the French population rose by only 30 percent during the first half of the nineteenth century . In Britain the population had doubled during the same period .
 French agricultural production developed more slowly than that of Britain . Small family farms remained characteristic of small family farms .
 French banking facilities remained relatively rudimentary compared to those in Britain and the Netherlands . French banks remained relatively small compared to British and Dutch banking facilities .
 The primary function of the Bank of France, created by Napoleon in 1800, was to loan money to the state . It was created in 1800 by Napoleon and was the first bank to lend money .
 The handful of private banks preferred to make what appeared to be safer loans to governments . Private banks were run out of the deep pockets of wealthy families, which were run by wealthy families .
 Deposit banks were denied the right to invest in private industry, except for investment in companies enjoying state concessions, such as those building the railways . Deposit banks would not be allowed to invest into private industry in the country .
 The French state shared investors' suspicions of companies of any size, limiting the number of investment ‘joint-stock companies’ that could be created . French state also shared investors’ suspicions of any company of any kind .
 Many companies were cautious family firms that invested profits in land rather than in the expansion of their businesses . Furthermore, many companies invested profits into land .
 With many peasant families still hiding their money in their houses or gardens, it is difficult to raise investment capital . With many peasants still hiding money in houses or garden, it's difficult to sell investment capital.
 In France, textile production provided the catalyst for industrial development . Textile production was the key to industrial development in France .
 Between the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and the beginning of the economic crisis of 1846-1847, the production of coal tripled, and that of pig iron doubled . At the same time, production of pigiron doubled .
 The reputation of French industry rested on the production of luxury products, ‘articles of Paris’ such as gloves, umbrellas, and boots, as well as fine furniture .
 Workshop production expanded into a rural joiner's workshop in France . Workshop production of barrels, pipes, and watches expanded .
 Rural industry, characterized by low capital investment, remained essential to French economic growth . Rural industry was characterized by . low capital . investment, according to French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The July Monarchy was the constitutional Monarchy brought by the July Revolution of 1830 . It encouraged business interests, sometimes maintaining high tariffs that protected special interests .
 The government provided a decisive push in the launching of railways in France . The government purchased land and bridges along which the tracks were to pass and guaranteed a minimum return on investments .
 Bankruptcy laws became less onerous, eliminating the humiliation of incarceration as a penalty . The humiliation of imprisonment as a result of bankruptcy is no longer an onerous penalty .
 The government also pleased businessmen by crushing insurrections by republicans and by silkworkers in Lyon in the early 1830s .
 Strikes were legalized in Britain with the repeal of the Combination Acts in 1824, but remained illegal in France until 1864 . Strikes, legalized in the UK, remained illegal until the end of the war in France . Strikes were also legalized in France in 1864; strikes were legalized
 In the German states, industrialization lagged behind that of Britain and France . Industrialization in the German States has been slow to reach its peak .
 The German states remained as a whole overwhelmingly rural between 1816 and 1872 . The percentage of rural population barely declined at all during that period . The population of the German states was barely declining at all .
 The harvest failure and subsequent agricultural depression of 1846, compounded by the Revolutions of 1848, temporarily halted German economic development, like that of France, in its tracks . Furthermore, the harvest failure . and subsequent . agricultural depression, compounded . by the . Revolutions . of 18
 Coal mining and iron production developed in the Ruhr Basin, which had half of the coal riches of the entire continent . The region's coal riches were found in the early 1900s .
 Prussian state appointed directors to serve on the boards of private companies, brought technical experts from Britain to help develop industries, encouraged technical education, and encouraged industrialization .
 In the 1840s, the Bank of Prussia began operating as a joint-stock credit bank to provide investment capital . The lack of investment capital in Prussia limited industrial development in the other German states . The bank was founded in 1840s to provide capital for investment investment .
 The Zollverein was founded in 1834 . States and cities within the German Customs Union were within the union . States within the Union were also within German cities .
 It was the first attempt by the German states to reduce customs duties and to coordinate economic activity . Led by Prussia, it was first attempt to cut customs duties .
 The Zollverein was the brainchild of economist Friedrich List . List was a tanner’s son who became an outspoken proponent of railway building .
 List proposed in 1819 the abolition of all tariffs within the German states . However, he insisted that protective tariffs be raised to shield German industries from British imports .
 The Zollverein included four-fifths of the territory of the German states . The Zollsverein was the largest organisation in the country .
 It contributed modestly to German economic and industrial growth, expanding markets for manufactured goods . Germany has seen modest economic growth in recent years .
 An order from Russia arrived for machinery to produce knives and forks, followed by another for steel springs and axles for a German railway . Finally, another order arrived from Russia for machinery produced for the railway .
 Krupps steelworks became enormously successful, turning out guns of increasing size and quality . Thereafter, Krupp steelworks was enormously successful .
 Eastern and southern Europe remained sparsely industrialized, hampered by inadequately developed natural resources and insufficient government attention . Sparse industrialization in Sotithern and Eastern Europe hampered by inadequate natural resources .
 Entrepreneurs faced the difficulty of raising investment capital in poor agricultural societies . Entrepreneurs had to raise investment capital to raise funds for agricultural ventures . Entrepreneur: Entrepreneurs face the difficulty raising investment in poor countries .
 There were exceptions, such as the increasingly mechanized textile production of Piedmont and Lombardy in northern Italy and Catalonia in Spain, to be sure .
 Industrialization in Spain was slowed by inadequate transportation and laws that discouraged investment . Industrialization was slow in Spain due to inadequate transport and laws discouraging investment .
 Spain suffered the absence of a railway system until after the middle of the nineteenth century . Lacking navigable rivers, Spain also suffered from an absence of railway systems until after after the mid-nineties .
 A commercial code in 1829 established the right of the state to veto any proposed association of investors . The state can veto any association of investment associations .
 Russia had a relatively tiny middle class—with only about 160,000 merchants out of a population of about 57 million people at mid-century . Russia had only a small middle class, with only around 160,00 merchants .
 The majority of the population were serfs bound for life to land ow'ned by lords . However, the majority of those who were not serfs were forced to live with their lords .
 Serfs fled to the distant eastern reaches of the empire . Their bondage made it difficult for entrepreneurs to recruit a stable labor force . Serfs were among the hundreds of thousands of serfs who fled .
 The minister of finance from 1823 to 1844 opposed the building of railway lines . He believed that they would encourage needless travel .
 Serviceable roads had been built w ith military, not commercial or industrial, considerations in mind . Only about 3,000 miles of roads were built in mind of military considerations .
 Three hundred thousand boatmen pulled barges up the Volga River, a trip of seventy-five days . The trip was made by boatmen pulling barges into the river . The Volga river is one of the world's largest rivers .
 Internal and foreign trade expanded markedly in the first half of the nineteenth century, including grain and timber . Much of it was through Black Sea ports, much of it through the Black Sea .
 Coal and iron ore deposits lay thousands of miles from Saint Petersburg, Moscow, and Kiev . They could not be transported to manufacturing centers only with great difficulty and at daunting cost . However, coal and iron . ore deposits are located in Russia and Ukraine .
 Some hostility toward industrialization remains entrenched in Russia, part orchestrated by the Orthodox Church . Some hostility to industrialization is still entrenched in the country .
 The state undertook only feeble efforts to encourage industrial development . The state did little to encourage the industrial development of the country .
 The Council of Manufacturers was created in 1828 . Trade councils organized in the largest towns, and several technical schools were established .
 Russian industry was significant in and around Saint Petersburg, Moscow, and the Ural Mountains . Overall, despite these factors, the growth of Russian industry remained significant .
 The cotton industry developed rapidly, as did a number of traditional manufacturing sectors in response to population growth . Cotton and other industries developed rapidly as a result .
 Russian industrial workers increased from 201,000 in 1824 to 565,000 out of a population of about 60 million in 1860 . A fifth of Russian serfs were serfs who had to pay some of what they earned to their lords .
 Spinning and weaving remained overwhelmingly cottage industries . However, spinning and weaving was still overwhelmingly a cottage industry .
 One should not exaggerate the cohesiveness of the European middle class . The European Middle Class is a very diverse group of people .
 The size and influence of the middle class was far greater in Britain, France, Belgium, Germany, and the northern Italian states, than in Spain, the Habsburg monarchy, or Russia .
 In liberalism, the middle class found an economic and political theory that echoed the way they viewed the world . With the family as the basis of social order, the family was the basis for social order . The middle class also found a theory of liberalism that echoed their views of the family .
 Within the family, men and women occupied, at least at least in theory, separate spheres . Men and women occupy separate spheres within the family .
 Religion and education played privileged roles in middleclass families, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Religion and education play privileged roles"
 At the same time, for all the frugality sometimes ascribed to the nineteenth-century middle class, bourgeois prosperity found expression in the development of a culture of comfort . At the time, the middle class was often frugal and comfortable .
 The middle class has expanded in size and diversity amid the ongoing economic transformation of Europe .
 It included all people who neither held noble title nor were workers or peasants depending on manual labor for economic survival . It included those who were not noble title or were dependent on manual work .
 The terms ‘bourgeois’ and ‘burghers’ first emerged in the Middle Ages to refer to residents of towns like Lubeck, Bremen, and Hamburg that enjoyed specific rights or even independence granted by territorial rulers .
 By the nineteenth century, the middle class made up roughly 15 to 25 percent of the total population in Western Europe but a far smaller percentage in Sweden, Eastern Europe, and the Balkans . By the 1900s, middle class had made up 15-25 percent of total population .
 The Russian middle class at the beginning of the century accounted for no more than about 2 percent of the population, including intellectuals and Orthodox priests . The middle class in Russia at the start of the Century accounted for only about about about 2 per cent of population .
 The nineteenth-century middle class encompassed a great range of economic situations, occupations, education levels, and expectations . The 19th century middle class was defined by a wide range of social situations .
 It can be imagined as a social pyramid topped by a small group of well-connected banking families, industrial magnates, and the wealthiest wholesale merchants, as well as top government ministers and ambassadors .
 Below this extremely wealthy group came lawyers and notaries, notaries and families drawing more modest incomes from businesses, rental properties and government posts .
 In general it required some resources, connections, and access to credit to make money . In general, making money requires some resources and connections to start .
 At the bottom of the pyramid stood the “petty bourgeoisie,” at whose expense nobles and wealthy bourgeois made cruel jokes . At bottom of pyramid stood a ‘petty bourgeois,’ at whose jokes were made cruel .
 This stratum included shopkeepers of modest means and expectations, wine merchants, minor officials, schoolteachers, cafe owners, and some craftsmen . Some craftsmen, such as goldsmiths and silversmiths, proudly considered themselves middle class .
 Many wealthy merchants and industrialists hungered for social prestige, which was still closely tied to owning land . The social prestige of owning land was still tied to land ownership .
 The proportion of land owned by the middle class increased rapidly during the first half of the nineteenth century in Britain, France, and Germany .
 Ownership of land remained the basis of electoral enfranchisement in much of Western Europe . This further increased the political influence of the middle classes in Europe .
 The landed elite—noble and non-noble—remained at the pinnacle of social status in Britain . Its share of Britain's wealth fell from about 20 percent to about 10 percent between 1800 and 1850 .
 Some English “country gentlemen” still looked down their noses at those they scorned as mere “calico printers” and “shopkeepers” Some peers now owed their titles to family fortunes made in commerce or industry a century earlier .
 In Britain the eldest son still inherited the entire family fortune . Some second and third sons left country life to become businessmen .
 Many noble families delighted to have their offspring marry sons and daughters of wealthy businessmen . Wealthy businessmen married noble daughters of noble families .
 The entrepreneur emerged as a man to be revered and emulated . He emerged as an icon of social mobility and social mobility . The entrepreneur is now a global icon for social enterprise .
 The Scottish philosopher and economist James Mill became the political champion of the middle class . He called the middle-class class both ‘both the most and the most’
 Many middle-class families in England, the Netherlands, and some of the German states were influenced by evangelical Protestantism . Evangelical Protestantism stressed the redeeming nature of hard work .
 Even in Prussia, schoolbooks that had early in the nineteenth century emphasized immutable social hierarchy and the necessity of obedience gradually shifted to discussions of the virtues of hard work, self-discipline, and thrift .
 Middleclass families viewed the expansion of their fortunes as the best assurance of respectability . Middle class families viewed expansion of fortunes as an assurance of their status .
 Welshman Robert Owen was the son of an ironmonger and saddler . He began his career as a clerk and then sold cloth . Owen was born in Wales and Wales .
 He borrowed money to start up his own textile business . He became part owner of the large and prosperous New Lanark Mills in Scotland .
 Robert Peel (1788— 1850), a British prime minister, is another case in point . Robert Peel was a British Prime Minister from 1788-1850 .
 His family had owned some land, his grandfather sold goods door to door, and his father became one of the most successful entrepreneurs in Lancashire .
 By 1790, Peel sat in Parliament as Sir Robert Peel, one of England’s wealthiest men . Peel was one of the wealthiest men in England .
 Some degree of social mobility was also possible from the ranks of relatively prosperous master artisans . To be sure, some degree of . social mobility .
 Hard times could cause petty bourgeois to tumble into the working class . Yet hard times could be hard times for petty bourgeois and working class alike .
 The possibility of being afflicted by economic crises or personal disasters haunted such families . Families were haunted by the possibility of suffering personal tragedies .
 Urban growth has grown the ranks of lawyers, doctors, and notaries in the U.S. Cities have seen a rise in the number of notaries, notaries and doctors . Urban growth will continue to grow as a result .
 For the most part, aspirations of those in these professions remained higher than their incomes and prestige .
 Lawyers had less than sterling reputations even though their numbers increased . Lawyers had fewer reputations than they did in the 1970s and '90s .
 In the 1830s and 1840s, the French caricaturist Honore Daumier (1808— 1879) depicted lawyers as arrogant, self-satisfied, insensitive men far more interested in extracting fees than serving justice .
 Some deeds of title fees sometimes amounted to more than 10 percent of the value of property . Some clients would not choose that particular verb, but some of their clients did .
 Notaries remained in most countries the financial equivalent of father-confessors . Notaries knew most of the deepest secrets concerning their clients’ fortunes .
 The number of doctors rose rapidly in nineteenth-century Western Europe . But they still struggled to be recognized as professionals rather than members of a trade .
 French doctor claimed to have proved syphilis was not communicable . His clients paid for his soothing words, which reassured them they had syphilis .
 Doctors were limited in the treatments at their disposal, which also contributed to their professions minimal prestige . Doctors had to be limited in what they could do with the treatments they had at the time .
 The vast majority of the hospitals that existed in London at mid-century had been founded since 1800 . Most of London's hospitals were founded in the 1800s .
 The British Medical Society began in 1832 with the goal of encouraging standardized training and professional identity . The society is now the largest in the world of medicine .
 In some countries surgeons now needed to have studied medicine in order to take up a scalpel . For the first time, in some countries, surgeons needed to study medicine to perform surgery legally .
 The British Medical Act of 1858 standardized credentials for doctors, but did not require them . The Act was passed in 1858, but didn't require credentials .
 In 1820, the Scottish writer Sir Walter Scott, assessing the future of a nephew, said that if the young man seemed fit for the army, he might well make his way there . If not, “he cannot follow a better line than that of an accountant,”
 Newer professions in such fields as veterinary science and pharmacology were open to sons of artisans and peasants . Newer fields in veterinary science, pharmacology and medicine were also open for sons of peasants .
 Clergymen and schoolteachers were drawn from the middle classes . Schoolteachers and clergymen were increasingly drawn from middle class .
 The growing reach of the state also required more officials and bureaucrats, providing attractive careers for middle-class sons . The state's growing reach required more people and bureaucrats .
 Middle-Class Culture: The middle classes believed that the family offered the best guarantee of social order . Middle-class culture: The family was a guarantee for social order.
 Most bourgeois held fast to the idea of separate spheres for men and women . Most bourgeois still believed separate spheres were separate spheres .
 Education and religious practice provided a common culture for the middle classes . Education and religion provided education and religious practices for middle class .
 A wave of evangelical fervor swept over Britain in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries . A revival of religious enthusiasm was apparent in some places on the continent as well .
 An astute choice of a marriage partner could preserve and even enhance a family’s wealth and position . Wealth can be enhanced through the acquisition of handsome dowries and wealthy daughtersand sons-in-law .
 The disasters of what were considered ill-advised or inappropriate marriages continued to be a popular theme in novels and the theater .
 Love could—and increasingly did—happily play a role in the choice of a mate . Love could also play a significant role in a mate's choice of mate .
 Prospective partners were more likely to insist that their views be taken into consideration in the arrangement of marriages . Prospective partner was more likely than to insist on their views .
 Middleclass families began to practice contraception after about 1820, limiting their children to two . Some middleclass families practice contraception .
 Coitus interruptus certainly became more common, as well as other rudimentary forms of birth control . Coitus interruptedus was more common in the early 1900s .
 The concepts of childhood and adolescence developed within middleclass families . The concepts were created by middle class families .
 ‘Children’s room’ and ‘children’ hour’ were middle-class concepts . The ‘hour’ was when the young came forward to see their parents or meet guests . ‘The children’ room” and the ‘
 Most working-class and peasant children had to begin work as soon as it was physically possible for them to do so . Most children in China had to start work at the age of 12,000 .
 Many children who were apprentices did not live with their families, but with the masters of their chosen trade . Many apprentices lived with their masters, not their parents .
 Parents passed on self-discipline and self-reliance to their offspring . Parents had to prepare them to take over family responsibilities, passing on self discipline .
 Bildungy is the training of cultivation and character, the subject of many nineteenth-century novels . Germans called it Bildungs, a form of training for character cultivation .
 Many men considered women “virtuous” when they remained in their domestic sphere . Women were considered “angels” whose obligation was to provide comfort, happiness, and material order to their families . Men considered women "virtuous" when they stayed in the domestic sphere
 Many middle-class women worked in commerce, as unpaid clerks in their husbands' shops or as receptionists and secretaries in their spouses' law, medical, or notarial offices . Many bourgeois insisted that women should work only when dire necessity left them with no alternative .
 During the middle decades of the nineteenth century the concept of British ‘manliness’ came to emphasize physical strength . Yet during the middle . decades of . the nineteenth . century, British "manliness" came to mean physical strength and physical strength.
 Oxford and Cambridge Universities evolved into defiantly masculine spaces that privileged athletic prowess . Oxford University was once dominated by athletic prowess and dominated by men .
 Trend perhaps reflected a response to the perceived threat of increasing possibilities for women in British society, as well as a homosexual subculture at universities and in Britain’s burgeoning urban world .
 A woman’s status remained closely tied to that of her father and her husband . A woman was closely associated with her husband and her father .
 Napoleonic Code made all men legally equal but left each woman subordinate to her husband’s will . In France, each woman was subordinate to their husband's will . Napoleomans made men equal but women were subordinate to husbands' will .
 On his accession to the throne in 1820, King George IV of Britain tried to prevent his wife, Caroline, from becoming queen by blocking her return from Italy under threat of prosecution for adultery .
 The king was forced to abandon his plan and accept his queen when women— particularly middle-class women—petitioned on her behalf, denouncing the king for promoting a double standard, since his own liaisons were notorious .
 Attend ye virtuous British wives Support your injured Queen, Assert her rights; they are your own, As plainly may be seen . Asserts her rights, As clearly may have been seen .
 Middle-class women cared for their children, planned and oversaw the preparation of meals, supervised the servants, and attended to family social responsibilities . Middle class women were also responsible for the care of their children .
 They exercised great influence over the education of their children, supplementing formal school instruction . They also took responsibility for providing some religious instruction, according to reports .
 Middle-class British feminists began to challenge female legal and political subordination . They debated the issue of “separate spheres" for women and men .
 In The Enfranchisement of Women, Harriet Taylor Mill stressed the injustice of considering anyone inferior, and therefore not deserving of the right to vote, by virtue of gender . Mill stressed that anyone inferior should not be considered eligible to vote .
 Mill argued that women, like men, should be able to compete as equals in a society defined by market relations . Mill argues that women and men should compete as equal in society .
 Feminists demanded that married women be allowed to continue to have control over property they had brought with them into marriage . They wanted to be able to keep control of property they brought to marriage .
 Opponents of women’s rights identified feminist movements with the violence of the French Revolution, or with surges of workingclass militancy . However, opponents of women's rights identified women's issues with violence of French Revolution .
 Most bourgeois families were able to employ one or more servants and had apartments of several rooms . Most of the time, the servants were employed as servants or servants .
 The wealthiest usually occupied the first floors of apartment buildings, but rarely the ground floor, where the concierge lived . Less well-off neighbors had to hike further up the stairs .
 The farther you had to walk up the stairs, the less well off you were . Note that with the exception of the concierge’s apartment on the ground floor, the farther you have to walk .
 A distinct middle-class style of interior design slowly emerged, with national and regional variations . National and regional regions have their own variations on interior design .
 The accoutrements of the salon were likely to include an armoire or two, a chest of drawers, an elegant table and chairs . Limoges porcelain in France, Wedgwood china in England, crystal glasses, a clock, candelabras
 The German decorative style offered wallpaper and sparse, austere furnishings and ornamentation . The style was popular in Germany during the 1930s .
 Pianos and other musical instruments became more common in the home and accompanied family singing . Family singing was more common during the 1930s .
 Flush toilets with running water replaced outdoor privies and chamber pots that had caused many unfortunate mishaps when emptied unceremoniously out windows . The chamber pots were emptied out windows when emptied out of windows .
 Victorian Britons embraced household possessions with a passion that verged on obsession . Victorian Britons were obsessed with their possessions, especially their possessions .
 Leaving the simplicity of decoration behind, they began to fill up their residences with china, carpets, mantelpieces, statues, statues and garishly decorated fire-screens .
 They ascribed to furniture and items of interior decoration a kind of moral quality . They believed they suggested that their owners were living good lives .
 Victorians’ identification with their homes arguably reflected the threat to class distinctions that was indeed very real in a century of enormous social change . Victorians' identification with homes also arguably reflected threat to social class distinctions .
 Some of these novelties may seem to us in hindsight to be remarkable for their bad taste . Some are antiques of fairly dubious origin or copies of colonial items purchased in curiosity shops .
 Owners of Victorian-made items tried to defy trend of mass manufactured items . They tried to reflect their status in Victorian society .
 The old Roman saying that ‘clothes make the man’ rang true of the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie . The old . Roman saying . “Clothes . make the . man” rang true in the 19th century .
 Middle-class men wear black suits, perhaps enlivened by a cashmere scarf . Middle class men wore black suits .
 Their wives dressed only somewhat less simply; it was left to jewelry to suggest family wealth . Their wives were left with little to suggest wealth .
 Expanding readership during the first half of the century encouraged a proliferation of novels, histories, poetry, literary reviews, newspapers, and political pamphlets, reflecting the diversity of middle-class interests .
 Balzac’s novels were first published in France as installments of lengthy serials that appeared at the bottom of the front page of newspapers . Authors were often paid by the word. Balzac's novels were published as installments .
 Charles Dickens, too, first reached his public in monthly installments . Charles Dickens first reached out to the public in installments . Dickens first did this in 18th century .
 In 1835 in the German Rhineland, Karl Baedeker published a guide to sites along the Rhine River .
 He soon published similar guides to Paris, German states, Austria, Belgium, Belgium and the Netherlands .
 Four years later, he began the first travel agency, building on demand for his services at the time of the Great Exposition of 1851 .
 Cook was soon transporting groups as far as classical ruins in Italy and Greece . Cook was transporting groups to classical ruins as well as Greece .
 Middle-class families began to view travel as a means of self-improvement . Families began to look at travel as an opportunity to improve themselves .
 In London, the National Gallery first opened its doors in 1824, about the same time as Berlin’s Old Museum . In Berlin, the Old Museum first opened in 1823, and in Berlin, it was the first of its kind .
 Secondary education increasingly provided a common cultural background for the middle classes . Secondary education was a key part of the middle class's education .
 Prussia's secondary schools were arguably Europe’s finest, offering a varied curriculum that included considerable religious instruction . Gymnasien, or high schools, were arguably the best of Prussia .
 In Britain, the victory of the entrepreneurial ideal was reflected in a gradually changing secondaryschool curriculum .
 The English elite had long been exposed to a classical curriculum, as well as to Spartan discipline featuring corporal punishment . English elite was exposed to classical discipline, including punishment .
 Reforms were intended to spur students on to better performances by stimulating academic competition through examinations and prizes . Thomas Arnold was headmaster at Rugby School . Reforms intended to stimulate academic competition .
 Arnold’s reforms reinvigorated the existing English ‘public’ secondary schools . In the United States they would be considered private—secondary schools, and new ones were established .
 Many businessmen, however, still believed that experience was the best preparation to carry the family torch . Many businessmen still believed experience was best preparation for carrying the torch .
 Prosperous French shopkeepers sometimes pulled their children out of school at age 11 or 12, viewing what they learned there as irrelevant to the tasks that lay ahead . Shopkeepers sometimes pull their children from school .
 Some entrepreneurs of family firms preferred to send sons to other companies, sometimes even in other countries, to obtain practical experience . Some entrepreneurs prefer to send their sons abroad .
 Secularized education, sponsored by states, only slowly undermined the role of religion in public life . Secular education only slowly undermines the role it plays in the public life, says author .
 Private schools operated by the clergy continued to exist, and in many places provided the only schooling for children .
 Middle-class families sent girls to convent schools to learn about drawing, music, and dance . In Catholic countries, middle-class girls were sent to convent school to learn drawing and music .
 State educational systems, staffed by lay teachers, gradually eroded ecclesiastical control of education . However, lay teachers gradually eroded state educational systems in the 1930s . State education systems were staffed with lay teachers .
 In France, liberals and republicans opposed a pronounced role for the Church in public life . They demanded public schools that would teach secular, nationalistic values . In France they were demanding public schools taught secular values .
 In the German states, ecclesiastical and secular authorities battled it out, but the established churches retained greater influence over public education .
 Piedmont became the first European state to establish a ministry of public education in 1847 . It was the first state in Europe to establish public education .
 The educational systems of early nineteenth-century Europe did provide many more people with basic reading and writing skills .
 Relatively few families could afford to send their children to secondary schools . Secondary schools could provide them with more advanced skills needed for better-paying employment .
 In France in the early 1840s, only two of every thousand people attended a secondary school . In the 1840s only two people in France attended secondary schools .
 Some working-class families still resisted even sending their children to primary school, not only because they could ill afford the modest costs involved, but because they needed their children’s wage contributions .
 For women, very few formal opportunities existed for secondary schooling . For women it was difficult to find formal opportunities for secondary education . Women's education was difficult for women to find a formal education .
 More young men went to university in order to prepare for careers in law, medicine, the church, or the civil service . More men now go to university than ever before in the 1960s .
 In Russia, the number of university students tripled from 1,700 in 1825 to 4,600 in 1848 . Even in Russia, there were still precious few in a population of more than 50 million .
 Religious ideals still played an important part in the middle-class view of the world . Religion still played a major role in the Middle-class .
 Disenchantment with organized religion permeated novels in Britain, France, and the German states . Contemporary writing rarely challenged common assumptions that closely linked Christianity and morality .
 Biblical references abounded even in the treatment of secular subjects, because they were understood by all literate people . Biblical references also appeared in the work of the Bible .
 In the German states, as in the Scandinavian countries, the middle classes were more likely to go to church than other social groups . In Germany, middle classes went to church more often than any other social group .
 Throughout Europe, women manifested a much higher rate of religious observance than did men . Women were more likely to observe religious beliefs than men .
 Many middle-class men and women deplored the materialism that seemed to have lured some of their own away from church . The materialism seemed to be the reason for many of them leaving church .
 Virtue could also be found among the men and women of the middle class . Virtue was also found in the middle-class, according to the study .
 The English middle class also viewed religion as a way of “moralizing’ workers by teaching them self-respect . The middle class was also concerned about ‘moralizing"" workers by giving them self respect . The British middle class considered religion to be a good source of self
 By the mid-nineteenth century, more than 2. million children attended Sunday schools, many created by the working-class communities they served . Sunday schools were often created by working class communities .
 They provided children of workers with educational, social, and recreational opportunities not otherwise available . They provided them with educational and social opportunities . Children of workers were provided with education, social and physical opportunities .
 "The middle class did not have a monopoly on “respectability"" and the virtues of hard work and discipline," says David Cameron . The middle class was not a monopoly, he says .
 Clubs, societies, and other voluntary associations became part of middleclass life . Voluntarism versus State Intervention is a key part of the middle class .
 The Anglophile Jockey Club of Paris and London's exclusive west London clubs . Some were organized exclusively for leisure activities, such as the Jockey club of Paris .
 Middle-class women formed their own clubs, among the few public opportunities open to them . The clubs were formed in the 1950s and '60s .
 Growing public awareness of the appalling conditions in which many workers and their families lived engendered impressive charitable efforts among the more privileged .
 Despite tradition of voluntarism and liberal rejection of state interference, fear of popular insurgency could temper liberalism . Despite the growing tradition of voluntaryism, liberalism could temper the liberal view .
 Anxious bourgeois were reassured by the greater professionalization of police forces both in France and in Britain . Robert Peel organized an unarmed municipal police force in London .
 In British, German, French, and Italian cities, civilian national guards were established, with membership limited to property owners . In the United States, as well, the U.S. and in Germany, the guards were also established .
 By about 1830, some Western European liberals became aware of some of the social consequences of laissez-faire economic policies . Some liberals were aware of the consequences of the policies .
 They did not object to the wealthy becoming even wealthier, but worried that the poor were becoming too poor . The poor were worried that they would be getting too poor, they said .
 Jeremy Bentham's followers began to espouse government-sponsored social reform . Some of Bentham followers, among others, espoused government-backed social reform in the 1930s .
 Liberals crusaded against slavery, portraying the institution as incompatible with morality and British freedom . Liberals fought against slavery in the early 1900s .
 Hannah More believed that poor children should learn how to read so that they could study the Bible, but not to write . Such a skill might make them reject their social subordination, she said .
 Middle-class liberal reformers, however, shared far more optimistic views of education .
 Henry Lord Brougham believed that progress would be served if working men were educated . He believed that working men would be better educated .
 Brougham and his followers founded a number of schools called Mechanics Institutes, most of them short-lived . The schools hammered home the entrepreneurial ideal to artisans and skilled workers .
 Education reform in Britain proceeded slowly because the state provided little direction . But educational reform in the UK proceeded slowly, at least partially because of the state's lack of direction .
 The state did no more than provide inspectors for schools built by towns or parishes that could afford to do so or that had received random government grants . Schools built by parishes built by town or town could not afford to inspect schools .
 On the continent, compulsory primary education existed only in Switzerland, beginning in the 1830s . The country's primary education was compulsory in the 1800s .
 The English philosopher John Stuart Mill became a forceful proponent of greater government intervention on behalf of social reform . Mill was a strong advocate for social reform in England .
 He was appalled that relatively few people of means seemed concerned about the awful conditions of working-class life . He said: 'People of means seem to be unaware of the terrible conditions'
 Mill rejected Adam Smith's cheery optimism about the ‘invisible hand’ in his Principles of Political Economy . Mill called on the state to assist workers by encouraging their cooperative associations . Mill rejected the idea of the “invisible” hand .
 Mill's On Liberty argued that the individual is the best judge of his or her own interests . Mill encouraged a retreat from pure economic liberalism even in his spirited defense of individual freedom . Mill argued that individual should judge his own interests in his or his own interest .
 The Industrial Revolution, the way people lived, changed the way they lived in the 19th century . It was the beginning of the industrial revolution .
 One should not overestimate the speed or extent of these fundamental changes occurred in the nineteenth century . Yet one should not underestimate the speed of these changes, he says .
 Factory workers comprised between only 2 and 5 percent of the population in 1850 . Factory workers in Britain, France, and Prussia, the three most industrialized European powers, comprised only 2-5 percent of population .
 In many places, industrial workers—particularly miners—returned home to work in the fields part of the year, or even part the day . In many of the world's largest cities, the city is home to many of its industrial workers, including miners .
 Most rural people in Europe were not landowners . Most rural Europeans were not farmers . Most of Europe's rural people were farmers .
 Landless laborers outnumbered any other category of the rural population, and their numbers increased dramatically in nineteenth-century Europe . Landless labor was the most common form of work in Europe .
 Agricultural wages fell, and rural underand unemployment became chronic . Rural unemployment was chronic in rural areas . Agricultural wages also fell, but unemployment remained high .
 The abolition of serfdom in 1807 on Prussian great estates east of the Elbe River increased the number of rural laborers scrambling to find farm work there .
 Many plots were too small to be profitable, or the land was of poor quality . Yet, even when peasants owned land, they were by no means guaranteed a decent life .
 In Prussia and southern Spain, the number of landless laborers soared . Owners of small farms were unable to survive and sold off their land . Landless laborers were forced to work in Spain and Germany .
 Rural protest increased in the first two decades of the nineteenth century . Rural protest began in the 18th century .
 In 1830, travelers found people who had died of hunger on the roads, nothing in their stomachs but dandelions . Travelers found people in 1830, a hard year, dying of hunger . In 1830 travelers found dandelion in the streets .
 In southern and eastern England, wealthy landowners had begun to use threshing machines, which left many hired hands without work . Wealthy landowners began to use the machines, leaving many workers without work.
 Grain passed through rollers of these portable machines and then into a revolving drum . Grain was passed through the rollers and rolled into the revolving drum. Grain was then placed in a rotating drum .
 Threshing machines could be set up in any barn or field and operated by one or two horses . They could be operated by a single horse or two .
 Farm workers began to smash threshing machines after their labor was no longer needed . Farm workers smashed threshers or ‘flailers’s’ machines to get rid of them .
 The protesters were sometimes supported by local artisans, whose own livelihoods were threatened by mechanization, or small landowners who could not afford the machines .
 Authorities weighed in to make arrests, exiling some people to Australia, and executed nineteen men . Authorities also exiled some people from Australia and exiled them to Australia .
 Other similar attacks occurred between 1839 and 1842 in Wales when poor people attacked tollgates and tollhouses in the ‘Rebecca riots,” which were also named after an imaginary redresser of social wrongs .
 In Portugal, women played a major role in an uprising in 1846 . It followed a government attempt to enclose land and force peasants to register land they owned .
 Conditions of rural life in Eastern Europe may even have worsened since the eighteenth century . Conditions of living in rural life may have worsened in the past few centuries .
 In Sweden, the small red cottages of farming families were notoriously cramped . Many people depended on their parishes to provide assistance in hard times . In Sweden the parishes provided assistance to their families .
 Rural people drew warmth from fireplaces during the day and from animals with which many shared quarters at night . Rural people used fireplaces and animals to warm their homes .
 There were few windows because they let in wind and rain, or because farmhouses had been built that way to reduce the tax on doors and windows, as in parts of France .
 In Silesia, peasant families still owed lords more than a hundred days of labor a year, for which they were to provide a team of animals . They were obligated to repair roads, repair roads and to make various payments in kind .
 Peasants also paid the equivalent of a third of their produce to the lord or to the state in taxes . Peasant also paid equivalent of third of produce to lord or state in tax .
 More than a hundred Russian landlords or their stewards were murdered by their peasants and serfs between 1835 and 1855 . The murders were carried out by peasants or serfs .
 In 1846, peasants in Austrian Galicia rose up and slaughtered their lords . The massacre took place in Austria Galicia, Austria .
 Landlords commuting payments in labor and in kind into cash did not end subsistence agriculture in parts of Central Europe and most of Eastern Europe and the Balkans . Even when entrepreneurial landlords began commuting such payments, this did not stop subsistence agriculture .
 The rural poor ate rye bread, porridge, and vegetables such as potatoes in northern Europe, cabbage in Central and Eastern Europe and in Russia, and onions and garlic in France .
 For many people, meat was little more than a distant memory of a wedding feast . For many, it was little less than a mere memory of the wedding feast. For many of us, meat is now an important part of our lives .
 Poor people were most likely to eat tripe, pigs’ ears, or blood sausage . When they could afford to eat meat, poor people ate tripe or pigs' ears .
 Water, however contaminated, remained the drink of necessity for the poor . In southern Europe they drank poor-quality wine, and in northern Europe, they drank beer when they could, or cider, although both were relatively expensive .
 In 1750, two British cities had more than 50,000 inhabitants . In 1801 there were eight, and by mid-century, twenty-nine were British cities . In 19th century, there were 29 British cities in Britain .
 London’s population rose from about 900,000 in 1800 to 2,363,000  in 1850 . London's population rose to about 1,500,000 by 1800s .
 French and German urbanization proceeded at a significantly slower pace than that of Britain and Belgium . France and Germany urbanized significantly slower than the UK and Belgium did .
 In 1851, only a quarter of the French population lived in urban areas . Urban areas were then defined as settlements of at least 2,000 people .
 Paris grew from about 550,000 in 1801 to about a million inhabitants in 1846 . Paris had a million people in 1845 . Paris was the capital of France's first city .
 Stockholm’s population multiplied by four, from 75,000 in 1800 to 350,000 at the end of the century . Stockholm's population grew by four in the 1800s, with the population growing by four .
 Porto in Portugal doubled in size in sixty years . Smaller towns grew rapidly, as well as smaller towns, such as Porto .
 Industrial towns grew most rapidly, but commercial and administrative centers, too, gained population . Industrial towns were most rapid in growth, followed by administrative and commercial centers .
 In general, the farther north and particularly east one went in Europe, the fewer and smaller the towns . London 900,000-1,000,000 - 2,363,000 population . Paris 547,000 1,053,000; Vienna 247,000 444,
 In Austria, more than four of every five people lived in the countryside . In Sweden, nine of ten people live in countryside . Austria, Sweden, Austria, Austria and Sweden all live in rural areas .
 There was in general less manufacturing in Eastern Europe, and therefore fewer manufacturing towns and trading ports . Furthermore, there was also less manufacturing towns or trading ports in Eastern Europe .
 The Russian Empire had only three cities of any size—Saint Petersburg, Moscow, and Kiev . Parts of Moscow were still indistinguishable from the rural world, dotted with wood or mud huts .
 The percentage of people living in towns and cities almost doubled during the first half of the century . Even in the Russian Empire, the population almost doubled in terms of population .
 As cities grew, poorer districts became much more crowded . Gas lighting made streets better illuminated than ever before, thanks to gas lighting . Poor districts became more crowded as cities grew .
 Crimes against property increased rapidly with urban growth, especially during periods of hardship . Crime against property crimes increased rapidly in urban areas .
 Between 1805 and 1848, indictable offenses in England and Wales multiplied by six . Part of this dramatic jump may reflect the result of better policing, and thus reporting .
 As urban centers became more densely packed, industrial suburbs developed . Industrial suburbs developed in the 1960s and '90s .
 The urban periphery offered more available land; proximity to railways, canals, and rivers; and a ready labor supply perched on the edge of the city, where the cost of living was cheaper .
 Within cities, European middle classes withdrew into privileged elite quarters, leaving workers and other poor people in separate, disadvantaged neighborhoods . The European middle class withdraws into privileged areas of the city, leaving poor people behind poor people .
 Industrial pollution has driven some middleclass families to new quarters . Industrial pollution, including smoke and other smells, altered residential patterns, altered patterns .
 Some people of means in industrial cities moved to newly developing middle-class suburbs . At the same time, some people of . means in . industrial cities . moved to . newly developing suburbs .
 Countryside residences, retreats from the bustle of urban life, became more common . Countryside secondary residences, as well as primary residences, are now common in rural areas .
 In England some middle-class people of means moved to exclusive suburbs, such as the villa neighborhoods on the edge of London and Manchester .
 The wealthy in London enjoyed vast public gardens, comfortable theaters, and elegant shopping arcades, a jolting contrast to the misery of the East End . The wealthy were able to enjoy vast public parks, theaters, theaters and elegant shops .
 Public gardens like Copenhagen's Tivoli and Berlin's Tiergarten were developed so middle-class denizens could observe and be seen . Paris’s Champs-Elysees, as well as Copenhagen’tivoli, is one of the world’
 Cafes catered to people of means, while cabarets attracted ordinary people . Cafes sold cheap drinks, selling cheap drink, attracted more ordinary people. Cabarets sold cheap drink. Cafes were popular in the 1930s and 1940s .
 As more people died than were born in most large cities, immigration accounted in almost every case for urban growth . Immigration of peasants and unskilled workers accounted in most cases for growth .
 Only about half of the residents of London and Paris were born in London . Only about a quarter of those in northern English industrial towns had been born in the city .
 People tended to live in the same neighborhood as others from their regions, such as the sooty “Little Ireland” in the midst of the largest factories of Manchester .
 The discrimination faced by the Irish in London was reflected in Elizabeth Gaskell’s North and South . The villains in the novel are Irish . Gaskell's North and the South is based on the experiences of Irish people in London .
 ‘Paddy’ became a racist stereotype of the Irish character, depicted as ignorant, superstitious, lazy, drunken, and potentially violent . Among the English of all social classes, "Paddy" became a . racist stereotype . The Irish character was depicted as . ignorant,
 Anti-Irish feeling in Victorian England was linked to anti-Catholicism . Violence and riots in the 1850s and 1860s generated violence and riots . It only slowly declined in the last part of the century .
 Between 1816 and 1850, at least 5 million Europeans booked passage across the seas . Central and Eastern Europe and Ireland were particularly hard hit by the ‘hungry forties .
 "The wife and me—I have no children—hadn’t a bit nor a sup, but wather to live on, and an igg or two . But the sore times came, and the taties was afflicted .
 Beyant oncete 3 for two days of harrud porthering that broke my back half in two . Then sorrow s the taste of worruk could I git, beyant said .
 After 1820, Norway sent more emigrants to the U.S. than the number of people living in the country in that year . The country sent more people to the United States than any other country in 1820 .
 At the same time, hundreds of thousands of Russian migrants pushed toward the eastern reaches of the empire in the quest for land .
 Improvements to transportation expanded the distance people could travel to find work . Improvements in transportation extended the way people could find work in America .
 British cartoon from 1850 depicts the expectations of migrants . Seasonal migration took men greater distances to work .
 Before the middle of the nineteenth century, seasonal workers still may have accounted for as much as a third of the workforce . Seasonal workers still accounted for up to a third .
 Middle-class socialists and workers themselves began to criticize some of the consequences of large-scale industrialization .
 Growing awareness among some workers that they formed a class apart followed directly from their growing sense that they were vulnerable to the vicissitudes of capitalism . The growing awareness of some workers came from a growing sense of their vulnerability .
 In Western European nations, domestic service remained the largest category of female employment at the middle of the century . Domestic service employed in Britain 1. million women, nearly 40 percent of women workers . In Britain, 1.1 million women were employed by women in the 1950s .
 The servants slept under staircases and in attics, but ate relatively well . Working up to eighteen hours a day, servants slept in staircases or attics .
 Working-class women had better prospects of marrying above their social class . They had a higher rate of literacy than did working class women in general . They were better prospects for marrying above social class.
 Country women spun and wove wool, linen, and cotton; sewed, embroidered, and knitted stockings by hand; and worked in fields or gardens, while looking after children .
 Such cottage work on the continent allowed country people to maintain the traditional rural family economy well into the nineteenth century .
 Urban women worked as laundresses, seamstresses, or street merchants and peddlers . Some kept boardinghouses, some kept boarding houses .
 Women were employed in many of the industries, both rural (where their labor had long been predominant in cottage industry) and urban, that expanded during the industrial age .
 A gradual shift to larger textile and clothing workshops and factories occurred in England, above all, as well as in parts of France, Belgium, and the Prussian Rhineland .
 Women with experience as cottage laborers found employment in textile mills . With the expansion in power-loom weaving, women with experience have found employment .
 In general, women everywhere worked for about half of what their male counterparts earned . Women in the U.S. earn about half what they do in the workplace .
 As in the pre-industrial period, many, if not most, female factory workers were young and single . Many of the women in the 1930s were single and working in the factories .
 Many male workers bitterly resented the arrival of women in the workplace . Women's rights have long been a problem for many of the world's men .
 This challenged traditional gender roles, including that of patriarchy, in that womens work had long been assumed to be at home . Women's work was thought to be in the home, rather than at home, in the 1970s .
 What came to be called the ‘struggle for the breeches’ began in Britain . The struggle for breeches began in the early 1900s .
 Industrial Revolution may have been the slow change from the conception of gender as hierarchical to one as representing different but complementary spheres . The Industrial Revolution brought about by the Industrial Revolution was a slow change .
 Despite significant continuities, wage labor altered family life and the structure of communities . Wage labor altered families and communities in the early 1900s .
 Wage labor made young women and men less dependent on their parents, enabling many to marry earlier . Wage labor enabled many women to marry later in life, enabling them to stay with their parents .
 Some couples delayed wedlock until both partners could accumulate skills or assets to maintain an independent household . Marriage still remained an economic relationship, but marriage still remained to some extent an economic .
 A sharp rise in illegitimate births seems to have been another effect of the rise in employment opportunities and wages for unmarried couples in “free unions,” or common-law marriages . Many women who gave birth were unattached .
 Many mothers left the workforce to care for children for at least a time . Many mothers are still in the workforce today, leaving the workforce .
 The family economy also depended on their wages, and they generally returned to work as quickly as possible . But since their wages also depend on them, they often returned quickly to work .
 Hundreds of thousands of European women worked full or part-time as prostitutes . Hundreds of thousand of women worked as prostitutes in Europe .
 Prostitution presented a hierarchy of conditions of life and wages, ranging from confident high-class courtesans to poor girls beckoning clients from dark doorways . Prostitutes faced a hierarchy in terms of conditions and wages of life .
 Some women, including many who were married, were able to earn much more money selling sexual favors than they could earn in textile mills or in domestic service .
 To middle-class moralists, prostitutes symbolized moral failure and the dangers of modern life . Prostitutes symbolized failure of modern society, according to the author of the book .
 Middle-class male demand for prostitution increased in Europe’s burgeoning cities . Yet it was the increase in middle-class demand that increased the number of prostitutes .
 Police sought to police brothels and the comportment of prostitutes in order to keep the profession hidden as much as possible from public view . They sought to limit the ravages of venereal disease by ordering prostitutes to have regular medical checkups .
 The number of prostitutes in London was so difficult to determine that estimates for the 1840s vary from 7,000 to 80,000 . Estimates for London prostitutes in 1840s are estimated to be 7,500-80,000 per cent .
 In St. Petersburg, there were over 4,000 registered prostitutes in 1870 . In Saint Petersburg, the city's prostitutes were registered .
 At a very young age, many had also learned to assist in domestic textile production, preparing wool for spinning and raising silkworms . Many had also been taught to prepare wool and prepare silk for spinning .
 Now in factories, smaller size made children useful for certain tasks, such as mending broken threads or climbing on machinery to extract something impeding its operation . Now, their smaller size makes children useful in certain tasks .
 In Britain during the early 1830s, youths less than twenty-one years of age made up almost a third of the workforce . In Britain, youths under 21 years old made up a quarter of a workforce .
 As in cottage industry, factory work often employed entire families, with adult males supervising other family members . Adult males supervise family members in factories .
 Children's low wages were a quarter of what their fathers earned, but a significant contribution to the family economy . Children s low wages are about a quarter what their father earned, the study says .
 One man recalled “being placed, when seven years of age, upon a stool to spread cotton upon a breaker preparatory to spinning,” an elder brother turning the wheel to put the machine in motion .
 Methodists wanted to save children from exhausting and sometimes dangerous work . Methodists, among other British evangelical Protestants, wanted to stop children from work .
 A British law passed by Parliament in 1833 forced employers to start part-time schools in factories employing children . Some owners designated a worker to be “teacher,” whether or not he could read or write very well .
 In 1841, France s first child labor law banned factory work for children under eight years of age . The workday was limited to eight hours for those eight to 13 years old and to twelve hours for the 13 to 16 years old .
 The law, however, was extremely difficult to enforce, was routinely circumvented by employers and ignored by parents who needed the extra family income, however small . The law was often ignored by employers or parents, however .
 The place was full of women, young, all of them, some large with child, and obliged to stand twelve hours a day . The place is full of young women .
 Their hours are from five in the morning to seven in the evening, two hours of that being for rest, so that they stand twelve hours a day . They stand from five-to-seven in the early hours of the day .
 "The heat was excessive in some of the rooms, the stink pestiferous, and in all an atmosphere of cotton flue," says the author . "The smell of the stench was too much to bear"
 The young women were all pale, sallow, thin, yet generally fairly grown, all with bare feet . They were a strange sight to English eyes. They were the young women .
 Northern industrial cities of England attracted the attention of horrified observers . The northern industrial cities were particularly singled out for their industrialism .
 Above the bridge are tanneries, bonemills, and gasworks, from which all drains and refuse find their way to the Irk, which receives further the contents of all the neighboring sewers and privies . Here each house is packed close behind its neighbor .
 Historians say Industrial Revolution almost immediately improved the way ordinary people lived . Industrial Revolution increased employment and lowered the price of some goods, they say .
 Other historians have embraced the view that industrial capitalism was making conditions of life worse for workers and their families . The number of people depending on wage labor increased faster than did job possibilities and pay .
 During the first half of the century, incomes of many artisans, as well as women workers, fell as trades were flooded with the end of guild restrictions and increasing mechanized production .
 Women spinners were often the first to experience unemployment because of the new technology . Women workers such as spinners often faced unemployment .
 Wages in many industries were extremely volatile; boom periods could come and go with numbing suddenness . Wages are extremely volatile, and boom periods are unpredictable . In many industries, the boom period could come to an end with numbness .
 Even good years were broken in many industries by “dead seasons” when there was no work . Even good seasons were broken by ‘dead seasons,’ when there wasn’t work .
 In England, many middle-class heads of household earned three or four times as much as even a skilled worker .
 In the late 1820s in Paris, more than three-quarters of people who died left virtually nothing to heirs . They had next to nothing and, in any case, they could not afford to have a will drawn up by a lawyer .
 On the continent, the poorer a family was, the greater the percentage of its income that was spent on food, primarily bread . The poorer families spend a greater percentage of their income on food than on bread .
 Clothing accounted for the second largest category of expense, followed by lodging . Clothing was the largest item of expense in the United States .
 All other expenses, including heat, light tools, supplies, and recreation, had to come out of less than 10 percent of the family's income .
 Most migrants to cities no longer benefited from the kind of community support they had received during hard times in their villages . Migrants to cities now no longer benefit from the same kind of support they received in their village .
 Recourse to the neighborhood pawn shop was part of the experience of the majority of urban working-class families . The pawn shop is now a popular destination in the U.S.
 English workers tend to be better off than most of their continental counterparts . English workers tended to be more successful in Europe than most continental counterparts.
 Paternalism was the tradition by which employers took some responsibility for helping their workers by providing some supplementary services . The satanic mills of Manchester were the subject of a BBC documentary .
 Some manufacturers did pay slightly higher wages, provided decent housing, and insisted that their workers' children attend school . But some manufacturers also provided decent homes and insisted their workers attend school.
 Such laudable efforts affected the lives of relatively few workers . However, such laudable . efforts affected . little workers .
 The nineteenth-century urban poor probably lived in more miserable housing than their counterparts in the previous century . The 19th century urban poor were likely to live in miserable housing .
 Buildings in industrial cities, built hurriedly and as cheaply as possible, quickly became dilapidated tenements . The buildings were built as cheaply and as quickly as possible .
 Many workers lived amid terrible smells from raw sewage, garbage, industrial pollution such as sulfurous smoke, and putrid rivers and streams . The smell of raw sewage and garbage can be heard in many places .
 Warm summers bring outbreaks of serious diseases like typhus and dysentery . Warm summers brought outbreaks of deadly diseases such as typhus . The disease was spread in the early 1900s and early 1800s .
 Between 1848 and 1872 in Britain, a third of all people died of contagious diseases . A third of people died from contagious diseases in Britain between 1848-1872 .
 The decline in mortality was barely felt in the heart of industrial cities, where tuberculosis remained a great killer . Despite attempts to improve water supplies and construct sewer systems in several large English cities .
 At midcentury, about 26,000 infants were abandoned each year in both Moscow and Saint Petersburg . About a fifth of all babies in Warsaw were abandoned in the Soviet Union .
 Most fortunate of the abandoned were left at the doors of charitable organizations created by states, municipalities, and churches . The most fortunate were left in the hands of state and local governments .
 A poor family blocks their landlord from invading their cellar apartment, which they share with a donkey and some rats . The family blocks the landlord from entering the cellar .
 In four towns in one Russian province, more than 90 percent of all of the children taken in by orphanages died within a few years . The orphanages are located in four Russian towns .
 Great Britain was the first state to have a national policy of poor relief . Great Britain's poor relief policy was first national policy in the country .
 Doles based on the price of bread and the number of dependents for whom each head of a poor family had to provide . Doles were based on a family member's salary and the amount they needed to provide for their dependents .
 This arrangement had the drawback of encouraging landowners to pay lower wages, while assuring them of an inexhaustible supply of cheap field hands . But this arrangement also gave the landowners an easy choice of low wages .
 It also may have encouraged poor families to have more children, as payments were adjusted to family size . It may have also encouraged poor to have children .
 It established workhouses in which poor people without jobs would be incarcerated . The workhouses were established in order to keep poor people in workhouses .
 Workhouses were organized like prisons, their occupants exposed to harsh discipline in the hope that they would find any kind of possible work in order to avoid being sent back . Workhouses in the 1930s were organized as prisons, with the aim of finding work to escape punishment .
 Towns enforced laws against begging in order to force the unemployed poor into workhouses . Towns were forced to enforce the laws to keep the unemployed from begging in workhouses. Towns enforced the laws by forcing the jobless poor to live in workhouse .
 When families were taken in, husbands were separated from their wives, children from their parents, and all were herded into dormitories .
 Inmates forced to work at simple tasks and given used clothes and dreadful food . Inmates were forced to do simple tasks at the hands of the prison staff .
 The stigma of being poor was such that one influential official even tried to stop the ringing of church bells at pauper funerals . The stigma was such a stigma that one official tried to prevent ringing of bells .
 In 1841, despite organized opposition, more than 200,000 people were workhouse inmates in Britain . Despite organized opposition and although application of the law varied greatly, application of workhouse laws varied .
 During the first half of the nineteenth century, many workers began to consider themselves members of the working class with interests that were different from those of their employers and the middle class .
 "They began to have a sense of community based on a belief in the dignity of labor," says the author .
 This class consciousness did not spring up overnight, and it is difficult to fix a certain point in time when it did develop . This is not the first time the world has seen a class consciousness crisis .
 Not all workers became conscious of themselves as a class apart . Moreover, certainly not all workers were conscious of being class apart.
 Great differences in skills and work experience remained among workers in different countries and even among workers . Male and female workers in the same region, or city, and male and female .
 Other identities continued to be important to workers, such as those of family and motherhood, cultural identity (Flemish, Venetian, Welsh, etc. etc.), religious adherence, and religious adherence .
 Urban artisans were the first workers to begin to express class consciousness, sharing the frustrations and goals of other workers . Urban workers were first to begin expressing class consciousness in their work .
 Large-scale industrialization had deleterious consequences for many trades, threatening the control craftsmen had maintained for centuries over their work . Craftsmen were threatened by industrialization .
 Shoemakers, masons, and tailors, among those in other trades, retained their own craft organizations . Shoemaker, mason and mason among those who retained their craft organizations.
 Rival associations within the same trade sometimes engaged in bitter, violent battles . Rival trade associations within same trade often engaged in violent battles.
 Even within trades, hierarchies of skill and remuneration remained. Furthermore, even within trades,. hierarchies . remained .
 The number of artisans expanded rapidly because there were no legal restrictions to entering a given craft . As a number of states followed France’s lead in 1791 by banning guilds in the name of liberalism .
 Journeymen were more uncertain than ever before about whether they would become masters . Journeymen would employ their own journeymen and take on apprentices. Journeymen, having completed their apprenticeships, would be more uncertain .
 In Prussia, the number of masters in Prussia increased by only about half between 1816 and 1849 . The number of journeymen and apprentices aspiring to a mastership more than doubled during the same period .
 Merchant-manufacturers put work out to master and journeymen tailors, but asked them to perform a single task, such as making sleeves, in return for less money than if they had tailored an entire suit .
 Master tailors were driven out of business or forced to become subcontractors in their own trade . Many master tailors have been driven out or forced by necessity to become submenants .
 Mechanization also began to undercut tailors by producing ready-made clothes . Tailors began to be undercut by making ready made clothes .
 In 1811 and 1812, glove makers in Nottingham, England, smashed a thousand stocking-frames that deprived them of work . Already in 1811-1812, gloves makers smashed the frames .
 Machine-breaking ‘Luddites’ yearned for a return to the old economic and social order, before mechanization, as had the “Captain Swing” rebels in 1829-1830 . The “Luddite’s” yearned
 Mechanical looms reduced Silesian hand-loom weavers to desperate poverty . Mechanical looms reduce hand-lovers to poverty in the region . Weavers were forced to rely on hand-made looms for their livelihoods .
 Workers’ views of themselves drew upon a corporate language of the Old Regime that gave primacy to the idea of work as a value in itself and of the community of workers as a moral entity . Workers' views of . themselves drew . upon corporate . language of . the Old
 Many workers concluded that they, not entrepreneurs with capital, were the source of wealth and were being exploited . Many workers conclude that they were not entrepreneurs but entrepreneurs .
 Other workers also began to feel a sense of class consciousness because they collectively suffered unemployment or reduced wages . Other workers felt the same sense of consciousness .
 Residential patterns and leisure haunts contributed to solidarities among such workers, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Workers’ Associations and Social Protest Workers' associations helped shape working-class consciousness and militancy .
 Craft-based ‘friendly societies’ had more than a million members in 1815 . Crafts-based "friendly societies" had over 1,000 members in Britain .
 Their counterparts were journeymen’s associations and ‘mutual aid societies’ in France, Germany and France . They were also known as ‘travelers’ associations’
 Fledgling trade unions developed in Britain after 1824 when Parliament repealed the Combination Acts which had banned unions . The Combination Act was repealed in 1824 .
 Members sought to protect wage rates and conditions within their trades . Members of the trade union sought protection from wage rates, conditions .
 Less than a fifth of workers belonged to such associations during the first half of the century . The vast majority of these were more skilled craftsmen .
 Many men believed they had little in common with unskilled workers, who, in any case, could not afford union dues and who lacked job stability . Many of these men thought they were better off with the unskilled .
 Trade associations, including a minority organized by and for women, provided assistance when a member fell sick (paid out of membership dues) and assured members that they would be spared the indignity of a pauper’s grave .
 They also provided funds to assist workers who refused to agree to conditions imposed by employers or masters . The funds were also provided to help those who refuse to agree conditions .
 These payments had to be made covertly because strikes remained illegal in most places . These payments were made in secret because strikes were illegal in many places .
 Tailors and shoemakers were often literate, as well as many seamstresses, who were often self-educated . Unskilled workers had a much higher level of literacy than did unskilled workers .
 Literate workers read newspapers and brochures and related the news to those who could not read . Literate people read newspapers, brochures, and related news to people who couldn't read . Those who can't read read the news and related it to them .
 The emergence of political movements seeking universal male suffrage (or even universal suffrage) and significant social reforms aided the development of a sense of class by emphasizing the language of “liberty, fraternity, and equality,” a heritage of the French Revolution . The emergence  of
 Some workers began cooperative stores, hoping to put aside funds to finance cooperative villages . Some workers hope to start stores to help finance cooperatives in villages .
 In the latter year, the first national union, made up of spinners, was founded . In the 1930s, spinners were made into a national union .
 Some trade union members undertook producers’ cooperatives within their trades, but most of these were short-lived . Some trade unions members undertook .
 The period from 1815 to 1850 was arguably the most socially turbulent period in modern British history . The period between 1815 and 1850 was the most social turbulent period of modern history .
 Skilled workers joined with middle-class radicals to demand political reform . Skilled and middle-aged workers joined forces to demand reform .
 William Cobbett helped galvanize radical opinion with his journal, the Political Register . Cobbett's journal, The Political Register, was published in the 1930s and '60s .
 By expanding the number of those eligible to vote, the Reform Bill temporarily diffused middle-class dissatisfaction . The Reform Bill was passed by the British House of Representatives in 2010 .
 The continued exclusion of working men from voting contributed to working-class consciousness in Britain . Parliament had legally defined workers as a separate, inferior class, in this way . Parliament's exclusion of workers from voting contributes to working class consciousness .
 At the same time, middle-class and working-class support for factory reform led to the acts of Parliament limiting work hours for children and then women .
 Amid hardship, more workers took to the streets in protest to demand political reform . Workers took to streets in demand for political reform, calling for political reforms .
 Methodism won thousands of converts among workers among workers . Methodism preached discipline and acceptance of one’s fate on earth. Methodism was an early form of Christianity .
 Solidarities within specific trades are stronger than those that cut across trades, experts say . More important, solidarities in specific trades remained stronger than in other trades .
 The utopian vision of rebuilding British political life while bringing social justice faded, too . Gradually, too, the vision of a British government in the 1960s faded . The U.S. government's first election victory was in 1964 .
 Many if not most workers came to accept capitalism as inevitable, while demanding a fairer share of its benefits . Many accepted it as inevitable and demanded a fair share of the benefits .
 French and German artisans were more militant than their British counterparts, who accepted the tradition of the politics of reform .
 German craftsmen desperately struggled to try to protect their trades from being flooded by newcomers . Craftsmen desperately tried to protect themselves from the flood of newcomers .
 Many French workers, now seeing themselves as members of a “confraternity of proletarians,” struck against employers in the 1830s and 1840s . Many workers now see themselves as . members of . a �fraternity . of . proletarians’ strike against employers
 They also supported bourgeois republicans in their push for electoral reform, in the hope that a republic would enact reforms on their behalf .
 Large-scale industrialization gradually transformed economy and society in Western Europe . The 1830s and 1840s brought lively discussion, heated debate, and startling transformations in thought .
 The rapid increase in wage labor influenced the emergence of new political forces that, proclaiming the equality of all people, sought dramatic social and political change .
 Socialism was the birth of the movement known as socialism . The preoccupation with the condition of workers led to socialism . socialism was the result of growing preoccupations with workers' condition .
 Utopian socialists, most of whom were French, provided an original critique of the changes brought by the Industrial Revolution . Most of them were French .
 Their ideas were in part shaped by their reaction against the social consequences of economic liberalism . Their ideas are shaped by reaction against social consequences, they say .
 The name ‘utopian’ reflects their dreams of creating a harmonious way of life . The name 'utopian' reflects their dream of creating harmonious life, they say .
 Many workers found an explanatory power in the critical reaction of the Utopians to liberalism and capitalism . But their importance comes not from their quirky theories, however intriguing they may be, but from the fact that many workers found a explanatory power .
 This accentuated their determination to put forward demands for social and political reform . This accentuates their determination .
 Utopian socialists agonized over the living conditions of the laboring poor . Socialists agonize over the poor's living conditions .
 The “social question’s was the miserable living conditions of many if not most workers. The social question was the misery living conditions, says CNN.com.com .
 U.S. utopian socialists envisioned a gentle world of cooperation . Rejects the ‘egotistic’ individualism of the spirit of acquisition, utopian socialists .
 Speaking hypothetically, he asked what the consequences for France would be if all of its dukes and duchesses, princes and princesses, bishops and priests, and other luminaries of altar, throne, and chateau sank .
 As tragic as that event would be, he had to admit that the loss to society would be inconsiderable . He said that he had a lot of sympathy for those who lost their lives .
 If France were to lose its most learned men, talented bankers, artisans, and productive farmers, the result would be disastrous . However, if France, in a similar tragedy, were to . lose all of its learned men and talented bankers .
 SaintSimon was charged with offending the royal family, but he was acquitted by a jury . He was acquitted of offending the royals, but was not charged with insulting them .
 Saint-Simon postulated a hierarchy, or order of status, based not on blood, but on productivity, based on productivity . He proposed a hierarchy based on a person's productivity rather than blood .
 Believing that history moves through discernible stages, he asserted that mankind could anticipate a future in which science would solve the material problems of humanity in harmony with moral improvement .
 People of talent must be freed from the fetters of restraint imposed by uncaring, unproductive monarchs, nobles, and priests . For this to happen, people of talent should be freed of restraint, writes David Frum .
 Charles Fourier was the rival of Saint-Simon . Fourier is the French poet of the 19th century . He was the founder of the French Symbolist movement .
 Fourier claimed that at a very early age he discovered that the art of selling was the practice of lying and deception . Fourier said that at an early age, he found that at the age of being a salesman, he had to lie and deceive .
 At his father’s insistence, he went off to Lyon as a young man to start a business that quickly failed . At the same time, he tried to take advantage of his father's decision to move to France .
 Fourier spent the rest of his life preparing a grand scheme for improving the condition of humanity . Fourier's grand scheme was designed to improve humanity's condition .
 His cosmology rested upon his conclusion that history moved in great cycles toward a more perfect future . The author's cosmology was based on a belief that history was moving toward a better future . He said that history's cycles move in cycles to create a better world .
 This planet’s next stage would be based upon the principles of cooperation and harmony would free everyone from the repression of bourgeois individualism . This planet would be the next stage of the revolution .
 The phalanx would channel the ‘passions’ of each person in socially productive ways . Individuals would benefit from the opportunity to express their deepest proclivities, he says .
 In the ‘phalanstery’ the place where the Utopians would live, crime would become a distant memory . Criminals’ supposed penchant for blood would be safely fulfilled in certain occupations, such as becoming butchers .
 With everyone so satisfied, differences in wealth would remain, it would not matter that differences would remain . "With everyone so happy, there would be no difference in wealth," he says .
 While Fourier dreamed and waited, the wealthy British industrialist and philanthropist Robert Owen acted . Owen acted after Fourier's dream was realized . Owen was a philanthropist and industrialist .
 Owen built a mill in New Lanark, Scotland, to create a spirit of cooperation . Owen believes education and environment could shape a spirit in society . Owen built the mill in Lanark to help students learn to work together .
 He provided decent housing for his workers and established schools for their children . He established schools and established housing for workers .
 Owen espoused the equality of women, although he emphasized not political rights but rather the special qualities of motherhood . Like Fourier, for whom human progress demanded the emancipation of women he espoused . Owen: "I'm a mother. I'm a woman. I don't want
 Englishman William Thompson penned in 1825 the Appeal of One Half of the Human Race, Women, Against the Pretentions of the Other, Men .
 Etienne Cabet had a greater popular following in France . No utopian socialist had a larger following than Cabet . Cabet was a French socialist .
 Cabet sought to apply the principles of Christianity to the extreme social problems of the day . Cabet, too, sought to . apply the . principles of . Christianity to social problems .
 His novel Voyage to Icaria described an imaginary city of wide streets, clean urinals, and social harmony . Even the bourgeoisie would be converted peacefully to the principles of cooperation and association, he wrote .
 Cabet s ‘communist’ newspaper had 4,500 subscribers in the early 1840s . Almost certainly reached twenty times that number .
 Artisans, their livelihoods threatened by the abolition of the guilds and mechanization, were particularly intrigued by Cabet's ideas . Artisans were especially intrigued by the ideas .
 A few of them set sail with Cabet for the New World, founding several utopian colonies in Texas and Iowa . The colonies were founded by Cabet in 1881 .
 Another group of utopian socialists represented the scientific or technocratic tendencies inherent in Saint-Simon’s respect for science and insistence that the state lead the way toward material progress . Another group represented the technocratic and even authoritarian tendencies .
 Practical Socialists carried Saint-Simon’s analysis a crucial step further . Some utopian socialists carried the analysis further .
 The bourgeoisie relegated the bourgeoisie into the category of non-producers, because they possessed capital, while workers seemed to be the real producers by virtue of their labor . The bourgeoisie was relegated to the category .
 In France, a group of Saint-Simonian women in 1832 founded a newspaper, La Tribune des Femmes y that vowed only to publish articles by women . The emancipation of women would come with the emancipation of the worker, according to the newspaper .
 The French government declared Flora to be illegitimate because it refused to recognize her parents’ marriage in Spain . Flora's Peruvian father’s fortune was confiscated and she had to take makeshift jobs in France .
 When she separated from her abusive husband, French law decreed that he receive custody of their children . But she later won custody when he started to abuse them, too .
 Tristan campaigned against women’s inequality within marriage and before the law . Tristan won the award for his work against inequality in marriage within marriage .
 She campaigned for female emancipation with impassioned speeches and forceful prose . Linked feminism and socialism, she campaigned for women's rights .
 Louis Blanc looked to governments to give scientists a free hand in applying their talents to the betterment of the human condition . Louis Blanc wanted to be able to use his talents to improve the world's health .
 The state should also guarantee workers the “right to work,” that is, employment in times of distress and a decent wage in the face of unchecked competition . The right to work should also be guaranteed employment in distress, and a fair wage .
 The state should provide credit to workers so they could form producers’ associations within their trades, writes David Frum . The middleman skimmed off profits that he had not earned, he says .
 Blanc believed the workshops would serve as the basis for the reorganization of society along cooperative lines . Blanc believed that these workshops would help society reorganize along the lines of cooperative society .
 Blanc’s socialism was predicated on increasing workers’ influence on government through the establishment of universal suffrage . Blanc was the founder of the Socialist Party in France in the 1930s .
 Pierre-Joseph Proudhon looked not to the strengthening of the state but to its abolition to create a better world . Proudhon wanted to abolish the state, not strengthen it, but create a world .
 Proudhon, a typesetter, had grown up among landowns in eastern France . Proudhon was a landowner who grew up among peasants in the region of eastern France.
 He believed that the existence of the state itself was a principal reason why capitalism exploited workers . He said that the very existence of a state was the main reason why workers were exploited .
 Proudhon defined property as unearned profit that came to employers from the labor of their workers, and not property per se . Not surprisingly, this frightened property owners in France, even though Proudhon defines property as property .
 Proudhon wanted workers to organize themselves into small, autonomous groups of producers that would govern themselves . Proudhon's idea was to organize workers into small groups of autonomous groups that govern themselves. Proudhon was born in France in 18th century .
 In 1843 his career as a journalist came to an abrupt halt after his radical newspaper ran afoul of the Prussian government . He went to Paris to write for the first time in 1843 after his newspaper was banned in Germany .
 There he read the histories of the French Revolution and the utopian socialists . There he also read the history of the U.S. and utopian socialists.
 Marx lambasted the French monarchy in a series of articles . Marx was expelled from France after he lambasted its monarchy . The French police expelled him from France in 1903 .
 He befriended Friedrich Engels, the Rhineland German whose prosperous, conservative family owned a cotton mill in Manchester, England . Engels' family owned an English cotton mill . Engels was the son of a German aristocrat who lived in Manchester .
 Marx visited industrial Lancashire, then the greatest concentration of industry in the world . Marx visited the area in the 1930s and 1940s . His visit to industrial Lancs was the first time he visited industrial areas in Britain .
 His observation of evolving capitalist society led him to conclude that capitalism was but a stage in world history . He concluded capitalism was a stage of history .
 Marx applied the concept of dialectical stages of the development of ideas and institutions, developed by the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, to the progression of world history . Marx used the dialectical stage of development to explain the evolution of ideas, institutions .
 The French Revolution had marked the definitive overthrow of feudal society, represented by the power of the aristocracy and the Church . For Marx, this was a bourgeois revolution . The revolution was a revolution for bourgeois society, Marx said .
 The bourgeois and the proletariat were fighting it out in the middle decades of the nineteenth century . Just as the nobility and the bourgeoisie had battled in the eighteenth century, so the victorious bourgeoisie controlled the means of production (capital, raw materials, and equipment needed to produce goods)
 English commercial capitalism had brought the bourgeoisie to power, which in turn had facilitated the growth of industrial capitalism . The English bourgeoisie was brought to power by the bourgeoisie, which was in turn facilitating industrial capitalism.
 By creating a proletariat, capitalists had sown the seeds of their demise . By creating the proletariat, however, capitalists created a class of people . The world's first class is now in decline .
 Inevitably, socialism would replace capitalism when the proletariat seized power, Marxists say . Marxists believe that capitalism would be replaced by socialism when the revolution struck .
 Marx thought of Proudhon destroying property as seen by a hostile caricaturist . But that moment, Marx thought, lay in the future, awaiting the further concentration of capitalism and the development of a larger class-conscious Proudhon .
 Marx called his socialism “scientific socialism” because he thought that it was inevitable, based on what he considered the scientific certainty of class struggle . Marx thought that class struggle was inevitable based on class struggle, Marx said .
 Marx believed that a revolution by workers would be prepared by the organizational efforts of a group of committed revolutionaries . Marx formed the Communist League in order to prepare for a revolution .
 In 1848, he published the Communist Manifesto y which resounds with the provocative exclamation, “The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains.” The Communist Party was founded in 1848 .
 Europeans were impressed with the rapid pace of economic change during the first half of the nineteenth century . Europeans could not help but be impressed by the rapid change in economic change .
 Trains revolutionized commerce and travel, bringing distant places closer together . Trains truly revolutionized travel and commerce .
 Cities grew rapidly, their railway stations bringing in more agricultural goods produced with capital-intensive farming . Cities grew quickly, bringing in agricultural goods from capital intensive farming .
 Factories dotted the landscape, although traditional workshop and cottage production remained essential . Factories now dotted the countryside, but traditional workshops still remained essential in the area .
 Many upper-class contemporaries were worried by what seemed to be teeming, increasingly disorderly cities . Yet they were worried about what seemed like an increasingly disorderly city . Yet many upper class contemporaries were concerned by the teeming cities .
 Industrial Revolution generated material progress, but also increased dissatisfaction among workers . Industrial Revolution seemed to have increased wrenching poverty and dissatisfaction . The Industrial Revolution, however, also seemed to be increased in dissatisfaction with workers .
 European powers tried to restore prerogatives of ruling dynasties, nobles, and established churches . Napoleon defeated Napoleon at Waterloo in 18th century .
 Liberal movements struggled against conservative ideology in Restoration Europe . Liberal and national movements struggled to overcome conservative ideology .
 Liberalism, above all, seemed to reflect the desires of the middle classes . Liberalism was born in France in the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 They hoped that by imposing a treaty on France and creating an international mechanism, the Concert of Europe, they could prevent Europe from again being shaken by revolution in France .
 The Congress represented conservative impulses, standing against liberalism and nationalism . It stood against organizing states along ethnic or national lines and demanded reforms in the name of the popular sovereignty .
 Early nineteenth-century Vienna was a perfect setting for a gathering of the representatives of Europe’s sovereign powers . Vienna was the scene of a meeting of representatives of the world's sovereign powers in the early 19th century .
 The Schonbrunn Palace on the outskirts of the Habsburg capital and Vienna’s own elegant baroque buildings still reflected the grandeur of absolutism and traditional court life . Despite the years of warfare that had virtually bankrupted the Austrian monarchy, the Sch
 At the Congress, Austrian hosts staged elaborate dinners, elegant balls, and festive fireworks displays . Organized hunts helped relieve boredom at the Congress .
 Artists stood ready to paint the portraits of the members of the diplomatic delegations . Artists were waiting for the portraits to be painted .
 Aristocratic guests amused themselves by trying to guess which of the hundreds of maids and porters were spying for the Austrians . The Austrians were at the centre of the Austrian invasion of France in the 18th century .
 The antics of some representatives provided as much comic relief as irritation as irritation .
 A Spanish diplomat insisted that his country should have the right to several small Italian states . Spanish diplomat said he should have a right to a number of small states .
 The other representatives were so annoyed by this demand they invited him to go on a ballooning excursion, and sent him off in the general direction of the Alps .
 In fact, the Congress met officially but once, to sign the final treaty . The treaty was negotiated in smaller formal and informal gatherings of the various delegations .
 In the wake of the many territorial changes that had occurred during the previous twenty-five years, the representatives redrew the map of Europe, particularly of Central Europe, putting old rulers back on their thrones .
 Rapid population growth swelled the number of lawyers, notaries, and other middle-class professionals in the U.S. City of New York .
 The middle classes’ liberal emphasis on individual freedom found expression in literature, art, and music of romanticism . Romanticism celebrated individual fulfillment through subjectivity and emotion, says historian .
 Liberal movements were in many places closely tied to the emergence of nationalism as a source of allegiance and sovereignty . Liberal movements in many parts of the world have been closely linked to nationalist movements .
 Nationalism threatened the territorial settlements effected by the Congress of Vienna . Nationalism was threatened by the Treaty of Peace of Peace on Vienna .
 The Habsburg Austrian monarchy ruled eleven major nationalities without a state of their own, including Hungarians and Poles, who had once had fully independent states . The Austrians ruled eleven nationalities, including Hungary and Poland .
 In the meantime, German and Italian nationalists began to call for national political unification . In the 1990s, the Italian and German nationalists called for national unification .
 The allied representatives to the Congress were determined to ensure that France could not again rise to a position of domination in Europe . France was determined not to return to a dominant position in Europe.
 Even before Napoleons first defeat and abdication in 1814, representatives of Prussia, Austria, Russia, and Great Britain formed a coalition, the “Quadruple Alliance,” intended to prevent France or any other state or political movement from threatening the legitimate
 The Treaty of Paris was signed in March 1814, thus before the Congress of Vienna . It was signed by the French President Napoleon III in 1814 .
 Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand, who had served Napoleon with flexibility rooted in an uncanny sense of survival, became the intermediary for Napoleon . He had served the French king with flexibility and a sense of survivor .
 He exploited tensions among the allies, especially between Prussia and Austria . The Austrians and Prussia were allies during the Cold War .
 The allies might well have forced the French to sign a draconian treaty . The French might have signed a treaty with the allies of the world .
 Napoleon was defeated Napoleon but the restored Bourbon monarch was wanted to solidify his throne . Napoleon wanted the Bourbon monarch, whose throne was solidified against liberal challenges within France .
 France retained lands incorporated before November 1, 1792, including parts of Savoy, Germany, and the Austrian Netherlands, as well as the former papal city of Avignon . France retained territories incorporated before 1792 including Savoy and parts of Germany, Austria and Austria .
 France gave up claims to the remainder of the Austrian Netherlands, the Dutch Republic, the German states, the Italian states, and Switzerland . France also gave up claim to the rest of Austria, the Netherlands, and the German and Italian states .
 It lost to Britain the Caribbean islands of Trinidad, Tobago, Santa Lucia, and part of Santo Domingo .
 Yet, difficult territorial issues remained to be resolved in central and southern Europe . Yet, some of the world's most populous countries remain divided .
 Diplomatic Maneuvering at the Congress of Vienna was almost entirely the work of diplomats representing Austria, Prussia, Great Britain, and Russia .
 Talleyrand’s wily off-stage negotiations gradually brought France to the position of a full-fledged participant in the deliberations . France has been a major player in the French Senate since the fall of the Cold War .
 Metternich was the son of a noble who had served at the court of the Habsburg monarch . Born in the German Rhineland, Metterich was born in the Rhinland region .
 Forced to quit diplomatic service in 1792, he rose to become the minister of foreign affairs in 1809 .
 Metternich was a handsome dandy with immaculately powdered hair as at home in the social whirl of formal receptions and magnificent balls as in petty intrigues of high society .
 He was a determined, calculating practitioner of toughminded diplomacy . But he was determined and calculating, he was a committed, calculating diplomat .
 Metternich dominated international affairs of the continent until 1848 . Meternich dominated world affairs of Europe until the end of the war .
 Castlereagh went to Vienna in the hope of establishing Britain as the arbiter of European affairs . His passion was sheepherding, and he was painfully shy and painfully shy . He was a keen sheepherder, but was too shy to get involved .
 The British Empire included one of every five people in the world . Now Europe’s greatest power, the British Empire was one of the world's greatest powers .
 Britain sought the elimination of the French threat to its commercial interests as well as security . The British government sought to eliminate the threat as part of the deal .
 Castlereagh and Metternich viewed the prospect of Russian expansion in Central Europe with anxiety . Castlereag and Metterich both viewed the Russian expansion with anxiety.
 Only Russia now seemed in a position to disrupt Europe through unilateral acts . Only Russia seemed to be in a place to disrupt the EU through unilateral action .
 Tsar Alexander I of Russia wanted the allies to affirm formally what he considered the religious basis of the European alliance . Alexander I was the Tsar of Russia and the Russian Empire .
 Alexander 1 was, above all, a deeply religious man who lapsed into an intense mysticism and overwhelming unhappiness as he became increasingly reactionary . Alexander 1 lapsed in on a series of religious lapses during his life as a young man . Alexander was a deeply religious man
 Alexander 1 drafted a document that became the basis for the Holy Alliance . Alexander 1 was Alexander 1 of Alexander 1, who drafted the document . The Holy Alliance was formed from Alexander 1 to Alexander 1 .
 Emperor Francis I of Austria and Frederick William III of Prussia signed the document, but the British prince regent—the future George IV (ruled 18201830) —begged off . The future British Prince Regent, George IV, begged off from the document .
 Prussia, Russia, and Austria promised mutual assistance wherever established religions and peace were threatened . Austria, Prussia and Russia promised mutual aid wherever established religion and peace was threatened .
 In the moral claims of the Holy Alliance lay justification for repression by the allies of any liberal and national movements in Europe . The Holy Alliance's moral claims are justified for the repression by any liberal or national movement in Europe, writes David Cameron .
 Under Metternich’s stern leadership, what became known as the Congress system restored the principle of dynastic legitimacy and the balance of international power .
 Poland lost independence when it was last partitioned by Russia, Prussia, and Austria in 1795 . The future of Poland stood at the top of the list of contentious issues .
 Russian troops occupied much of Poland, which Tsar Alexander wanted to annex to the Russian Empire . The Polish nation was invaded by the Russian tsar Alexander in the early 1800s .
 Great Britain, France, and Austria, fearing increased Russian and Prussian power in Central Europe, formed an alliance to head off any attack by Russia or Prussia . The alliance was formed in response to the threat posed posed posed by Russia and Prussia.
 It was to include lands Austria and Prussia had seized during the earlier partitions . The land was to be included in the new partition of the Great Depression .
 “Congress Poland” was made up of about 20 percent of Poland’s territory before the first partition of 1772; see Chapter 11 . It was despite a constitution nothing more than a Russian protectorate, with the tsar occupying the Polish throne .
 Large parts of what had been independent Poland remained in Prussia and in the Austrian Empire .
 Russia also held on to Finland, which it had conquered during the Napoleonic Wars . Finland was conquered by Russia in the early 1800s, and Finland was also conquered .
 Prussia received the northern half of Saxony, Posen and the port city of Gdansk . To balance Russian gains in the east, Prussia gained Saxony and Posen .
 In comparison with the debates over Poland and Saxony, the resolution of remaining territorial issues seemed easy . The resolution of the remaining territorial disputes seemed easy in comparison .
 Prussia received territories on the left bank of the Rhine River to discourage French aggression to the east . Prussia was given territories in order to discourage the French invasion .
 The Prussian Rhineland was now separated from the eastern Prussian provinces by the states of Hanover and Hesse-Kassel . The states of Hesse and Hanover were now separated by the eastern provinces .
 Prussia also received Swedish Pomerania and parts of Westphalia, but lost its outlet to the North Sea . East Friesland was returned to Hanover with the return of East Fursland .
 Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia enlarged to include Genoa, Nice, and part of Savoy . Switzerland, reestablished as a neutral confederation of cantons, enlarged to be neutral . Other buffers against France along its eastern border included Switzerland, Switzerland, and Pied
 Most territorial settlements were made without the slightest consideration of local public opinion . Most of the settlements were decided without consideration of public opinion. Most of these settlements were not considered by local people .
 Map 15. Map 15 was released by the Allies of the Soviet Union in 1945 . Map 15 is a map of the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 Europe after the Congress of Vienna, 1815 . Changes in boundaries of states after the congress of Vienna . Europe .
 Congress placated Britain by awarding the former Austrian Netherlands to the Dutch . It left a state friendly to Britain on France’s northern border .
 Castlereagh’s plan to link the Dutch throne to the British monarchy failed, at least in part because the intended groom became royally drunk in the presence of the intended but most unwilling bride .
 Austria was well compensated for the loss of the Austrian Netherlands with Lombardy and Venetia in Italy, much of Galicia, and Illyria on the coast of Dalmatia . The loss of Austria Netherlands was compensated for by Lombardy in Italy and Galicia .
 The grand duchies of Parma, Modena, and Tuscany, too, had close family links to Vienna . Parma and Modena had close ties with Vienna .
 Ferdinand I introduced a constitution, but signed an alliance with Austria . He promised not to introduce any further reforms without the latter’s permission . Ferdinand I signed a constitution in Austria, but promised to not introduce reforms without his permission .
 Austrian garrisons and secret police in each Italian state helped assure Austrian domination of northern Italy . Austrian secret police were used to protect Austrian interests in Italy .
 The second Treaty of Paris, signed in November 1815, pushed France back from its 1792 borders to those of 1790 . The treaty was signed following Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo in June 1815 .
 Napoleon's victories in Central Europe had led to the end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 . Napoleon’s victories in . Central Europe led to . the . end of . the Holy . Roman Empire .
 On June 9, 1815, the Congress created a German Confederation of thirty-five states loosely joined by a Federal Diet (Bundestag), or governing body, that would meet in Frankfurt .
 In addition to Prussia and Austria, the Confederation also included the states of Bavaria, Hanover, Wiirttemberg, the two Hesses, and Baden . The independent, or “free,” cities of Hamburg, Frankfurt, Bremen, and
 The Confederation did not include the non-German lands of the Austrian Empire . The Confederation was created in 1881 .
 Confederation pledged to assist each other if any of them were attacked or in any way threatened . Members of the Confederation pledged each other to help each other .
 It is unlikely that unanimity could ever be achieved among the member states, or that states could be compelled to obey a decision made by the Confederation .
 The Diet merely afforded Metternich a means of bullying the smaller states . The Diet was merely a way to bully the small states .
 The German Confederation was anything but an affirmation of a move toward German national unification . The Confederation is anything more than a national unity .
 Prussia emerged as a rival for Austria’s leadership of the Confederation and for dominance in Central Europe . By virtue of its Rhineland acquisitions, Prussia became a rival .
 In this extension of the Congress of Vienna, representatives of the powers would meet annually . Representatives of the power would meet each other in Vienna .
 If necessary, they would join together to put down movements that could threaten the status quo . The U.S. has a long history of anti-government movements .
 Austria had the most to fear from national claims for independent states, Metternich said . Austria was the country most at risk of independence claims, he said .
 Austria was both a state in the German Confederation and the most important province within its empire of many nationalities . Austria was the most significant province in the Confederation of Austria . Austria is Austria's most important provincial province of the Confederation .
 The Austrian Empire stretched from the stately elegance of Vienna through the plains of Hungary, to isolated Romanian and Croatian villages . It stretched from stately Vienna to the isolated Romanian villages .
 German was the language of the imperial bureaucracy, and of many of the towns, but one could find eleven major languages within the borders of the empire . One of the 11 major languages in the empire was German .
 The Habsburg monarchy depended on the support of the nobles of the favored nationalities and the German-speaking middle classes . The monarchy was founded in 17th Century Austria .
 Metternich exploited the fear that the upper classes of the favored nationalities felt toward any awakening from the lower classes, particularly of other ethnic groups . He exploited that fear of awakening from lower classes .
 This kept most Magyar nobles loyal to the Habsburg dynasty, although some desired ultimate independence . Some wanted ultimate independence, but some still wanted to be independent .
 Prussia feared that Russia was seeking to expand its influence in the Balkans, especially among peoples of the Orthodox faith . Prussia and particularly Austria feared it was expanding its influence .
 Metternich was willing to use Austrian armies to maintain the status quo y . He sought to avoid any joint Congress military action that might bring Russian armies into Central Europe or the Balkans . Metternch therefore was willing .
 Austrian leader wanted to keep alive the Austrian alliance with Britain against any future French, Prussian, or Russian aggression . He thus wanted the alliance to survive .
 Castlereagh was less concerned by Russia’s expanded interests in Central Europe than about containing France, he says .
 He had reservations about the appropriateness of the Quadruple Alliance s intervention in the internal affairs of European states . But he had reservations .
 The British participated in the annual gatherings of representatives of the Concert powers, but gradually withdrew from the Congress system . The British withdrew from Congress system in 1903 .
 At Aachen in 1818, the allies agreed to withdraw their remaining troops from France . France, having paid off the war debts, now joined the Holy Alliance .
 The Congress of Vienna was guided by conservative principles of monarchical legitimacy . The right to the thrones of Europe was determined by hereditary succession, and by close ties to the established churches .
 In the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, the members of the ruling House of Savoy came back wearing powdered wigs in the style of the eighteenth century . The religious orders returned in force .
 In Lombardy-Venetia, consultative assemblies were established in Milan and Venice, but they did little more than assess taxes . Consultative assemblies in Venice and Milan and Milan were established .
 In Germany such bodies routinely approved legislation without limiting the power of the sovereign . With the exception of Baden, in the German states such bodies regularly approved legislation . In Baden it was routinely approved by the state legislature .
 The governments of the German states that had been occupied by France completely purged the remnants of Napoleonic administration . They annulled French-inspired legislation, and imposed strict censorship .
 When the French left the Papal States, Pope Pius VII tried to exorcise all traces of French influence .
 Administrative reforms undertaken during the occupation ended; so did street lighting and vaccinations . Even vaccinations were identified with the godless French .
 In Tuscany the duke ordered the colors of Giotto’s portrait of Dante altered, fearing that observers would see in them the French tricolor flag . The duke also ordered Giotto's painting of Dante to be altered .
 The French Revolution had by no means eliminated noble influence in the states of Europe . The revolution was the result of the French Revolution in France .
 Even in Britain, the lines between landed and business wealth were more blurred than anywhere else . Nobility still dominated the House of Commons in Britain .
 An electoral system based on landed wealth gave them a disproportionate advantage . The system was based on land wealth and gave them an unfair advantage .
 In Spain, nobles were particularly numerous, although many of them were relatively poor . Many of Spain's noble families were particularly poor .
 Sweden counted about 12,000 nobles in the middle of the nineteenth century . Sweden still counted about . 12,500 nobles in Sweden .
 In the Italian states, nobles still held sway in declining or stagnant walled towns like Palermo, Naples, and Rome, as they did in the countryside . The Italian states still hold sway in some of the country's largest cities .
 Even in industrializing Milan and in Turin, nobles dominated the civic administration . Even in . industrializing . Milan and Turin .
 The farther east one went, the more nobles still dominated economic, social, and political life . The farther west one went the more social, social and political power .
 Nobles owned 40 percent of the land of Prussia and retained their stranglehold over the officer corps . Nobles were able to keep control of their land .
 The Landwehr, the civilian reserve force, is commanded by mere commoners . The army defiantly brushed aside possible competition from the landwehr .
 In Russia, the officer corps remained a noble stronghold, reinforced by the aristocracy’s near monopoly on appointments to military academies and to important posts in the civil service . In Russia the aristocracy has a near monopoly in appointing officers to important positions .
 In the architecture of public buildings and palaces, noble taste still predominated, as in the enormous neo-Gothic Parliament in Budapest, where nobles held sway for centuries .
 In much of Europe, public buildings and statues affirmed aristocratic values and moral claims that had characterized the old regimes . In many of Europe's public buildings, statues and statues are seen as an example of the old regime .
 European nobles retain close ties to the established churches, which still deferred to aristocratic status . European nobles retained close ties with established churches .
 During the revolutionary era, the established churches, particularly the Catholic Church, had suffered . The established churches had suffered during the revolution, particularly from the revolutionary period .
 Europe now witnessed a marked religious revival, as in the Lutheran northern German states . Europe has witnessed a religious revival in Germany .
 In France, old religious confraternities were revived . pious families contributed money to rebuild churches, monasteries, and convents destroyed or damaged during the Revolution .
 In Britain, the Established Church rejected the notion of divine-right or absolutist monarchy . Yet most British conservatives believed the existing social order represented by the Anglican Church to be God-given .
 Restoration Europe drew on several sources . The conservative ideology of Restoration Europe is based on several historical sources . Restoration Europe was founded in 1945 .
 Conservatives insisted that states emerged through gradual growth and that monarchical legitimacy stemmed from royal birthright, confirmed by the sanction of religion . Conservatives insisted statehood came from gradual growth .
 Catholic and Protestant conservatives insisted that the established churches provided moral authority that complemented that of traditional monarchical institutions of government, which alone could maintain order .
 In Russia, the mystical Tsar Alexander 1 believed fervently that the Orthodox Church had an important role in keeping his people subservient . Alexander 1 .
 Pietism broke with Protestant orthodoxy to teach that mankind was essentially sinful and required a repressive state to keep in line . In the German states, Pietism was a form of Pietism . Pietism taught that mankind needed to be kept in line by the repressive state .
 Europe’s conservative monarchies, depending on noble support, therefore sought to reestablish the privileges that the French Revolution and Napoleon had swept away . Europe's monarchies sought to reinstate the privileges they had been swept away by Napoleon .
 A French writer, Joseph de Maistre, emerged as a theorist of the alliance of throne and altar . He was a French writer who wrote about the alliance between the altar and throne .
 Rejecting the concept of ‘natural rights’ associated with Enlightenment thought, de Maistre argued that a king’s power could never be limited by his subjects, because that power came only from God .
 De Maistre blamed the Revolution on the philosophes who had shaken the faith that underlay the absolutism of hereditary monarchy .
 Most conservatives saw no difference between reform and revolution, believing that reform would inevitably lead to revolution and radical change . Most conservatives thought reform would lead to radical change, but reform was not revolutionary . Reformers believed that revolution and revolution would inevitably end in revolution .
 They stood opposed to political claims stemming from any notion of individual freedom, popular sovereignty, or membership in any particular national group . They stood adamantly opposed to any notion that . individual freedom .
 Conservatives faced the problem that their support was limited to a very narrow social and political base in a Europe that was slowly being transformed by the Industrial Revolution . Yet conservatives confronted the problem of their support in Europe was limited .
 The restored monarchy in France under Louis XVI11 granted a Charter to the French people promising essential liberties . It was testimony to the influence of the revolutionary era that the restored monarchy gave a Charter . The French people promised essential liberties in the Charter .
 The French monarchy, as well as that of Piedmont-Sardinia and even Metternich’s Austria, utilized the bureaucratized state apparatus inherited from Napoleon to repress liberals . Instead of restoring the less-centralized ruling structure that had typified Old Reg
 Liberals, the term became current in the late 1830s, shared a confidence that human progress was inevitable, though gradual . Liberals shared a belief that progress is inevitable, but gradual, and that progress was gradual .
 From the Enlightenment, the bourgeoisie inherited a faith in science, which they held to be a motor of progress . The bourgeoisie held a belief in science as a motor for progress .
 Liberals believed that all individuals should be equal before the law . Liberals held that individuals are born good, free, and capable of improvement . Liberals believed all individuals were born good and free, but not equal .
 Economic liberals believed in “laissez-faire’s” that the economy should operate freely without state interference . Economic liberals for the most part believed in laissezfaire .
 Nineteenth-century liberals wanted government by constitution and by elected legislative bodies (such as the British Parliament and the French Chamber of Deputies) that would reflect some degree of sovereignty .
 liberals demanded such civil liberties as freedom of the press and of assembly, and education for the lower classes, so that individuals could develop to their full capacities . Liberals demanded such freedom of speech and freedom of assembly as well as education .
 Liberals replaced the discourse emphasizing the rights of man with that of the citizen or subject . Liberals gradually replaced Enlightenment discourse emphasizing man's rights with the legally defined rights of the subject .
 They put faith in political and social rights embodied in constitutions, defined by law, and guaranteed by the state . They put their faith in the state's guarantee of political, social rights .
 Middle-class voters trusted elected legislative bodies to ensure their rights as property owners could not be trampled by monarchs and aristocrats .
 They opposed electoral systems that were so narrowly constructed that only the wealthiest men were allowed to vote, as in Britain, France, and Prussia . They were opposed to electoral systems where only wealthy men could vote .
 Most liberals during the first two-thirds of the nineteenth century did not believe that all people should vote, but rather that eligibility to vote should stem from the amount of property owned . Only such men—and not women—of property should hold the electoral franchise, they say .
 Liberalism sought to place limits on state authority . Liberals sought to put limits on government authority .
 They rejected government interference in the operations of the economy . In particular, they rejected government intervention in the economy.
 Many liberals opposed protectionism—state-imposed duties on imports . Many liberals therefore opposed protectionist trade protectionism .
 Their motto was “laissez-faire’s ‘invisible hand’ of supply and demand to bring change . Government should allow the “in invisible hand” of supply, demand to change, they said .
 Smith argued that the unrestricted functioning of the free economy would ensure the pursuit of private interests . Smith had argued that a free economy was necessary to ensure private interests was pursued .
 This would, in turn, serve the public interest by creating more wealth, creating wealth . This would be good for the public, and it would help create more wealth for the next generation . The public interest would benefit from this wealth creation .
 Businessmen would supplant nobles and churchmen as the men to whom ordinary people deferred . With their investments augmenting the general good, businessmen would replace churchmen and nobles .
 Utilitarianism formed another cornerstone of the entrepreneurial ideal, indeed of liberalism in general .
 In 1776, he posited that laws should be judged by their social utility, or whether or not they provided “the greatest good for the greatest number” of people . He said laws should not be judged on whether they provide ‘greater good’ for the
 Bentham's utilitarianism reflected the relatively decentralized government of Britain and a pervasive belief among the king’s subjects that a government that made few demands and that served efficiently counted among the “liberties” of freeborn Britons .
 Adam Smith’s successors gradually made a science out of speculations about the operations of the economy, insisting that the laws they postulated about the development of capitalism were based on scientific certainty . Adam Smith's successors continued to make speculations out of speculation .
 They optimistically pointed to the ongoing economic and social transformation of Britain in the manufacturing age .
 The theories of Smith and Bentham had a great impact on British businessmen . The theories were influential in the world of business .
 Social status of an individual increasingly came to be measured in terms of utility . The social status of a person was often measured by their utility . This was the case in the 1930s, when social status became more important .
 David Ricardo published Principles of Political Economy and Taxation in 1817 . Ricardo's work was published by the British economist in the same year as his work on tax .
 Ricardo assumed the existence of an “iron law of wages,” which held that, if wages were left to the laws of supply and demand, they would fall to near subsistence level . Ricardo assumed an ‘iron law’ of wages would hold wages to a near subsistence
 This is more cheering news for manufacturers than for workers . This was certainly more cheering for manufacturers .
 Ricardo Ricardo was elected to Parliament in 1819 . He was a hero to the middle class . Ricardo was a member of the British aristocracy .
 He reassured liberals that the ‘invisible hand’ of the economy would bring continued economic growth . The bulk of entrepreneurial profits would go into employers' pockets, he said .
 Through the Political Economy Club, the ideas of Bentham and other liberals reached a wide audience . Bentham's ideas of liberalism reached a wider audience . The ideas of the British Liberal Party were published in the 1860s and 1870s .
 Middle-class entrepreneurs did not always agree on what specific economic policies they favored . They often disagreed on what policies they favor .
 Tory governments in Britain bored the first holes in the wall of protectionism by reducing the duty collected on Baltic timber, which had been kept high to favor Canadian exporters .
 Many French industrialists demanded that the government maintain high tariffs to keep out British manufactured goods and machinery . Many of them demanded that high tariffs be kept out of France .
 Most liberals like Ricardo demanded the “freedom of work,” that is, that nothing constrain free agreements between employers and their workers . Most liberals demanded the freedom of work . That is, of course, not freedom of freedom of employment .
 They considered their factories to be their castles, which they could do what they pleased . The factories were considered to be 'their castles' and 'their factories'
 British liberals believed that a strong state compromised political freedom . British liberals were concerned that the state compromised freedom of expression .
 The French Revolution had, after all, culminated in Jacobin state centralization and Napoleonic despotism . It had culminated in the French Revolution, which ended in a state of centralization .
 Continental liberals remained more “statist” accepting a more active role by government . They relied on a powerful state to counteract influence of nobles and clerics .
 Romanticism began to emerge as a literary, artistic, and musical movement in the late eighteenth century . Romanticism emphasizes imagination and emotion in personal development .
 English poets William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge called for poets to abandon classical style . Poets wanted to express their emotional response to nature rather than classical models of art .
 During the romantic era, swooning and fainting came into vogue because they seemed to be honest expressions of emotion . Swooning was a popular expression of emotion in the romantic age of the era .
 Conservative Origins Romanticism first contributed to the conservative revival . Conservative Origins of Conservative Origins: Conservative Origins .
 Early romantic writers had become disillusioned by the French Revolution's violent turn . After initially being intrigued by the Revolution s apparent victory over the strictures of the Old Regime, the early romantic writers became disillusioned .
 Coleridge had been among the first to sing the praises of the Revolution, but turned against it when French armies began pouring across the frontiers more as conquerors than as liberators .
 Many of the early romantic writers were individuals of religious faith who rejected Enlightenment rationalism . Many of these writers rejected Enlightenment rationality .
 Disillusionment with the French Revolution helped German romantic writers discover in nationalism a means of individual fulfillment . The French Revolution was a major source of inspiration for German nationalism .
 Nationalism, too, marked a reaction against Enlightenment rational tradition . Nationalism was a reaction to Enlightenment rationalism, and nationalism was not rationalism .
 Johann Gottfried von Herder was the son of a Prussian schoolteacher . He was one of the impassioned leaders of the Sturm und Drang movement, a rebellion by young German writers .
 Herder argued that it was through the passionate identification with the nation that the individual reached his or her highest stage of development . Calling for the study and celebration of German literature and history, Herder said it was necessary to identify the nation .
 His insistence on the existence of different racial types, shaped by climate, history, and cultural traditions, would influence the evolution of racism later in the century .
 In Central ;and Eastern Europe, romanticism celebrated the historical authenticity of the cultural traditions and languages of ethnic peoples . In many areas, many areas were constituted in many areas by a patchwork of nationalities . Romanticism was a form of nationalistic nationalism .
 From there it would be a short step to argue that nationalities should have their own independent state . From there, there would be an argument for nationalities to be able to have independent states .
 Romantics defined freedom as the unleashing of the senses and passion of the soul . Romantic Literature and Painting Romantics define freedom as unleashing the senses .
 They searched for the ‘heroic genius’ who fulfills himself in spite of constraints placed on him by the state, religion, or societal convention . The search for a hero was conducted for the first time .
 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe evoked the impassioned battle raging in the mind of the heroic individual . Goethe's Goethe was inspired by the battle of heroic individuals in his work .
 Goethe’s hero in Faust struggles to make his way against a society that fails to understand him . Faust is the work of Goethe's Faust, a play by Goethe .
 Like Faust, romantic writers and artists were, at least at the beginning, literary and academic outsiders . Faust was an outsider of academic and literary circles . Faust and Faust were literary outsiders .
 Many were loners, without established professional positions, overwhelmed by what they considered the tragedy of their unrequited search for individual fulfillment . Less-gifted people did not comprehend their brilliance, they said .
 I am the eye with which the Universe Beholds itself and knows itself divine . All harmony of instrument or verse, all prophecy, all medicine is mine, All light of art or nature is mine .
 Romantic painters sought to convey feeling through the depiction of the helplessness of the individual confronted by the power of nature . They sought to depict storms, surging seas, and immense, dark forests .
 In France, Theodore Gericault reached the public eye with his Officer of the Chasseurs Commanding a Charge , 584, an almost worshipful painting of a Napoleonic officer in the heat of battle .
 Gericault became obsessed with shipwrecks, a subject that reflected his volatile personality . Gericaults became fascinated with the subject of shipwrecking .
 The Raft of the Medusa depicts a shipwreck off the West African coast . He sought out real-life survivors of such tragedies in order to paint his work .
 Musical compositions built on the traditions of the eighteenth-century masters, helping the public rediscover them . Romantic music sought and achieved a sharp break with the rules of classical literature .
 The compositions of Ludwig van Beethoven bridged the classical and romantic periods, with a foot firmly in each of each . The composer's compositions of the classical period included classical music and romantic music .
 Beethoven’s audiences struggled to understand his music, which increasingly seemed to defy traditional structures and harmonies . The composer's audiences struggled with his music .
 A critic reacted to one of Beethoven’s symphonies, “The composer . . takes the majestic flight of the eagle, then he creeps along rock-strewn paths.” A critic wrote that the composer “creeped along rock’
 Beethoven’s symphonies and string quartets were widely played in Europe . His sonatas helped popularize the piano, and his sonatatas were widely popularized .
 The instrument, which continued to be improved, became more resonant and was established as a single solo instrument . The instrument continued to improve, becoming more resonate .
 Mozart had struggled to make ends meet two decades earlier . Mozart freed himself from the old patronage system of court and church . Beethoven enjoyed wealth and fame .
 Romantic music grew in popularity during the first half of the nineteenth century . Opera remained the most popular form of musical expression, drawing crowds with its extravagant staging .
 The public flocked to public concerts, and more musicians could now make a living from their performances . More musicians now have a chance to perform in public concerts .
 Paganini's performances, musical effects he produced, and his frenzied appearance suggested to one observer that he was engaging in witchcraft . Paganini’s performances, the musical effects and his . musical effects . produced, suggested to some observer that . he was engaged in witchcraft.
 Concerts in middle-class homes became common in the 1930s and '50s . Concerts were common in middle class homes .
 The Congress of Vienna resembled the Dutch boy gamely trying to dam the deluge by plugging up the holes in the dike with his fingers . The Congress was a gamely attempt to dam up the flood with the help of the Dutch .
 During the first half of the century, virtually every country in Europe experienced a confrontation between the old political order, represented by the Congress of Vienna, and nascent liberalism . During the early 20s, Europe was confronted by a new political order: the old .
 In France and the German states, liberal bourgeois demanded political rights for a wider number of people . In Germany and France, they demanded political freedom for a larger number of those .
 Newspapers and political pamphlets deftly sidestepped the heavy hand of censorship to challenge the restored prerogatives of conservative regimes . Newspapers, pamphlets and newspapers deftly avoided censorship in Iran .
 In Britain, middle-class spokesmen confronted conservatives and what conservatism’s enemies referred to as “Old Corruption” A political system based upon the patronage and influence of wealthy landowners. The middle class confronted conservatives .
 Intellectuals, lawyers, and students called for the creation of independent states based upon ethnicity . Intellectuals and lawyers called for an independent state based on ethnicity to be created .
 This was anathema to the powers represented at the Congress of Vienna, particularly the leaders of the polyglot Russian and Austrian Empires . This was an attempt to keep the peace between Russia and Austria .
 Demands for new states organized around the principle of nationality would threaten the very existence of empires . The idea of nationality as opposed to monarchical or princely sovereignty would threaten empires .
 The first test for the Congress system came in Spain . Liberal Revolts in Spain, Portugal, Italy and Italy .
 King Ferdinand VII declared that he did not recognize the liberal constitution that had been drawn up by the Cortes in 1812 . Ferdinand VII was King of Spain from 1812 to 1814 .
 It defined sovereignty as residing “essentially in the Nation,"" the union of all Spaniards in both hemispheres . It provided ministers responsible to the Cortes .
 It guaranteed the right of property, freedom of the press, and freedom from arbitrary arrest . It also guaranteed freedom of property and freedom of freedom of press .
 Ferdinand VII imposed strict censorship, welcomed back the Jesuit religious order, and repressed Masonic lodges . Ferdinand VII was the Spanish king's first monarch .
 He refused to convoke the Cortes, which he had promised to do upon his return . Furthermore, he refused convoke him to do the same thing .
 Ecclesiastics and nobles reclaimed land they had lost during the Napoleonic period .
 The Inquisition, the Catholic Church’s institutionalized apparatus to maintain religious orthodoxy, returned to Spain . The police again began to arrest alleged heretics . The Inquisition was an institutionalized state of repression .
 Spanish monarchy remained inextricably allied with noble and ecclesiastical privilege . The Spanish monarchy was allied with the Spanish monarchy .
 The clergy accounted for about 30 percent of adult Spanish males, many living in monasteries that dotted the countryside . Many of the clergy were living in the countryside, many of the country's most rural areas .
 The aristocracy and the Church owned two-thirds of the land, much of it as unproductive as its owners, who collected revenue from those tilling the soil . Much of it was unproductive and unproductive .
 The vast majority of peasants supported the established order, believing the word of the village priest to be that of God . Yet the vast majority believed the word was that of the priest .
 The allies were delighted to have a “legitimate’’ sovereign back on France's southern flank, although Spain had long since ceased to be a European power . The allies are delighted that Spain has long been a legitimate power .
 French occupation and Peninsular War had weakened Spain’s hold over its Latin American colonies . French occupation, with the king in exile, had weakened the Spanish hold .
 Rebellions against Spanish rule broke out in the colonies, beginning in Argentina in 1816 . Argentina was one of the most important colonies in the world .
 The example of the War of American Independence in North America provided inspiration . The example was inspired by the example of America's War of Independence .
 Spanish forces, lacking resources and badly led, were obliged to fight over enormous stretches of wildly varying territory . Spanish forces lacked resources and were forced to fight .
 Of the overseas empire that had stretched from North America to the southern tip of South America in the sixteenth century, Spain retained only the Caribbean islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico, as well as the Philippines in Asia . The Philippines was the last of Spain's overseas empire, and the Philippines
 Army officers who led the insurrection against Ferdinand were soon joined by merchants and lawyers . Army officers led the revolt against Ferdinand .
 The king agreed to convoke the Cortes and abide by the liberal constitution of 1812 . The king now agreed that he would abide by that constitution .
 Metternich and Tsar Alexander I of Russia, supported by Prussia, demanded allied armed intervention . So did Louis XVIII of France, eager to prove himself a reliable ally . Louis XVII of France was eager to show himself as an ally .
 Great Britain remained adamantly opposed to any intervention in Spanish internal affairs . Great Britain feared the presence of foreign troops in Spain might jeopardize British commerce or increase French influence .
 Liberal army officers took advantage of the continued absence of King John VI to rise up against the British-backed regent in 1820 .
 They drafted a liberal constitution based on that penned in Spain in 1812 . They drafted the constitution, based on the constitution in Spain, Spain .
 A military coup d etat led to the return of King John from Brazil as a constitutional monarch . That same year, a military coup led to a return to Brazil .
 The constitution proclaimed that year guaranteed religious toleration, civic rights, and the sanctity of property . The constitution declared that year .
 The influence of this revolution, which undercut the influence of the Church, led to civil war from 1832 to 1834 between royalists and an alliance of liberals and radicals, and then in 1851, after some forty different governments and another coup d’6a secret meeting of
 Army officers and merchants in Naples and Sicily revolted against the rule of King Ferdinand I, another monarch who had been restored to his shaky throne by the allies .
 ‘Charcoal-burners’ took their name from their practice of swearing each new member to secrecy by tracing a charcoal mark on his forehead . These ‘charcoal burners” swear their oath of secrecy to secrecy .
 Carbonari, originally formed to fight Napoleon’s armies, now directed its fervor against the monarch placed on the throne by the Austrians . The Carbonari was originally formed in 18th century to oppose Napoleon .
 Austrian troops put down the revolt in Piedmont-Sardinia . Austrian troops also put down a revolt in the Kingdom of Piesmont-Piedmont . However, the revolt was put down by Austrian troops .
 In response to what they perceived as the liberal threat, in 1820 the Russian, Prussian, and Austrian governments signed an agreement at the Congress of Troppau in Austrian Silesia . The agreement was signed in response to the threat of liberalism in Russia and Austria .
 The Alliance proclaimed the right of the signatories to intervene militarily in any country in which political changes were brought about by revolution . Based on the �in principles of the Alliance, the Alliance proclaimed right to intervene .
 Following the suicide of Castlereagh in 1822, Britain further distanced itself from the Congress system .
 That year, the remaining Congress powers reconvened in the northern Italian town of Verona . Congress powers were still in charge of the Congress powers .
 Britain’s withdrawal cleared the way for military action in Spain to restore King Ferdinand VII to his throne . Britain withdrew from Spain in order to restore the King of Spain to the throne .
 A French army took to the field for the first time since Waterloo, but in very different circumstances . With the support of Russia, Prussia, and Austria, a French army was able to defeat the British army in the Battle of the Bastille .
 The grateful king of Spain renounced the Constitution of 1812 and ordered the torture and execution of his opponents . King of Spain ordered the execution of those who opposed him .
 President James Monroe feared that the Concert powers might try to help Spain restore its authority over its former Latin American colonies . Monroe's proclamation became one of the bases of subsequent American foreign policy .
 In the German and Italian states, liberals and nationalists were often the same people . In Germany and Italy, they were often seen as liberal and nationalist .
 In 1817, a large convocation of student associations celebrated the three-hundredth anniversary of Martin Luther’s revolt against the papacy by burning books deemed anti-patriotic . The convocation burned books deemed too patriotic to burn in memory of Luther .
 In 1819, a German student murdered an arch-conservative historian and dramatist commonly believed to be in the pay of the Russian tsar . The student's murder was the murder of a German historian, known as a Russian historian .
 Teachers fired in one state were to be blacklisted in other member states . Teachers fired from one state would have been blacklisted from other member state .
 Metternich convinced Frederick William to renounce any form of ‘universal representation’ in his kingdom . Frederick William renounced ‘Universal representation” in his country . Meternich convinced Prince Frederick William .
 The episode seemed to clinch Metternich’s victory over constitutionalism in the German states in the past .
 The Greek revolt in 1821 against the Ottoman Turks shattered the Congress system . The revolt against the Ottomans shattered the system of Congress .
 Austria and Russia hoped to extend their influence in the Balkans at the expense of the Ottoman Empire . Austria and, above all, Russia wanted to extend its influence in Balkans .
 Catherine the Great had seen Russia’s role in the Balkans as protecting Christians there against the Islamic Turks . In the late eighteenth century, the role was seen as protecting Christian Christians there from the Turks .
 Russian nationalists coveted Constantinople, the gateway to Asia and the Black Sea . Moreover, Russian nationalists wanted Constantinople as a gateway to Asian and Black Sea ports .
 Britain feared a potential threat to British control of India . Britain was wary of Russian influence in Afghanistan .
 Austria, threatened by Russian interest in the Balkans, also feared Russian designs on Constantinople . Austria also feared Russia's designs on the Balkans .
 Support for the Greek rebels would represent a renunciation of the status quo , a principle upon which the Congress system had been based . The Congress system was based on the principle of the Congress .
 The Greek revolt grew out of a small Greek nationalist movement that had developed at the end of the eighteenth century . The revolt was led by a small nationalist movement .
 In 1821 Ypsilantis organized a revolt in Turkish Moldavia, hoping that Romanians would also rise up against Ottoman domination and that Russia would aid the cause of the insurgents . The revolt took place in 1821 .
 The Turks crushed the initial Greek uprising after the tsar disavowed the rebels . When Romanians did not rebel, the Turks had to crush the initial uprising .
 Further revolts against the Turks broke out in mainland Greece and on several Aegean islands . Several weeks later, further revolts broke out against Turks .
 The Congress powers, including Russia, immediately condemned the insurrection . Russia's President Vladimir Putin condemned the uprising .
 The Greek revolt caught the imagination of writers in Western Europe .
 Members of the philhellenic movement embraced the Greek revolt as a modern crusade for Christianity and independence against what they call what they called the Greek revolution .
 Byron and Shelley took up the cause of Greek independence . The English poets were inspired by the Greeks' struggle for independence from Greece .
 Shelley called the poet the “unacknowledged legislator of the world,” Shelley also supported Irish independence from Britain . Shelley called Shelley the ‘lawmaker’ of Ireland, who also supported independence .
 The Greek insurgents massacred thousands of Turks in 1821 . The brutal Turkish repression of the Greeks caught the attention of Western conservatives and liberals alike .
 In 1822, the Turks massacred the entire Greek population of the island of Chios, after having executed the patriarch of Constantinople in his ecclesiastical robes on Easter Sunday . A year earlier, the Patriarch of Constantinople had been executed a year earlier in Constantinople . The Turks had executed the
 Eugene Delacroix celebrated the Greeks’ struggle for national sovereignty in his painting The Massacre at Chios, 590 . The Massacre is the most famous painting of a Greek massacre in the world .
 The British government also had come to the view that peace could best be maintained by the creation of an autonomous Greek state .
 In 1827, Britain, France, and Russia signed the Treaty of London, threatening the Turks with military intervention if they did not accept an armistice . The treaty of London was signed by the British, French and Russian governments .
 A combined naval force destroyed the Turkish fleet at Navarino . When the Turks refused, the combined force destroyed their fleet . The Turkish fleet refused to return to the port .
 Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire in 1828 and occupied the Balkan territories of Moldavia and Eastern Wallachia . Russia occupied the territories in the early years of the Russian Revolution .
 Moldavia and Wallachia became protectorates of Russia, further pushing back the Ottoman Empire’s European territories and expanding Russian influence in the Balkans . Moldavia became a protectorate of Russia in the early 1900s .
 At his succession to the throne after the assassination of his autocratic father in 1801, Tsar Alexander I seemed liberal and idealistic . The Decembrist Revolt in Russia was the first Russian uprising since the death of Alexander I .
 Alexander had at least been aware of the plot to kill his father, Tsar Paul, and his grandmother, Catherine the Great . Alexander was scarred by the hatred between his father and his mother, Catherine .
 Some Russian liberals welcomed Alexander’s accession to the throne, seeing him as a potentially charming reformer . Because he was somewhat familiar with Enlightenment thought, some Russians welcomed the king's accession .
 He surrounded himself with a committee of advisers who advocated reform . He began his reign by granting amnesty to thousands of people condemned by his father . He relaxed censorship, relaxing censorship and abolishing torture injudicial investigations .
 During the Napoleonic Wars, Tsar Alexander had taken steps to make his regime more efficient, including the creation of a council of state, the formation of centralized ministries directly responsible to the tsar .
 Most Russian nobles feared that any reform would threaten their prerogatives . Most Russians feared that the reforms would threaten them . Most of Russia's aristocrats feared that reforms would undermine their powers .
 Early in his reign in 1803, the tsar gave permission to the nobles to free their serfs . Few chose to do so, but few chose to free them .
 Universities and schools were closely monitored to root out liberals . Study abroad was banned and study abroad banned . censorship was applied with ruthless efficiency .
 He continued the aggressive policies of Peter the Great and Catherine the Great in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . At the same time, he expanded the empire by adding Georgia at the expense of the Turks . He continued to expand the empire .
 Russia had some young nobles who had been educated in Western Europe (before foreign study was prohibited) and a handful of army officers who had lived in France during the allied military occupation after Napoleon’s fall .
 By 1820, two loosely linked conspiratorial ‘unions,’ as they were called, had been formed . The unions were formed in 1820 .
 The educated nobles of the Northern Union hoped that Russia might evolve toward British constitutionalism . Russia's constitutionalists hoped that the country would evolve toward a constitutionalist state .
 Tsar Alexander’s sudden death in December 1825 seemed to offer the conspirators their chance . The sudden death of the Tsar in 1825 offered the chance to seize the throne .
 Constantine, the eldest, had quietly yielded his succession to the throne in favor of his younger, more Decembrists gathering in December 1825 at Senate Square in Saint Petersburg . Constantine's eldest son Constantine was the son of the younger Decebrists .
 The Northern Union convinced the Saint Petersburg garrison to support the succession of Constantine . Constantine died in Constantine's death in August 13, 1783 . Constantine's reign was the last of the Roman Empire .
 Troops occupied a central square in the capital, shouting the name of their favorite, until Nicholas ordered troops loyal to him to fire .
 A hastily planned insurrection by the Southern Union was also put down . The Southern Union had also been put down in 1881 .
 The leaders of the Decembrists, as they came to be known, were executed . They were executed by the Roman Empire .
 Nicholas 1 believed that his power to govern came directly from God . Nicholas 1 was hard-working and willful .
 St. Nicholas tightened the grip of the police on education in an attempt to exclude Western ideas from Russia . Nicholas tightened his grip on the education system in a bid to include Western ideas .
 The new tsar did not approve of serfdom because it was inefficient, but he feared that its abolition could lead to peasant insurrection . The tsar feared that abolition would lead to peasants uprising .
 Nicholas did, however, order the codification of Russian laws in the first decade of his reign . He encouraged reforms improving the conditions of state serfs . Nicholas did not order codification but encouraged reforms .
 The arrival of liberal ideas from the West encouraged debate and calls for reform within the Russian intelligentsia . It encouraged a group of reform-minded men within the imperial bureaucracy .
 In a contemporary French lampoon of the return of the Bourbons to the throne, a majestic eagle—the symbol of Napoleon—sweeps out of the Tuileries Palace in Paris . A somewhat plump, unsightly duck waddles in, followed by its ungain
 The contrast between Napoleon’s bold achievements and the stodgy and pious Restoration was sharp indeed . Napoleon's bold achievements were compared to the stody, pious Restoration .
 Upon the return of the Bourbons to power in May 1814, Louis XVIII promulgated a Charter that, in effect, made France a constitutional monarchy . The Charter was created in 1814 .
 The Charter recognized equality before the law and accepted the Napoleonic Civil Code . The Charter was established in France in the 18th century . It was accepted by the French Revolution in France .
 It established an assembly consisting of a Chamber of Deputies and Peers . The assembly was established in 1903 . It was the first assembly of its kind .
 The king would name members (whose appointment would be for life and hereditary) of the Chamber of Peers, as well as ministers, who would be responsible only to him .
 The Chamber of Deputies would be elected in a complicated two-stage process . It would be based on an extremely narrow electoral franchise . It is based on a national vote .
 The restored Bourbon monarchy maintained the centralized state bureaucracy . It recognized all Napoleonic titles, decorations, and even pensions . Property purchased during the Revolution as “national” would remain in the hands of the new owners .
 The government could levy no taxes without the consent of the Assembly . The Assembly could not levy any taxes without consent from the government .
 The religious orders returned to France in force in force, and the observance of Sunday and Church holidays became obligatory .
 Ultra-royalists, or “Ultras,” were the most fanatical royalist enemies of the Revolution . They launched the “White Terror,’ so called because of the color of the Bourbon flag .
 Ultras easily defeated more moderate royalists sponsored by the government . Ultras won the election for the Chamber of Deputies in August 1815, 1815 .
 Ultras referred contemptuously to Louis XVIII as “King Voltaire” because of his Charter, which they viewed as a compromise with the Revolution . Some of the Ultras viewed Louis XVII as ‘King Voltaires’
 They demanded that the ‘national property’ be returned to its original owners . They demanded the 'national property' be handed back to its owners .
 Louis XVIII dissolved the Ultra-dominated Chamber of Deputies in 1816 . New elections produced a somewhat more moderate Chamber . Louis XVII dissolved the ultra-dominated chamber .
 In 1820, a madman assassinated Charles, the duke of Berry, the king’s nephew . Charles was the only member of the Bourbon family capable of producing an heir to the throne . Charles died in 1820 at the age of 50 .
 Ultras cry for revenge, accusing liberals of being ultimately responsible for the assassination . Ultras cried for revenge . The Ultras accused liberals of having been ultimately responsible .
 The king dismissed the moderate government, restored more stringent censorship, and altered the electoral system to reduce the influence of bourgeois voters living in towns . The king also restored the censorship of censorship .
 Church bells stopped their mournful cadence and rang out in joy . Soon, however, the church bells rang out with joy .
 It turned out that the duke’s wife had been pregnant at the time of his death . The duke's wife was pregnant when he died .
 The Ultras, at least for the moment, retain the upper hand . Confident that God was with them, the Ultras retained the upper control .
 Rumors spread that the French king was going to allow the Catholic Church to collect the tithe, that is, require French subjects to pay 10 percent of their income to the Church .
 The Chamber of Deputies passed a law making sacrilege a capital offense . Sacrilege is a crime committed in a church . The law was passed by the chamber of deputies .
 That no one was ever executed for such an offense did not diminish public outrage . No execution was ever held for such a crime .
 The government financed the indemnification of those who had lost land during the Revolution by reducing the interest paid to holders of the national debt . Most of the debt holders were middle class middle-class people .
 Former Napoleonic soldiers, particularly those officers pensioned off on half pay, looked back on the imperial era as their halcyon days .
 In 1820-1821, some joined the Carbonari, a secret society named after its Italian equivalent, and plotted to overthrow the Restoration . The Carbonari was named after a secret Italian equivalent of its Italian counterpart . Some members of Carbonari plotted to topple the Restoration in 1820
 Some merchants and manufacturers believed that the Restoration monarchy paid insufficient attention to commerce and industry, listening only to rural nobles . The Restoration monarchy was overthrown in 1883 .
 Elections in 1827 increased liberal strength in the Chamber of Deputies . Economic crisis had begun with the failure of the harvest the previous year .
 The opposition to the government of Charles X received a boost from a new generation of romantic writers .
 In 1828, liberals formed an association to refuse to pay taxes in protest of the government’s policies . The association worked to ensure that all eligible to vote registered to do so .
 Benjamin Constant demanded that the electoral franchise be extended . Constant is a Swiss novelist, political essayist, and member of the French Chamber of Deputies . Constant was a French politician and author .
 When the king dissolved the Chamber, the liberal opposition won a majority in the new Chamber . The liberal opposition now has a majority .
 Charles had sent an army to conquer Algeria, whose ruler was a vassal of the sultan of Turkey . In the meantime, Charles sent his army to Algeria, which was ruled by Turkey .
 Not even news of capture of Algiers on July 9, 1830, could end vociferous opposition . News of capture in 1830 could not stop opposition .
 The king and Polignac then settled on a move that they hoped would bring an end to the crisis . King and his French counterpart hoped to end the crisis in France .
 Charles X promulgated the July Ordinance on July 26, 1830, shattering the principles of the Charter of 1814 . Charles X's July Ordinances were the first of the July 1814 Charter of the French Revolution .
 He dissolved the newly elected Chamber of Deputies; disfranchised almost three-quarters of those currently eligible to vote; ordered new elections under the newly restricted franchise; and muzzled the press .
 Fired upon in the street and pelted by rocks and tiles thrown from rooftops, the king’s soldiers became increasingly demoralized . The king's soldiers were pelted with rocks, tiles thrown by rooftops and thrown by rocks .
 Liberals put posters around Paris calling for LouisPhilippe to be the new king . The posters were put around Paris on July 30 .
 From the junior branch of the royal Bourbon family, Louis-Philippe, the duke of Orleans, had the reputation for being relatively liberal . He fought in the revolutionary armies, having fought for the French Revolution .
 Louis-Philippe had expanded his horizons by drinking bourbon in Kentucky . The French monarch drank bourbon at a Kentucky bourbon bar .
 Liberals offered the throne to LouisPhilippe, who became ‘king of the French”—the title, rather than “king of France,” was intended to convey that the king’s authority came from the people . The title was used to convey the king
 Louis-Philippe agreed to a revised version of the Charter of the French Revolution . The tricolor flag of the Revolution replaced the white flag of The Bourbons . The French Revolution was the first French Revolution to take over France .
 The new liberal monarchy won relatively quick acceptance from the other European powers . Despite its revolutionary origins, the new liberal monarchist state was quickly accepted by other European countries .
 Catholicism ceased to be the official religion of the state, although it remained the nominal religion . The vast majority of the population remained Catholic . Catholicism was the most popular religion in the country .
 The new Orleanist regime almost doubled the number of voters, but France was still far from being a republic . The new French government almost doubled France's population in 2008 .
 Many of those enfranchised by the revised Charter were drawn from the middle class . Many of the voters in the new charter were drawn in the middle classes .
 Lawyers and men of other professions significantly increased middle-class representation in the legislature . Lawyers and other professions increased middle class representation in legislature .
 The government helped stimulate economic growth and industrial development by improving roads and implementing other policies that benefited manufacturers and merchants .
 The portly Louis-Philippe himself contributed to this image, surrounding himself with dark-suited businessmen and carrying an umbrella, that symbol of bourgeois preparedness .
 The Orleanist monarchy could claim neither the principle of monarchical legitimacy asserted by the Legitimists or that of popular sovereignty espoused by republicans .
 Legitimists launched several small, failed insurrections in western France in the early 1900s . The French Revolution was a failed uprising in France .
 In Paris, crowds of workers, disappointed by the government’s lack of attention to their demands, sacked the archbishop's palace in 1831 . Crowds of workers in Paris, disappointed with government's lack of response, sacked palace in Paris .
 Silk workers in Lyon rose up against their employers and the state in 1831 and 1834 . Silk workers rose in revolt against the state and their employers .
 Chamber of Deputies passed a law in 1835 severely restricting the right to form associations . The next year it passed another law again fettering the press .
 Louis-Philippe survived an assassination attempt in 1835; a plot by a secret organization of revolutionaries, the “Society of the Seasons,” attempted to overthrow him in 1839; and another attempt to kill him in 1840 .
 The cult of Napoleon, accentuated by the vogue for the literature of romanticism, served only to highlight what seemed to be the mediocrity of the July Monarchy . Napoleon was the subject of numerous scandals, including the death of Napoleon III, who died in 1903 .
 The French Revolution of 1830 directly encouraged liberal and national movements in other countries . Other Liberal Assaults on the Old Order include the French Revolution and the Great Depression .
 Liberal successes followed in Belgium and Switzerland, but not in Spain . Spain's first major success was in France, Belgium and the Netherlands .
 The Dutch Netherlands achieved independence from Spain from Spain in the seventeenth century . Belgium became the first country to become independent from the Dutch Netherlands . Belgium's independence was achieved in 17th century .
 Brussels, the largest city in Belgium, lies within Flemish Belgium, but had many French speakers . The city is located in Flemisch Belgium, and lies within the Flemis .
 Belgium has fewer seats in the Dutch Estates-General than its population should have warranted . Belgium's population is smaller than it should have been, say Belgians called “Dutch arithmetic”
 Catholics had to contribute to Protestant state schools and paid higher taxes . Catholics were forced to pay higher taxes to attend Protestant schools . Catholics paid more for Protestant schools than Catholics in the 1930s .
 In the late 1820s, Belgian liberals allied with Catholics against the Dutch government demanding that ministers be responsible to the EstatesGeneral and taxes be reduced .
 The boundaries of the Dutch Republic and Belgium, including within Belgium the areas that were Protestant and Catholic, as well as Flemish and Walloon areas . The birth of Belgium, 1831-1839, was the first time Belgium was formed .
 Grand Duchy of Luxembourg was created in 1831 and united with the Netherlands in the person of the grand duke, King William I of the Netherlands . Luxembourg was united in the 1831 unification of the country .
 Brussels opera presented a production about an insurrection in Naples in 1648 against Spanish rule . Following the arrival of news from France of the July Revolution, the production was presented .
 So inspired, the audience left the theater to demonstrate against a government newspaper and other symbols of Dutch authority . The audience was inspired to protest against the government newspaper .
 Workers, suffering unemployment and high prices, put up barricades in Brussels . They were soon joined by units of bourgeois militia from outside Brussels . Workers were suffering unemployment .
 A halfhearted military attack floundered when inexperienced Dutch troops panicked as the ranks of the defenders swelled . The Dutchmen panicked when inexperienced troops panicked .
 After three more days of fighting, Dutch troops withdraw to the north . Dutch troops withdrew from the north of the city .
 The Dutch bombardment of Antwerp convinced more Flemish to support the rebels . The bombardment of the city convinced more than a majority of Flemans to join the revolt . The revolt was the result of the Dutch bombardment .
 A Belgian Congress offered the throne to one of Louis-Philippe’s sons, but he was forced to decline . Britain would not tolerate such French influence in Belgium . A Belgian . Congress offered him the throne .
 The European powers guaranteed Belgium’s independence, and when the Dutch took Antwerp in August 1831, French military intervention returned that city to the new nation . The French intervention returned the city to Belgium .
 Belgium became a constitutional monarchy with a parliament of two houses, both elected by about one of every thirty males . Belgium's parliament was elected by a single male member of every 30 males .
 The Congress of Vienna had reestablished Switzerland as a federation of semi-autonomous cantons . Switzerland was one of the most liberal states in Europe .
 The allies had been willing to tolerate a constitution that allowed relatively extensive political freedoms . Because of Switzerland’s long tradition of decentralized government, the allies had tolerated a constitution . The Swiss constitution has been criticized by some of the world's largest powers .
 Congress powers forced the Swiss cantons in 1823 to restrict freedom of the press and curtail the activities of foreign political exiles . Congress powers feared some cantons might become havens of liberalism .
 The 1830 revolution in France inspired the quest for constitutional guarantees of freedom, more efficient government, and limits on political influence of Protestant and Catholic clergy in Switzerland .
 The constitutions of ten cantons were liberalized, guaranteeing freedom of expression and giving all adult men the right to vote, a victory unique at that time . The constitution was liberalized .
 Austria pressured German-speaking Swiss cantons to oppose secularization . Austria pressured the Swiss government to oppose the secularization of the country .
 During the winter of 1844-1845, when the canton of Lucerne announced that the Jesuit order would again be welcome within its borders, liberals rebelled . The canton decided to allow the order back into its borders .
 In 1847, the other cantons declared war on the Sonderbund and defeated the Catholic cantons within a month . The other Swiss and German cantons also declared war in 1847 .
 Switzerland became a federal state with universal male suffrage in 1848 . In 1848, Switzerland adopted a new liberal constitution, becoming the first state of its kind .
 Nationalism gradually emerged as a force for change in Central and Eastern Europe within the context of multinational empires . Nationalism also emerged as force for . change in . Central and . Eastern Europe .
 Arrows indicate intervention by conservative Congress powers to suppress revolts . Arrow indicates intervention by right-wing Congress powers .
 AmMerdam was created in St. Petersburg hd 1825 . It was the first time the city had been visited by a major city .
 Tsar Alexander 1 granted the Poles the Constitutional Charter of 1815 . It provided for a parliament of two houses, a Senate of appointed members drawn from noble families and Catholic bishops . A lower house elected by people of means was also elected by means .
 In 1820, Alexander forbade the Sejm from meeting for five years as punishment for opposing Russian policies . Alexander's policies included imposing disadvantageous customs barriers on Polish grain . In 1819, Alexander banned Sejmu from meeting as punishment .
 Some Poles hoped that France, in the wake of the July Revolution, would send forces to help them expel the Russians . Some Poles believed that France would send troops to help expel them .
 The issue of Polish independence interested only French republicans, not the liberal monarchists who had brought Louis-Philippe to power . However, the issue was important to French republics, not monarchists .
 Russian troops withdrew in the hope Polish insurgents would rise up against Russia in 1830-1831 . Russian forces withdrew in hope of Polish insurgents rising against Russia .
 In January 1831, a large crowd surrounded the Sejm, which declared that the Russian tsar (Nicholas I) was no longer king of Poland . A large crowd of people gathered in Poland to declare that the tsar had been overthrown .
 The Sejm refused to attempt to mobilize peasants in support of the insurrection . They feared that peasants might demand land reform and attack their lords instead of the Russians . The Russian Revolution was the first Russian uprising in Poland .
 Tensions between moderates and radicals erupted into violence, making its defense even more difficult . The defense of the U.S. government has become increasingly difficult in recent years .
 Warsaw fell to Russian troops in the autumn, and about 10,000 Poles fled Russian oppression . Warsaw fell in the fall of the Soviet Union in 1945, and the city was occupied by Russian troops .
 Polish artists and musicians enriched cultural life in Western Europe . Emigre Polish artists were part of the Polish community in Europe's major cities .
 Frederic Chopin moved to Paris in 1831, hoping to make his fortune . The composer moved to France hoping to find a way to make money . Chopin died at the age of 1831 in Paris .
 Polish folk music was inspired by Polish folk themes and dances . Although he was not really a political refugee, ardent nationalism infused his music .
 Nicholas I abolished the constitution that Poland had enjoyed within the Russian Empire, as well as the Sejm and the Polish army . The Polish constitution was abolished by Nicholas I in 1883 .
 Prussia and Austria withdrew concessions they had earlier given to the Poles in the territories they had absorbed in the 1790s . Encouraged by Russian measures against the Poles, Prussia withdrew concessions .
 Popular stirrings in Italy began with movements in Bologna and the Duchy of Modena . Protests against inefficient and corrupt rule started as protests against inefficient rule .
 Rebels in Parma locked Duchess Marie-Louise out of the city by shutting the gates until an Austrian army arrived in March 1831 to let her back in . The Duchess of Parma was forced to leave Parma in 1831 .
 Insurgents against Austrian rule in several towns within Papal States unrealistically counted on help from French armies . Like the Poles, insurgents hoped to rely on French armies, who again would march with tricolor flag .
 With Austrian troops approaching from the north, an army of volunteers marched toward Rome, defeating the pope’s army . The army of volunteer soldiers defeated the pope's army .
 A papal army mopped up resistance, sacking several towns, and Austrian troops had to return to save the local populations . Austrian troops were forced to come back to help the local population .
 Giuseppe Mazzini was a lawyer by training and an energetic revolutionary by temperament . He emerged as a guiding spirit in the quest for Italian unification under a republic . He became a leading figure in the Italian unification movement .
 He was one of the first to suggest that the states of Europe might evolve into a loose federation of democratic states based on the principle of nationality .
 Mazzini believed that a defeat of Austria in northern Italy would serve as a first step toward creating a federation of European democratic republics . The victory would be the first step towards creating a democratic republic .
 Jailed and then expelled from one country after another, he launched futile insurrections in 1834—1836 and in 1844 . Jailed, then expelled, he was imprisoned and expelled from several countries after another .
 Some Italian nationalists began to look to the liberal Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, Italy’s strongest state, to effect national unification . Some nationalists began looking to the conservative kingdom .
 Austria dominated the Italian peninsula, which included small states that were proud of their independence . Austria still dominated the area, but it still dominated Italy .
 The dream of Italian unification was limited to a small number of middle-class intellectuals . The dream remained limited to the most part of the middle class in Italy .
 In Spain, King Ferdinand VII married Maria Christina, a liberal Neapolitan princess, in 1830 . Maria Christina was the daughter of Maria Christina .
 After the king’s death in 1833, civil war broke out between liberals and conservatives . Liberals and conservatives supported the cause of Don Carlos, the brother of the late king . Don Carlos was the king's brother .
 Maria Christina, ruling as regent, promulgated a constitution in 1834 modeled on the French Charter of 1814 . Maria Christina ruled as a regent .
 General Ramon Narvaez seized power in 1843, promulgating a conservative constitution and stifling the press . In 1843 he seized power, promulgated a conservative Constitution and stifled press .
 In the German states, liberals faced an uphill battle . German Nationalism in Central Europe is a key part of the country's history .
 Constitutions implemented during the Napoleonic period had been weakened or withdrawn . Constitution changes were gradually weakened during the period of Napoleonics .
 Electoral assemblies selected by limited franchise and had almost no power . Electoral assemblies were selected by . limited franchise . Electoral assembly selected by. limited franchise, had little power .
 The wave of liberal and nationalist movements encouraged by the revolutions of 1830 reached Central Europe .
 Popular disturbances forced the rulers of Hanover and Hesse-Kassel to make political concessions . The Hanover rulers of Hesse and Hanover had to make concessions .
 In Saxony, a liberal constitution was enacted following uprisings in Leipzig and Dresden . In Brunswick, liberals won a constitution in the northern German state of Brunswick . In Dresden, a constitution was also enacted in Dresden .
 The Polish revolt against Russia in 1831 fueled the imagination of German university students . The revolt was inspired by the events of the 1831 uprising in Poland .
 Police foiled an attempt by students to seize Frankfurt, the meeting place of the Federal Diet of the German Confederation . Students had been planning to seize the city's meeting place for the German parliament .
 The Confederation’s Diet passed ‘Ten Articles’ which brought the universities under surveillance, coordinated police repression of liberals in the German states, prohibited public meetings, and stipulated that any state threatened by revolution would be assisted by the others .
 Heinrich Heine rushed to Paris after the fall of the Bourbon dynasty . Heine had rushed to the capital after his father's death .
 His French Conditions sharply contrasted the mood of apparent intellectual freedom and optimism of Paris with that of the repression and gloomy resignation liberals faced in the German states, which had no revolutionary tradition .
 German liberals confronted a pervasive respect for ideological conformity . German liberals remained political outsiders, confronted by a culture of conformity .
 German liberalism became increasingly linked to the pursuit of German unification, despite the challenge posed by German particularism, the tradition of many small, independent states . Yet German liberalism was linked to German unification .
 The philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel made explicit the close connection between the development of German nationalism and the reverence for a strong state as the embodiment of national sovereignty, which characterized German liberal thought . The philosopher made the connection explicit .
 For Hegel, nationalism was the equivalent of a secular religion that had the potential of shaping a new morality . For Hegel it was the potential to shape a new society, he said .
 Hegels state is overwhelming, even frightening, subsuming individual rights to its power . State is sublimiting individual rights, submuting individual rights into its power.
 Liberal economic theory attracted German merchants and manufacturers, who objected to the complexity of customs tariffs that created a series of costly hurdles along roads and rivers .
 As German manufacturing developed, businessmen supported a proposed German Customs Union . Following its creation in 1834, the union removed some tariff barriers in 17 states .
 To liberal nationalists, the Zollverein seemed to offer a basis for the eventual political unification of Germany . To liberals, it seemed like the idea of unification was a basis .
 Those who hoped that Prussia and the other German states would move toward constitutionalism were disappointed . Prussia was one of Germany's most populous states .
 Prussian King Frederick William IV (ruled 1840-1861) refused to establish a Diet representing all of Prussia . King refused to set up a Diet for all of the country .
 When he finally did convoke a United Diet in 1847, it was not popularly elected and was to serve the king only in an advisory capacity . The United Diet was only to serve as an advisory service to the king .
 In Britain, demands for political reform to include more middle-class voters would be the true test of the ability of the British elite to compromise in the interest of social and political harmony . The British elite would be tested to prove their ability to compromise, writes David Cameron .
 Three hundred thousand soldiers demobilized after Waterloo found little work after Waterloo . Many of them depended on poor relief. Many of the soldiers were forced to find work .
 Working people joined clubs organized by radicals demanding universal suffrage . Working people became involved in the fight for universal voting rights .
 Poor harvests in 1818 and 1819 brought high prices and grain riots . Grain riots and machine breaking led to machine breaking and machine failures .
 Popular radicalism of the 1790s had led to the government's dissolution of radical ‘corresponding societies’ and suspension of habeas corpus . The Peterloo Massacre in Manchester, 1819, made it possible to arrest people without charges .
 Combination Acts made strikes illegal while reinforcing existing laws against trade unions . The Combination Act was passed in 1903 . It was the first act to make strikes illegal in the United States .
 On August 16, 1819, some 60,000 men and women gathered near Manchester to demonstrate for the right to form political organizations and to assemble freely . The demonstration was held near Manchester, England .
 Soldiers gunned down protestors, many dressed in their Sunday best, killing eleven and wounding hundreds of others . Hundreds of others were wounded in the attack, including dozens of people .
 The ugly incident entered history as “Peterloo,’a shameful victory not over Napoleon at Waterloo but over Britain’s defenseless laboring poor . It was a shameful victory for the poor, not Napoleon, but the poor .
 Parliament passed Six Acts that, reviving the repressive legislation of the era of the French Revolution, included suspending habeas corpus and imposing further restrictions on the press . Parliament passed the Six Acts, which, revives the repressive laws of the period of French Revolution .
 That year the government broke up the ‘Cato Street Conspiracy,” a plot by radicals to assassinate members of the Cabinet as they attended a dinner in London . That year, the government .
 Crimes increased in Britain, particularly against property, reflecting hard times . Criminals increased in UK, especially against property crimes .
 Artisans and skilled workers demanded higher wages and organized more unions within crafts . Artisans, skilled workers organized more unionized groups .
 Parliament abolished Combination Acts in 1824, making strikes legal . Parliament abolished the Combination Act in 1823, making striking legal .
 Workers formed more “friendly societies” which offered modest assistance when a member became ill, or paid for burial upon death to avoid the indignity of a pauper's grave .
 There would be no revolution in nineteenth-century Britain . Religious and Electoral Reform would not have been possible in 19th century .
 The landed elite, which dominated Parliament, supported manufacturing interests, enacted reforms . Reforms were enacted by bowing to middle-class demands .
 Even if many Tories believed that electoral reform would be a dangerous precedent, the fear of popular protest and perhaps even revolution led them to compromise . Even though many believed it would be dangerous to reform, the Tories believed it was a compromise .
 Reforms passed by Parliament contributed to the emergence of a liberal consensus in Victorian Britain that lasted throughout the century . Reforms by Parliament helped to form a liberal majority in the country .
 The government allocated funds for the construction of more Anglican churches in working-class areas .
 Methodism, along with other churches within the “New Dissent,’s won many converts, arguably reducing social tension . At the same time, Methodism and other churches in the ‘Dissent’ won many convertions .
 Bible societies and other evangelical associations interested in the plight of the poor increased dramatically in number in the 1960s and '90s . Bible societies .
 In 1828, Parliament repealed the Test and Corporation Acts, which had forced anyone holding public office to take communion in the Anglican Church . Despite vociferous opposition from the Established Church, the Act was repealed in 1828 . It was then repealed by Parliament, despite vocifer
 Catholic emancipation emerged as a major political issue partly because it was linked to the problem of Catholic Ireland . Catholic emancipation was a major issue at least partly because of its links to Catholic Ireland.
 Reform movement had begun and organized protests against English Protestant domination . There was a reform movement that began in the 17th century .
 Irish Parliament had been eliminated in 1800, although Ireland was represented in British Parliament . The Irish Parliament was eliminated from the British Parliament in 1800 .
 In 1829, Parliament passed the Catholic Emancipation Act, which removed legal restrictions that had kept Catholics from holding office or serving in Parliament . Catholics were finally allowed to hold office or serve in Parliament in 1829 .
 In Britain, political liberalism continued to be closely linked to the movement led by Whigs . Whigs were the party most attached to constitutional monarchy and the rights of Parliament .
 The electoral system remained a patchwork that reflected the interests of local elites and particular communities that had gradually developed in England since the fourteenth century . Electoral system was largely based on local interests and communities .
 The industrial north sent few men to Parliament because electoral districts had not changed since before the Industrial Revolution . Electoral districts had never changed since the industrial north .
 No one represented the industrial centers of Manchester and Birmingham in Parliament . No representation of industrial centers in Parliament.
 Wealthy merchants in those cities were no longer content with indirect, ‘virtual representation” through members of Parliament who claimed to have their interests in mind . Wealthy businessmen in cities such as New York, Washington and London wanted representation .
 Some sparsely populated rural districts still were represented in Parliament . In contrast, some sparsely-populated rural districts were still represented .
 With news of France’s Revolution of 1830, the British upper classes rallied together, fearful, as they used to say, that when France sneezed, the rest of Europe might catch a cold .
 Glasgow rally celebrates news of the French and Belgian revolutions . Organized protest was limited to an enthusiastic rally in the Scottish city of Glasgow .
 William Cobbett's weekly newspaper, the Political Register, aimed at ‘journeymen and labourers” spoke on behalf of the electoral franchise to all men . In England, crowds gathered to hear the popular radical .
 The general election following George IV’s death in 1830 reduced the conservative majority in Parliament . The Reform Bill of 1832 was passed by the House of Lords in 1832 .
 A broadly based campaign for electoral reform swept the country . Some of the 5,000 petitions that were brought to Parliament attacked the selfishness of the landed elite .
 The new prime minister knew that any reform bill would never get through the House of Lords as then constituted . Earl Charles Grey, a Whig, knew that a reform bill that passed the Commons would never pass the Lords .
 Lords rejected a bill sponsored by the government that would have eliminated many “rotten’s and “pocket” boroughs . In 1831, Lords rejected the bill . The bill would have included many ‘rotten' and ‘pocket’ boroughs
 Public meetings protested this defeat, particularly in the industrial north and Scotland, which had no representation in the Commons .
 When the House of Lords rejected a second reform bill in October 1831, demonstrators massed in London and Bristol . Riot in Bristol ended in twelve deaths .
 By this time, more Tories had come around to Grey’s view that only the passage of some sort of electoral reform bill could save Britain from a revolution .
 They feared an alliance between frustrated businessmen and radicals, supported by workers, as had occurred in France in 1830 . They feared a similar alliance between the radicals and frustrated businessmen .
 Whigs proposed a third bill, which Commons passed in March 1832, and sent it on to Lords . The Whigs' third bill was proposed by the Whigs and sent to Lords in 1832 . The bill was passed in the House of Commons and Lords .
 Reform Act of 1832 was a turning point in the history of modern Britain . Reform Act was passed by Parliament in 1832 . It was the first attempt to reform the British Parliament in the 1830s .
 The landed magnates agreed to lower the minimum franchise requirement, almost doubling the size of the electorate . Landlord magnates also agreed to reduce the minimum requirement of a minimum franchise to almost double the electorate.
 In 1840s, 15 percent of the members of the House of Commons were businessmen . 35 percent had some other connection to commerce and industry, such as serving on the board of directors .
 A larger percentage of men could now vote in Britain than in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, or Spain . The majority of men in the UK could now be able to vote in their country .
 Anti-slavery societies launched a nationwide campaign against slavery in the British Dominions . In part a response to growing opposition to slavery by religious Dissenters, Evangelical Protestants, and political radicals .
 Britain withdrawn from the slave trade in 1808 . 750,000 people signed petitions in Britain calling for the abolition of slavery . Britain withdrew from slavery in 1807 .
 Ladies' associations distributed campaign literature and organized a boycott of sugar produced by slaves in the West Indies .
 Able-bodied individuals would no longer receive assistance from parishes, but would be incarcerated in “wellregulated” workhouses . The workhouses would be "wellregulated" by the Catholic Church .
 Municipal Corporations Act of 1835 eliminated the old, often corrupt borough governments . Act created elected municipal corporations responsible for administration . Municipal corporations were created in 1835 .
 This again reflected the growing political influence of the English middle classes, particularly in industrial areas . This again reflects the growing influence of English middle-class .
 Reforms allowed many more Whigs, including Dissenters, to assume positions of responsibility in local government . It was another blow to the domination of public life by the old aristocratic oligarchy and the Established Church .
 The Chartist movement reflected the strength of reformism in Britain . Chartism and the Repeal of the Corn Laws were the result of the repeal of Corn Laws .
 Some French and German workers dreamed of revolution, their English counterparts took out their quill pens . The English revolution was inspired by the idea of a revolution .
 William Lovett founded the London Workingmen’s Association for Benefiting Politically, Socially, and Morally the Useful Classes in 1836 .
 Chartists objected to the monopoly of wealth and political influence in Britain by a small percentage of the population, wealthy landowners and the captains of industry .
 The Chartist movement remained overwhelmingly peaceful, its members committed to acting as a ‘moral force’ in British life . Chartists were committed to act as a "moral force" in British society .
 Chartism was in some ways a movement that looked back into a past its members imagined as being more moral than the period in which they lived . Chartism looked back at a past that was more moral .
 Chartist leaders attempted to attract women to the movement by recognizing the contributions of women workers to the family economy . Despite resentment of many male craftsmen in working-class families that the gender roles of many women seemed to be changing, some men found themselves working alongside them .
 Chartists sought to convince harddrinking and often wife-beating male workers to be more respectable . Some Chartists tried to convince them to be respectable .
 A small “Physical Force” group emerged within the Chartist movement in northern England, threatening strikes and even insurrection if Parliament did not yield . This group remained small and relatively unimportant .
 In 1839, Parliament summarily rejected a Chartist petition with almost 1.1 million signatures . In 1838, Parliament rejected a petition by the Chartist Party . The petition was signed by almost 1,000 people .
 National Chartist Association carried a giant scroll with 3.million signatures to Westminster . The Chartists tried again in 1842 when they tried again to take the issue to Westminster in London .
 Chartism declined as a movement, despite a brief revival in 1848 . Chartism died in 1846, but Chartism was revived in 1849 . Chartists died of a heart attack in 1881, but the movement was revived again .
 The Corn Laws were passed by conservative-dominated Parliament in 1815 and 1828 . They were repealed in 1848 .
 When the price of wheat produced in Britain fell below a certain level, import duties would keep out cheaper foreign grain .
 Foreign grain could be imported virtually free of import taxes only when the price of wheat stood at or above a certain level . Foreign grain was allowed to be imported in the country without a price hike .
 The laws protected landowners, but were detrimental to the interests of businessmen who imported or sold imported grain and, above all, to ordinary people, who were forced to pay higher prices .
 Failed harvests in 1839—1841 brought great deprivation, as parishes cut back on allocations to the poor .
 The repeal of the Corn Laws pitted proponents of laissezfaire economic policies against wealthy property owners, Whigs against Tories . Whigs and Tories clashed over the repeal of Corn Laws .
 British manufacturers and spokesmen for the poor denounce the entrenched “bread-taxing” and “blood-sucking” oligarchy . British manufacturers denounced the entrenched "bread tax"
 In 1839, the Anti—Corn Law League started up, joining businessmen, Whig politicians, and political radicals, who believed that the repeal of the Corn Laws would be a major step toward universal male suffrage .
 John Bright argued that repeal of the Corn Laws would be a major step toward political democracy . John Bright said the repeal of Corn Laws was a step toward democracy . Bright: Repealing Corn Laws is the first step toward a democratic society .
 Bright, son of a Quaker cotton mill owner, incarnated British liberalism . He thundered against aristocratic privilege and its close ties to the Established Church . Bright, although not an MP, was not a member of parliament .
 He warned, “Until now, this country has been ruled by the class of great proprietors of the soil’s soil. He warned that until now, the country had been ruled .
 Everyone must have foreseen that, as trade and manufactures extended, the balance of power would be thrown into disarray . The family of a destitute, hungry Irish family searching for another scale .
 ‘Potatoes in a stubble field during the potato time has come. Well, that potatoes in stubble . famine.” famine. famine. ‘Well, that potato time is come’
 Prime Minister Robert Peel was himself the conservative son of a cotton manufacturer . His smile it was said resembled the gleam of silver plate on a coffin .
 He had pushed through reductions in and even elimination of some tariffs, including those on imported raw cotton . Believing in free trade, he had pushed for reductions in, even elimination, some tariffs .
 The Irish potato famine helped push him to undertake the dismantling of the Corn Laws . The Corn Laws were dismantled after the Irish Potato Famine in 1901 .
 Repeal would be an act of political courage, as he was bound to fall from power . Repeal of the law would be a political act of courage, he said. Repeal should be a sign of respect for the president, he added .
 Peel now believed only such a move could forestall a popular insurrection . Peel believed it would forestall the popular insurrection in Britain .
 In 1846, Parliament repealed the Corn Laws, reducing duties on wheat and other imported agricultural products . The Corn Laws were repealed in 1846 .
 Between 1820 and 1850, liberals and nationalists challenged the conservative post-Napoleonic settlement . Conclusion: Liberal and nationalist challenges the conservative settlement .
 Revolutions brought a liberal monarchy to France and independence to Belgium . Revolutions also brought independence from France and Belgium .
 In Great Britain, political and economic liberalism triumphed within the context of the nation’s reformist tradition . In Britain, the liberal state of liberalism was considered a reformist in the past .
 Reform Act of 1832 incorporated many more middle-class men into the political arena . Reform Act was passed in 1832 and incorporated many of the country's middle class .
 Liberals also gained ground in the German and northern Italian states . Middle-class proponents of German and Italian national unification became vocal .
 At the same time, cultural and nationalist movements began to develop among Czechs, Serbs, and other peoples within the Habsburg domains . Czechs and Serbs were at the time of the first wave of anti-Habsburg nationalism .
 Prussian and Austrian monarchies, to say nothing of the Russian tsar, stood as formidable obstacles both to reform and national movements . However, the Prussian, Austrian and Prussian monarchies were formidable obstacles .
 Political momentum was with those seeking to break down the bastions of traditional Europe, as the dramatic Revolutions of 1848 would clearly demonstrate .
 Few took note when uprising occurred in January 1848 in Palermo, Sicily, against King Ferdinand II of Naples .
 Nationalists exiled in London, Brussels, Paris, and Zurich excitedly returned to their native lands . But when a revolution drove Louis-Philippe from the throne of France in February, they were disappointed .
 The establishment of a republic in France became the catalyst for revolutionary movements in Central Europe . France's establishment of the French republic was the catalyst to revolutionary movements . France was the first republic to establish a republic .
 Prussia, Austria, and several other German and Italian states forced to accept liberal constitutions when confronted by determined crowds . In the face of clumsy attempts by governments to repress opposition by force, street insurgency and barricades forced the rulers of Prussia and Austria to accept more liberal constit
 The existence of the Habsburg monarchy was threatened by insurrections against its rule . The Habsenburg monarchy was overthrown in the 17th century . The existence was threatened in the early years of the monarchy .
 People in Lombardy and Venetia in northern Italy want autonomy . Czechs, Poles, and South Slavs put forth demands for autonomy . Lombardy, Venetian, and Lombardy are northern Italy .
 In Austria, liberals demanded political reforms, while some German speakers sought inclusion in a unified Germany . Some German speakers seek inclusion in the unified Germany, while others want political reforms .
 Turkish and Russian troops put down an uprising by Romanian nationalists in Bucharest . Turkish, Russian and Turkish forces put down the uprising by Bucharest nationalists .
 Of the European powers, only Britain and Russia (the most economically backward) did not experience revolutions . Only Britain, Russia and the most economically backward, did not .
 Chartist petition campaign for the extension of political rights revived in 1848 with news from Europe .
 Daniel O’Connell, a barrister, had stimulated national awareness among Irish peasants . Daniel O'Connell had stimulating national awareness with peasants .
 The radical Irish Confederation grouped militants determined to work for independence . The group was formed by the Irish Confederation .
 The government feared an Irish uprising and searched ships arriving from the U.S. for weapons . The government searched ships from the United States for weapons, fearing an uprising .
 Danish nationalists pressured their king to grant a liberal constitution . Denmark's constitution was passed by Danish nationalists in 18th century .
 The hard times of the 1840s, marked by harvest and business failures, had increased popular dissatisfaction with conservative or moderate regimes . In each revolution, the hard times had increased dissatisfaction with conservatives or moderates .
 Artisans and craftsmen believed that political change would lead to social reforms that would benefit their trades . Essentially middle-class movements, they drew on support of artisans and craftmen .
 After initial victory, the struggle to implement change led to a split between moderates and radicals . The struggle led to political concessions in Austria and Prussia .
 Tsar Nicholas I of Russia would play an important role in counter-revolution in Russia . Tsar's armies of the reactionary Tsar played a key role in the revolution .
 The late 1840s brought food shortages in Europe, including the tragic Irish potato famine . Revolutionary Mobilization is a form of revolution .
 Hard times provided an impetus to political opponents of existing regimes, which were preoccupied with food riots and other popular protest . Hard times provide an impetus for political opponents, rather than existing regimes .
 Critics and political opponents included liberal reformers asking for moderate political changes . Reformers asked for a lessening of restrictions on the press, or an expansion in the electoral franchise .
 German nationalists stood ready to push for the unification of the German states . The unification of German states was declared in 1918 .
 Republicans and socialists demanded more radical reforms, including universal male suffrage and social reforms to ameliorate the condition of the laboring poor . Republicans and socialist parties demanded more .
 Radical reformers also included nationalists within the Austrian Habsburg lands, principally Hungarians, who wanted their own independent state . The Austrians wanted to become independent states .
 When a spark ignited the fires of protest, moderates and radicals joined forces in revolution . Moderates and radicals join forces in the fight for democracy .
 The sudden overthrow of the July Monarchy in France provided that spark . The July 17th revolution was the overthrow of France's monarchy .
 In France, the liberal Orleanist monarchy seemed to have more enemies than friends . The February Revolution in France was the February 18th anniversary of the revolution .
 It was caught between nobles insisting that the monarchy lacked dynastic legitiessity . The monarchy was caught in the middle of dynastic disputes .
 The map shows areas of rebellion and centers of revolution during the turbulent period of 1848-1849 . The map was created in the wake of the French Revolution in France .
 France suffered international humiliation in 1840 after King Louis-Philippe seemed to back th< Ottoman governor of Egypt, Mehmet Ali, who rebelled, with the support ol Russia, against the Turkish sultan . France had also suffered international embarrassment in 1840 when King Louis appeared to back the
 Mehmet Ali's autonomy and recent conquests threatened the stability of the Ottoman Empire, France had to back down to avoid war . The other European powers, particularly Britain, opposed him .
 Republicans mounted another campaign for electoral reform in the midsi of another cyclical economic crisis that began with the disastrous harvest ol 1846 . Republicans mounted the campaign in the middle of the economic crisis .
 Workers demanded the right to vote and state assistance for the trades . Workers demanded state assistance and state support for the trade . Workers also demanded the rights to vote .
 The electoral reform campaign was to culminate in a giant banquet on February 22, 1848, in Paris . The event was to take place in France .
 In protest, demonstrators march through the streets ol central Paris . Demonstrators march through streets of central Paris.
 Paris National Guard, drawn from the middle class, refused to disperse demonstrators by force . Th< Paris National Guards are drawn from middle class . The National Guard is said to be the only force to disperse protesters by force.
 Troops panicked and fired on a crowd killing forty people . The incident occurred amid continuing boisterous protests .
 The crowds carried the bodies through the streets, anc workers began to construct barricades . Workers began to build barricades after bodies were carried through streets .
 King Louis Philippe abdicated, hoping that the Chamber of Deputies would crown him . The February Revolution of 1848 in Paris was the first of its kind in France .
 The victorious crowd proclaimed the Second French Republic at the town hall . The French Republic was proclaimed at the end of the war .
 The Chamber of Deputies selected a provisional government, headed by nine republicans . The government will be headed by 9 republicans, the chamber says .
 The provisional government immediately proclaimed universal male suffrage and abolished slavery in the French colonies . The French colonies were abolished by the provisional government of France .
 Enthusiastic crowds planted “liberty trees,” intended to commemorate a new era, a ritual borrowed from the French Revolution .
 Louis-Philippe had several able sons in exile . Orleanists could not be counted out .
 Napoleon Bonaparte had a coterie of supporters who honored his uncle’s memory . Furthermore, his nephew, Louis Napoleon, was a supporter of his uncle's memory .
 The legend of Napoleon remained strong among many former soldiers, peasants, and students . At a time when the prominent poet Alphonse de Lamartine complained that “France is bored,” the legend remained strong . Napoleon was Napoleon's first French president .
 Republicans were themselves divided between staunch republicans, who had opposed the Orleanist regime all along, and moderates, who accepted the republic only after its proclamation . Republicans were divided between moderates and moderates .
 Louis Blanc and other socialists were committed to the “right to work,” as they put it . They believed that the government should assume responsibility for providing employment in times of economic crisis .
 Because of France’s revolutionary tradition, the fledgling republic had to reassure the other powers of Europe that the French would not try to export their revolution, as had occurred in the 1790s . The fledgling republic was founded in France in 1903 .
 The other powers feared that the new regime might publicly support Polish independence or Italian or German nationalism . The new regime was spurred on by the presence of political exiles advocating these causes .
 Some French nationalists called for the annexation of Savoy and Nice . France had claimed the area off and on for centuries . Savoy was annexed by France .
 Volunteers formed a ragtag army with this acquisition of territory in mind . Volunteers formed an army of ragtag soldiers to take control of territory .
 Lamartine assured the European powers that the French had only peaceful intentions . The new republic’s minister of foreign affairs said the French were only peaceful . But the French government has been accused of using violence in the past .
 With elections for a constituent assembly approaching, political interest is widespread among people previously excluded from political life . Political interest has also been widespread among those previously excluded .
 George Sand (the pen name of Amandine Dudevant; 1804-1876) was a writer and activist for women’s rights . Sand was locked out of her apartment when she discovered that all three of the neighborhood locksmiths were at club meetings .
 The economic crisis immediately widened the gap between moderate republicans and socialists . The crisis has widened the divide between moderates and socialists in the past .
 Government bonds plunged in value, and the Paris Stock Exchange temporarily shut down . The Paris government bond market was shut down after the crash .
 Younger and more marginal workers were enrolled in an auxiliary paramilitary police force . The Mobile Guard was organized by the provisional government to help maintain order .
 The provisional government raised direct taxes on an emergency basis by 45 percent, the 45 centimes tax . Short of funds, the provisional government raises direct taxes by 45 per cent .
 With more provincial workers arriving in Paris every day looking for assistance, the provisional government opened “National Workshops/’ paying unemployed workers to repair roads and level hills . The provisional government has paid unemployed workers $1,000 a day to repair the roads .
 Many well-off Parisians began to grumble about the new government having to support unemployed workers . Many well off Parisians also grumbled about the government's support .
 The government agreed to restrict the workday to a maximum of ten hours in Paris and twelve hours in the provinces . The workday will be limited to ten hours per day in Paris, 12 hours in provinces .
 At the request of the socialists, the government established the “Luxembourg Commission” to study working conditions . The government also established a “Commission’s” study of working conditions at work .
 The 1848 revolution called into question all social institutions, including the existing gender hierarchy . By undermining existing political structures, the revolution undermined existing social structures .
 The Womens Voice called for reforms, including equality of women before the law, the right to divorce, and better working conditions . Several other newspapers were started by women .
 Petitioners demanded that the republic extend the electoral franchise to A Paris women’s club in 1848 . Petitioners claimed that the club should not be allowed to play in Paris .
 April elections brought a conservative majority, including many monarchists, to the Constituent Assembly . The assembly would draw up a new constitution . April elections saw a majority of monarchists in the assembly .
 The republicans were hurt in the countryside by the provisional government’s tax hike . The provisional government's tax hike is the first of its kind .
 Many rural people resented the demands of urban workers, including low bread prices and the maintenance of National Workshops . Many rural workers resented low bread price and low working costs .
 The Revolution of 1848 spread rapidly from France into Central Europe . Unlike the Revolution of 1789, it spread rapidly to Central Europe in 1848 . The Revolution in the German States was the first in Germany .
 While liberals bided their time, young German radicals, few in number, became more restive . While liberals waited for years, young Germans became restive in Germany .
 During the ‘hungry forties, riots against grain merchants and tax collectors occurred in many German states . Perhaps 50,000 people died of disease in Prussian Silesia alone in the 'hungry 40s .
 These organizations provided an apprenticeship in political ideology . Although these organizations offered only minimal assistance during times of unemployment and strikes, they provided a political apprenticeship .
 The differences in tactics between German liberals and radicals are clear ancl significant . The differences between the two are clear and significant .
 Both groups, sometimes sharing newspaper offices, political clubs, and even associations of gymnasts and rifle enthusiasts, demanded an end to all remaining feudal obligations owed by peasants to nobles . The end of political repression, the granting of a constitution, freedom of assembly and the press, and expansion of
 Radicals believed that only revolution could move the German states along the path to a new, more liberal political order, and perhaps to unification . Radicals, some of whom were socialists, believed only revolution would move the states .
 The news of revolution in France convinced rulers of the German states to make concessions to liberals . The news in late February 1848 convinced rulers to compromise with liberals .
 As Bavarian demonstrators built barricades and demanded a republic, Ludwig granted freedom of the press and other liberties . Ludwig granted the press, other liberties, in 1877 .
 When this failed to placate his opponents, the king abdicated in favor of his son . The king was forced to abdicate his son in order to appease his opponents .
 The sovereigns of several smaller states, including Hanover, Wiirttemberg, Saxony and Saxony, also named prominent liberals to ministerial positions .
 These were the ‘March governments’ of 1848, formed not out of conviction but rather from fear of revolutionary contagion . The March governments were formed out of fear of contagion, not conviction, but fear of revolution .
 Prussia and Austria are the two largest and most powerful German states . Austria and Prussia are the most powerful states in the world .
 In Berlin, demonstrators agitated for liberal political reforms and in favor of German nationalism . Demonstrators agitated for German nationalism and liberal political reform .
 On March 18, 1848, he replaced his conservative Germans putting up barricades in the streets of Altenburg during the Revolution of 1848 with a more liberal one . He replaced his conservatives with a liberal cabinet .
 Prussian monarchy would take the lead in pushing for a joint constitution for the German states . He further stated that the Prussian monarch would push for the joint constitution . He also said that the monarchy would lead the push for a common constitution .
 Troops move in to disperse throngs, but someone on one side or the other fired shots . Troops say they are trying to disperse crowds of protesters .
 As in Paris, the shooting of civilians by troops drove the situation out of control . The situation in Paris was similar to that in France .
 He authorized the formation of a civic guard, and ordered the release of imprisoned liberals . Intimidated by the disturbances, he met with representatives of the crowd, authorized .
 Most of Berlin insurgents had been artisans, as in the February Revolution in Paris . Most of the Berlin insurgents were artisans . In Paris, the revolution took place in February 1917 .
 Some of the Prussian leaders wanted Prussia to lead the way toward the unification of Germany, most had economic goals . Some of them were vaguely nationalist and wanted to lead toward unification .
 During the “hungry forties,” mechanized production had undercut tailors . Tailors' handmade clothes could not compete with mass-produced garments .
 Transport workers who had been put out of work attacked railroads and steamships on the Rhine River . Transport workers forced temporary government concessions .
 Clubs and workers' associations began meeting in several German cities in March . As in Paris, clubs and workers’ associations met in several cities .
 A Club of Democratic Women and a congress of workers both demanded equal rights for women . The women's clubs were founded in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Karl Marx hurried back to the Rhineland from Belgium convinced that the revolution he awaited was at hand . Karl Marx was the German political theorist and revolutionary . He was convinced the revolution was coming .
 In early March, the rural poor defied laws forbidding them to use royal and noble forests . The rural poor now hunted game and pastured their flocks as they pleased .
 Some peasants seized and destroyed old documents that had recorded feudal obligations and forced lords to sign formal renunciations of old privileges . Some peasants also destroyed documents that recorded feudal rights .
 Outbreaks of violence occurred even in Brandenburg, where the iron will of the Prussian nobles, the Junkers, had rarely been tested . The Junkers had rarely tested their iron will even in the province of Brandenburg .
 Armies, militias, and police hesitated to enforce laws or obligations that affected the peasantry for fear of sparking a bloody uprising like the one that took place in Polish Galicia in 1846 . Armies and militias were reluctant to enforce the laws or . obligations .
 Ferdinand I could barely sign his name to the reactionary decrees put before him . There were relatively few liberals to trouble the feeble-minded Habsburg ruler .
 Austrians seeking political change or Czechs desiring more rights for their people . Liberals opposed Habsburg autocracy, not Habsabsburg rule itself . Most of the Austrians were Austrians who wanted political change .
 They wanted constitutional reform, the complete emancipation of the peasantry, greater efficiency in the administration of Habsburg lands . Western liberals wanted freedom of the press and expansion of the electoral franchise .
 Hungary, over which Ferdinand ruled as king, had an even smaller middle class than Austria . Several prominent Hungarian nobles espoused liberalism and supported constitutional reform .
 Lajos Kossuth was a lawyer from a lesser noble family . He was influenced by British and American constitutional liberalism . He emerged as the leader of Hungarian liberals .
 Some Magyar leaders believed that Hungary could survive as a nation only within the Austrian monarchy . Kossuth saw Hungary s junior partnership with Austria as an obstacle to liberal reform .
 Most nobles were unwilling to support reforms that would inevitably undercut their special privileges . Most of them were unwilling, however, to support reform .
 Small nationalist groups demanded national independence from Habsburg rule . Young Italy, Polish Democratic Society, and Italian Carbonari also demanded independence .
 On March 13, 1848, crowds composed largely of students and artisans demanded reform . Crowds were largely students, artisans and artists demanding reform .
 Troops opened fire, killing several demonstrators, by now a familiar scenario . Troops open fire, kill several demonstrators; it's a familiar scene .
 The guiding light and symbol of the post-revolutionary restoration left Vienna in a rented carriage, beginning his journey to the safety of London .
 The crown capitulated to protesters' demands and authorized the formation of a National Guard, with a separate battalion (the Academic Legion) for Vienna’s students . Vienna's National Guard was formed in response to the protests .
 Workshops, similar to those in Paris, provided many workers with temporary employment . Workshops are similar to that of Parisian workshops .
 The emperor announced several important political concessions, including freedom of the press and expansion in the narrow electorate for the Diet . The emperor then announced several other political concessions .
 Ferdinand hurriedly granted constitutions to Austria, Moravia, and Galicia . Added lower houses to the Diets that were to be elected indirectly by men wealthy enough to pay taxes .
 The crown reversed itself, creating a single house of parliament to be elected by universal male suffrage in each province . When demonstrators protested these requirements, the crown created a single parliament . The new parliament was created by the crown in 1903 .
 In the elected Austrian parliament, the monarchy’s ethnic minorities combined would outnumber German speakers . Austria's ethnic minorities would be the majority of the Austrian parliament .
 Ferdinand was forced to relent after barricades were put up in Vienna . But again barricades went up again in Vienna, Austria, and again Ferdinand had to relent . Ferdinand was eventually forced to back down .
 The Habsburg realm had remained under the grip of feudalism, particularly in Galicia and Transylvania . It was largely under feudalism .
 The emperor in September decreed the abolition of all remaining feudal and seigneurial obligations, including the yearly obligation of labor service . Now fearing rural rebellions on which liberals and nationalists might capitalize, the emperor in Sept. 2013 decreed .
 Many landowners have already converted labor obligation into peasant cash payments . Many landowners had already converted the labor obligation to peasant cash .
 Hungarian nobles proceeded as if the Habsburg monarchy no longer existed . Meanwhile, the Hungarian nobles continued to carry out their duties as if it were not a monarchy .
 He and his allies proclaimed the “March Laws,” under which delegates to the Hungarian Diet were to be elected by male property holders . The March Laws were proclaimed by the "March Laws"
 The emperor of Austria would remain the king of Hungary, but Hungary would maintain a separate army and conduct its own foreign policy . Hungary would keep its own army, conduct foreign policy, maintain its own military . Austria would become Hungary's first country to become a nation .
 The Habsburg court, reeling from reverses on all sides, had little choice but to approve the changes . The changes were approved by the court after a series of reverses from all sides .
 The new Hungarian government immediately proclaimed freedom of the press, established a civilian guard, and affirmed the abolition of the robot for peasant landov\iers, while maintaining it for landless peasants . The robot was abolished for peasants .
 The Hungarian Diet virtually ignored the autonomy of the other nationalities within the Hungarian domains, including Croats, Slovaks, Serbs, and Romanians . Some of the revolutions of 1848 were viewed as the victory of the idea of the nation .
 Croats, the largest of the nonMagyar nationalities in Hungary, were resentful at not having been consulted . Croats are the largest non-Hungarian nationalities .
 The narrow electoral franchise, based on property owned and taxes paid, excluded most people of the poorer nationalities from election to the Diet . The narrow Electoral franchise was based upon property owned, taxes paid and property owned .
 The Magyars’ problem of national minorities became the Habsburg dynasty’s hope for holding its empire together . The problem became a problem for the dynasty, especially in Hungary and Austria .
 The imperial government began to mobilize the Croats against the Hungarians, whom the Serbs and Romanians also resented . The Croats were mobilized against the Hungarianians . The Serbs, Romanians and Serbs were resented.
 Emperor appointed Joseph Jelacic as the new governor-general for Croatia in March . In March, the emperor appointed Joseph . Jelicic is Croatia's new governor general .
 Hungarians refused to send troops to help the imperial army battle Italian insurgents . In retaliation, Hungary refused to fight Italian insurgents in Italy . The Hungarians were defeated by the Italian army .
 Ferdinand withdrew concessions he had made in March to Hungarian autonomy . Ferdinand then withdrew the concessions he made to Hungarian authorities .
 In March, Czech nationalists revolted in Prague, demanding that Bohemia, like Hungary, become an autonomous state only loosely tied to the old monarchy . Czech nationalists want Bohemia to be a loosely tied but not an independent state .
 Czechs wanted the Czech language to be equal to German, which remained the language of the army, the bureaucracy, and commerce . They wanted to make Czech language equal with German .
 Czechs wanted to expand the borders of Bohemia eastward into Moravia, where many Czechs lived . They also wanted to extend the borders eastward to Moravia . The Czech Republic was founded in 1918 .
 Bohemian Germans looked eagerly toward possible unification with the German states to the north . At the same time, many Bohemians hoped to unite with the Germans .
 Emperor Ferdinand left Vienna for Innsbruck in May 1848, fearing that revolutionary students and workers might make him a prisoner in his own palace . In the meantime, Emperor Ferdinand fled Vienna for the city .
 March brought insurrections against Austrian rule in Lombardy and Venetia, and against conservative regimes in the other states, notably the Papal States . March 17th was March 18th, 18th and 21st .
 In Tuscany, the grand duke bowed to reformers by promulgating a constitution . Grand duke of the Tuscan state bowed to reforms by issuing a new constitution . The constitution was created by the Grand Duke of Tuscana in 1903 .
 King Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia created a bicameral parliament to be selected by a small minority of adult males, easing press censorship, and establishing a civilian guard in Italy’s strongest state . King Albert created some liberal demands .
 On March 18, 1848, 10,000 people marched to the palace of the Austrian governor-general in Milan carrying a petition calling for liberal reforms . The petition was echoing those in Paris, Berlin, and Vienna .
 Italian army weakened by desertion of many Italian soldiers . Now in Milan, as insurgents established a provisional republican government, he found his army weakened .
 Much of Italy, particularly the Austrian-controlled north, seemed on the verge of a liberal and national revolution . Suddenly, much of Italy's northern Italy, including Austria-controlled northern, seemed to be on verge of an uprising .
 Venetians forced Habsburg troops to leave their city and declared a republic . Venetian troops were forced to leave the city and declare a republic of republic .
 Many Italian nationalists now looked to King Charles Albert of Piedmont-Sardinia for leadership in the political unification of Italy .
 He felt that if the Italian peninsula were to be unified, it should be on his terms, not as a result of rioting commoners . The Italian peninsula should not be unified as the result of riots, he said .
 The Piedmontese king feared the specter of popular insurgency in northern Italy . The king feared that popular insurgency would continue .
 He also worried that if Piedmont launched a war against Austria, the new French republic might take advantage of the situation to invade Savoy and Nice . The new French Republic might also take advantage, he said .
 The outpouring of anti-Austrian sentiment in Piedmont and the opinions of his advisers convinced Charles Albert to change his mind . Charles Albert changed his mind on the issue of the annexation .
 Piedmontese army swollen by volunteers from Tuscany, Naples, and Parma, and even the Papal States, marched unopposed through Lombardy, defeating the Austrian army . Austrian army was defeated by the army .
 Charles Albert decided to consolidate his gains in Lombardy with an eye toward annexing that territory to Piedmont . But instead of crossing the Po River, he decided to cut off Radetzky from supplies in Venetia, he went to Lombardy .
 In Lombardy itself, no one seemed able to agree on what should happen next . Lombardy has been hit by a series of violent incidents in recent years .
 Wealthy landowners wanted little more than a loose union of Lombardy with Piedn^ont . Lombardy was once one of Italy's most prosperous regions .
 Middle-class nationalists hoped to drive the Austrian army from Italy and establish a unified state, perhaps even a moderate republic .
 Radicals disappointed when Giuseppe Mazzini supported Charles Albert, instead of forcefully arguing in favor of a republic . Radicals were disappointed when the charismatic nationalist leader supported Albert instead of the republic .
 In a hurried plebiscite, Lombardy approved union with Piedmont . Lombardy voted to union with the rest of the Italian region .
 Some rulers mistrusted Charles Albert, fearing that he wanted to expand Piedmont at their expense . Some rulers feared that Charles Albert wanted to protect their own interests .
 The pope helped stymie the movement for Italian unification . Furthermore, the pope helped stop the unification movement .
 Before the revolutions, the new pope, Pius IX had initiated a few modest reforms in his territories, releasing some liberals jailed by his predecessor . The new pope released some liberals from his territories .
 Some nationalists had even begun to think that Italy could be unified around papal authority . Some nationalists even had hoped to unite Italy around the papal .
 Pope was hardly about to oppose the Catholic Habsburg dynasty on which the papacy had depended for centuries . But the pope was hardly . about to . oppose the . Catholic dynasty .
 Pius IX then announced that he would not support the war against Austria . The pope then announced he would back Austria in the war .
 The newly elected French Constituent Assembly unanimously approved a motion calling for the liberation of the Italian states .
 A French volunteer legion stood ready on the frontier, hoping that its help against Habsburg armies would bring French annexation of Savoy and Nice, as Giuseppe Mazzini dreaming of a unified Italy .
 French republic stayed out of the Italian fray for the moment . But facing British opposition and with enough to worry about at home, the new French republic has enough of its own .
 The Austrian court seemed resigned to losing Lombardy, and willing even to abandon its claim on Venetia, provided that Piedmont would not directly annex either territory . The beleaguered Austrian court appeared resigned to lose Lombardy .
 Radetzky believed he could defeat the nationalist armies of the Italian states, which fought with more enthusiasm than experience and lacked effective organization and supplies . The Austrian army was reinforced by soldiers arriving from Austria .
 Radetzky’s army defeated the Piedmontese-led army of Italian nationalists at Custoza near Milan in early August 1848 . The battle was fought in Custozza, near Milan .
 Charles Albert slipped out of the city late at night and returned to his capital of Turin . The people of Milan then scornfully turned against Charles Albert, who returned to Turin, Italy .
 From safer ground, the hesitant king negotiated an armistice with Austria . He hoped to retain Lombardy for his Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia . The war broke out between Italy and Austria in 1883 .
 Revolutions of 1848 generated resistance almost immediately from the political and social forces that had the most to lose from their success . The Revolutions were the most successful revolutions in the world .
 In Prussia, the king and nobles feared being toppled from their privileged positions . The king and noblemen feared losing their privileged position .
 In the Habsburg lands, where nationalism was the most significant factor in the revolution, the emperor and his army resisted . The emperor and the army resisted the revolution in Austria .
 The ultimate success of the counter-revolution throughout Europe was aided by the revolutionaries’ mixed aims . The revolutionaries' mixed aims helped them achieve the ultimate success .
 The split between liberals and radicals worked to the advantage of those who wanted a return to the way things had been before the spring of 1848 . The split in 1848 worked for the purposes of those wanting to return to how things were before .
 In France, the political crisis intensified as the provisional government faced competing demands . The provisional government faces competing demands from the government .
 On May 15, 1848, an attempt by the political clubs of the far left to dissolve the Constituent Assembly and declare a “social” republic of the people failed .
 Assembly announced that the National Workshops would be closed in three days . The provisional government was running out of money and credibility .
 Unemployed unmarried men were to be drafted into the army and married workers sent to work in the provinces . Married workers were also to be sent to the provinces to work there .
 For three days the ‘June Days’ raged in the workers’ quarters of central and eastern Paris . The 'June Days' raged for three days in central and east Paris .
 General Louis Cavaignac put down the Troops attacking a barricade in Paris during the June Days, 1848 uprising . He used regular army soldiers, the Mobile Guard, and National Guard units .
 The provisional government deported more than 4,000 workers to Algeria or other colonies, and sent thousands of people to prison . Thousands of people were sent to prison, and thousands were deported .
 Karl Marx believed that the June Days were a dress rehearsal for a future proletarian revolution that would pit workers against the bourgeoisie . Karl Marx thought that this would be a test for a proletarian revolution against the bourgeois .
 Some younger workers, including artisans, fought alongside unskilled proletarians in the Mobile Guard . The Mobile Guard helped put down the uprising .
 The Assembly immediately passed legislation to curtail popular political movements . The Assembly passed the legislation immediately .
 New laws limited freedom of the press and assembly and closed political clubs, specifically banning women from membership . Women were banned from joining political clubs .
 Attention now focused on presidential elections instituted by the new republican constitution . Constitution was finally promulgated in November 1848 .
 Napoleon was elected to the Constituent Assembly in April 1848, after returning from exile . Napoleon returned from exile in 1848 after returning to France . Napoleon was nicknamed “the hat without the head” by one wag .
 Cavaignac, the other major candidate, was the favorite of those who wanted to combine social order with a very moderate republic . Cavaignaignac was the candidate for a moderate republic in France .
 The minister of the interior of the provisional government, Alexandre-Auguste Ledru-Rollin, was the principal candidate of the socialists . Lamartine, a moderate, also ran, but both were identified with the unpopular 45 centimes tax .
 Outside of Paris many people had never heard of either of them, but just about everyone had heard of Napoleon . Napoleon Napoleon was Napoleon's most famous French conqueror .
 Louis Napoleon also won the support of many people who were for the republic . Louis Napoleon was also a major supporter of the French republic .
 Like his uncle, he was assumed to have good will toward all people in France . He is believed to have had a long life of good will .
 On December 10, 1848, Louis Napoleon was overwhelmingly elected president of the Second Republic . Napoleon was the first French president to be elected in France in 1848 .
 Some skeptics wondered whether he would serve as the heir to a revolution, or its executioner . Some skeptics were already wondering whether he, like his uncle, would be the heir .
 In the German states, liberals and radicals gradually split as conservative forces gathered momentum . In the Frankfurt Parliament, the Frankfurt parliament is held in the city of Frankfurt .
 Most liberals wanted the German states to be united under a constitutional monarchy . Most Germans wanted the unification of Germany under a monarchy .
 Radicals wanted nothing less than a republic based on universal male suffrage, Baden . Some of them joined a brief insurrection in the Rhineland state of Baden, Germany .
 To conservatives, this insurrection raised the specter of “communism” amid rumors that radicals would divide the great estates among landless peasants . To conservatives and to some of the liberals as well, some of them as well as the liberals .
 German Constituent National Assembly, the Frankfurt Parliament, will hold elections in Frankfurt . The remainder of the members of the preliminary parliament announced elections for the Frankfurt parliament . The Frankfurt Parliament will be the first parliament to hold elections .
 Only male ‘independent’ citizens in the German states would be eligible to vote . Some states used this vague qualification to exclude men who owned no property .
 The Diet of the German Confederation accepted the plans for the election of the Frankfurt Parliament . The Frankfurt Parliament will be elected in Frankfurt, Germany .
 St. Pauls Church was decked out in red, black, and gold, the colors of early German nationalist university student organizations . The church was dressed in red and black for the first time in the German nationalist movement .
 State, municipal, and judicial officials, lawyers, university professors, and schoolteachers comprised about twothirds of the Frankfurt Parliament . Schoolteachers, lawyers and university professors also made up about twithirds of parliament .
 Many were oblivious to the fact that poor acoustics rendered their speeches inaudible to people sitting in the back of the audience .
 Heinrich von Gagern symbolized the liberal and nationalist idealism of 1848 . Heinrich was elected president of the United States in 1848. He symbolized a man who symbolized liberal and nationalistic ideals .
 He had been one of the founders of the nationalist fraternities and a leader of the liberal opposition in his native Hesse . He was one of Germany's first nationalists .
 Gagern offered an imposing physical presence and carried out his difficult tasks with dignity . Although not of great intellect, he was not a great intellect .
 He confidently gave the false impression that the unity of the delegates was assured and that German unification lay just ahead . He gave the impression that German unity was assured, and that unification lay ahead .
 It lacked the support of the rulers of Prussia and Austria, and, for that matter, of Bavaria and Wurttemberg . It also lacked support of other German states .
 Without an army, it could not impose its will on any of Germany's German states . Without a army, the German army was not capable of imposing its will upon any of the states .
 There was considerable division over what shape the proposed unified Germany would take . Furthermore, considerable division existed over the shape of a unified Germany .
 Amid flowery speeches celebrating German national destiny, the problem of nationality immediately surfaced . Germany's national pride was celebrated at the opening ceremony in Berlin .
 Some delegates wanted Austria excluded from a united Germany . Some delegates were leery of the problem posed by non-German speakers within their state .
 Some wanted unification around Protestant Prussia, fearing the inclusion of Catholic Austria . Among these exponents of this “smaller German” ( Klein deutsch) solution, some wanted Prussia to be Protestant . Some wanted Prussian unification around Prussia .
 The more liberal “greater German” group wanted a unified Germany to include all states and territories within the German Confederation . More liberal ‘greater Germany’ group wanted the unification of Germany .
 Some wanted Austria’s inclusion to counter possible Prussian domination, as well as that of northern Protestants . Others wanted Austria's inclusion as part of a deal to stop the rise of Prussian power .
 A compromise solution appears to be a victory for the “smaller German” plan . After months of debate, a compromise solution appeared to be the "smaller Germany" plan .
 On October 27, 1848, the Frankfurt Parliament voted that any German state could join the new Germany, but only if it did it . The Frankfurt Parliament in 1848 voted to allow any state to join Germany . The new Germany was formed in the following year .
 Unless Austria is willing to separate itself from Hungary, it would have to remain outside a united Germany . Unless Austria was willing to split itself, it could have to stay outside of a unified Germany . Austria would need to separate from Hungary to remain in Germany .
 For the moment, the Austrian government is struggling against resistance to its authority from Hungary and the northern Italian states of Lombardy and Venetia . The Frankfurt Parliament’s German nationalism is another threat to its survival .
 The Frankfurt Parliament put aside its liberalism when it came to the question of Poland . The Frankfurt parliament has been in touch with the Polish government .
 Frankfurt Parliament voted overwhelmingly in favor of armed Prussian repression of the Polish uprising . The Frankfurt Parliament also expressed support for the Habsburg monarchy’s crushing of the rebellious Czechs .
 Prussian parliament gathered in May 1848 to begin drafting a constitution for Prussia . Prussia had been elected by universal male suffrage after the March insurrection in Berlin .
 The civic guard challenged noble control of the army officer corps . Amid urban and rural unrest, the parliament voted to make the civic guard a permanent institution .
 It also abolished the Junkers’ special hunting privileges and banned the use of all noble titles in anticipation of the abolition .
 The Junkers, however, were not about to stand by and watch Prussia drift toward a constitutional monarchy or republic . Prussia was ruled by the Junkers in the early 1900s .
 They vowed to defend “God, the King, and the Fatherland,” which they identified with their immunity from taxation and other prerogatives . They identified their immunity as protecting their country from taxation .
 Frederick William dismissed his liberal cabinet, sent troops to Berlin, and then dissolved the parliament . Frederick William was encouraged by the reaction to the June Days in France .
 While counter-revolution gathered momentum in Prussia, the middleclass liberals of the Frankfurt Parliament failed to build a base of popular support among workers and peasants . The Frankfurt Parliament was powerless to effect German unification on their own .
 Frankfurt Parliament rejected craftsmen’s demands for protection against mechanization and an influx of new practitioners into their trades as being incompatible with economic liberalism . Craftsmen's demands were rejected by the Frankfurt Parliament .
 Since the eighteenth century, German guilds had gradually lost their autonomy to the regulatory authority of the states . Since the 18th century, the guilds were gradually losing their autonomy in Germany .
 The influx of apprentices and journeymen into the trades has reduced the opportunity for journeymen to become masters . The influx has also reduced the chance to become master masters .
 By turning a deaf ear to workers’ demands, the Frankfurt Parliament lost a significant source of popular support . The Frankfurt Parliament has turned a blind eye to workers' demands .
 In September 1848 several hundred workers charged into St. Paul's Cathedral . Frustrated by the Parliament’s moderation and general dawdling, several hundred charged into the church .
 St Pauls Church tried to persuade the Parliament to declare itself a national convention of republicans . He tried to convince the parliament to declare its own national convention .
 Frankfurt Parliament proclaimed Basic Rights of the German People in December 1848 . After six months of debate, the Frankfurt parliament proclaimed the Basic Rights . The Basic Rights were proclaimed by the Frankfurt Parliament .
 It proclaimed the equality of “every German” before the law; freedom of speech, assembly, and religion . Influenced by the American Declaration of Independence and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen .
 The support of Prussia and/or Austria would be necessary to implement the Basic Rights of the German People and to form a united Germany . Prussia or Austria would need the support of the Prussia/Austria .
 Austria's opposition to the Frankfurt Parliament became even stronger . Austria’s opposition to Frankfurt Parliament becomes even stronger. But Austria still opposes the move to Frankfurt .
 The Frankfurt Parliament could do nothing as the Austrian government executed one of its delegates for having led an uprising in Vienna in October 1848 . The Frankfurt parliament could not prevent the execution of the delegate .
 The Habsburgs encouraged other German states to disregard the Parliament and to proceed with their own counter-revolutions . The French Revolution was the result of the French Revolution in France .
 Austria would only consider joining a united Germany if the entire Habsburg monarchy, with its many non-German nationalities, was included . The emperor made it clear that Austria would not join a unified Germany if it was included in the proposed union .
 In April 1849, the Frankfurt Parliament promulgated a possible constitution for a united Germany . The Frankfurt parliament promulgated the possible constitution . The constitution was promulgated in 1849 .
 It proposed the creation of a hereditary ‘emperor of the Germans’ and two houses of Parliament, one representing the individual German states . The other was elected by universal male suffrage .
 The only chance for the constitution to succeed was to convince the king of Prussia to become king of a unified Germany . The constitution was the only chance to succeed .
 Frederick William had occasionally voiced vague support for German nationalism . Frederick William also voiced support for the German nationalism .
 Parliament sent delegation to Berlin to offer Frederick William the German crown . Parliament sent a delegation to offer the crown to Frederick William .
 The head of the delegation asked for a glass of water in the royal palace, he was denied even that . The delegation was denied water by the king .
 He then implemented new voting restrictions that greatly favored the conservatives in subsequent parliamentary elections . The restrictions greatly favor the conservatives, which led to a landslide victory in parliament .
 The wealthiest 3 percent of the Prussian population elected one-third of the representatives . The next wealthiest 10 percent elected another third . The remaining 87 percent of men elected the final third of the parliament .
 Liberal abstentions and popular indifference further assured conservative domination of the new parliament . Upper house of nobles, officials, churchmen, and other members to be selected by the king .
 Most of the Frankfurt parliamentarians went home . Divided by indecision, lacking popular support, and facing Prussian and Austrian opposition, most of the parliamentarians left .
 The Frankfurt Parliament embodied the hopes of German liberals and nationalists . It ended in abject failure . The Frankfurt parliament was a failure .
 With the lack of consensus among the revolutionaries, counter-revolution gained the upper hand in the Habsburg Empire and in the German and Italian states . Counter-revolution now gained the . upper hand .
 In the Habsburg lands, the initial period of optimism gave way to a grim realization of the complexity of Central Europe . In the 17th century, the French Revolution was the most successful period of French rule .
 Ethnic conflicts broke out among Hungarians, Croats, and Serbs, as well as between landowners and peasants . Ethnic conflicts also broke out between Hungarians and Croats as well .
 The confusion of competing national claims and rivalries within the Habsburg lands eased the task of counter-revolution within the Austrian Empire . Counter-revolution in Austria was the work of the Austrian Emperor .
 If freedom was a central concern of the revolutionaries, it meant different things to different people . Freedom was a key concern for the revolution, but freedom was not the same thing .
 Magyar nobles wanted more autonomy for Hungary . Viennese journalists wanted freedom from press censorship . Artisans wanted freedom of competition from competition of mechanized production .
 Czechs demanded freedom from German domination as well as their own national autonomy within the Habsburg domains . Czechs were demanding freedom from the German domination and independence .
 Czechs hosted a Pan-Slav Congress in Prague in June 1848 to promote the rights of and bolster a union of Slavs within the Habsburg Empire and Central Europe . The Congress was held in Prague to promote and bolster the union of the Slavs .
 The assembled national groups could agree only on their common dislike of Habsburg policies . The gathered national groups agreed only on a common dislike for the Habsabsburg .
 Each group had a different plan for the reorganization of the empire, one that would favor its own interests . Each group planned to favor their own interests.
 Czech historian Frantisek Palacky declared that if Austria did not exist, it would have to be invented, because otherwise small ethnic peoples such as the Czechs would be submerged by Germans .
 Palacky supported increased autonomy for the Czechs within a strong Habsburg state . Palacky is considered the father of Czech nationalism . He was considered to be one of the most prominent Czech nationalists .
 While the Pan-Slav Congress, like the Frankfurt Parliament, was discussing lofty national questions, ordinary people were hungry . While the Congress was debating lofty national issues, people were hunger hungry .
 On June 12, 1848, barricades went up in Prague, manned by artisans and the laboring poor . Artisans and laboring workers manned barricades in the city .
 The Habsburg imperial governor ended the insurrection four days later . Prince Alfred Windischgratz bombarded Prague with cannon fire .
 Jelacic’s Croatian army defeated Hungarian revolutionary forces . Meanwhile, in northern Italy, Habsburg imperial army defeated Piedmontese forces .
 In August, Emperor Ferdinand returned to Vienna and was welcomed by the middle classes . Emperor Ferdinand was greeted by middle-class citizens .
 When he began to shut down the workshops, the workers rose up, as they had in Paris, before being crushed by the National Guard . The workshops were established to provide work for the unemployed, but were shut down .
 The imperial armies under Windischgratz bombarded Vienna, killing more than 3,000 people . More than 3 million people were killed in the bombings .
 Once again, enthusiastic revolutionaries proved no matA for the professional armies of the established powers . The revolution was the result of enthusiastic revolutionaries .
 The emperor imposed martial law, closed the political clubs, dissolved the National Guard, and reestablished censorship . The emperor also closed political clubs and reestablished censorship .
 The emperor appointed a council of advisers, but was under no obligation to consult it . The emperor was not required to consult the council . The council was appointed by the emperor but was not consulted by him .
 This ended the period of political uncertainty within Austria that had followed the March insurrection . Austria had been in a state of uncertainty since the uprising in March .
 The new emperor was determined to assure the dynasty and its empire’s survival . Placing his faith in the army, the new emperor placed his trust in his army .
 Prince Schwarzenberg enhanced the effectiveness of the imperial bureaucracy by appointing able commoners to important posts . The prince's appointment of commoners has been described as a 'miracle'
 He hoped to win the support of Hungarian moderates, albeit without recognizing the rights of nationalities . The Hungarian prime minister is expected to win support from moderates in Hungary .
 Alexander Bach was a lawyer of noble origins . He reformed the Habsburg legal system . Bach was the first minister of justice and then of the interior .
 At the same time, he implemented a system of carefully coordinated bureaucratic surveillance, spying, and repression . Known as the “Bach system’s” it helped root out political opposition .
 The Schwarzenberg government still had to deal with the Austrian parliament . Austria's government still has to work with the parliament .
 That body, from its exile in the town of Kremsier, had produced a draft for a liberal constitution . That body produced draft for the liberal constitution, from exile .
 The constitution approved the emancipation of the peasantry . It sought to establish a decentralized, multinational state under a constitutional monarchy that would recognize all languages .
 Schwarzenberg dissolved the parliament in March 1849, ordered the arrest of some of the deputies, and imposed his own constitution . The former president of Austria declared a state of martial law in 1849 . He imposed a constitution of his own .
 It made virtually no concessions to the non-German nationalities within the Habsburg domains . It restored Hungary to its pre-1848 position and restored it to its former position .
 Schwarzenberg intended to delay putting his constitution into effect until the revolutionary crisis had passed . Furthermore, with the young emperor’s consent, he intended to . delay putting the constitution into . effect . until the revolution had passed, he said .
 In April 1849, the Hungarian Diet refused to recognize Francis Joseph’s ascension to the Habsburg throne and thus his sovereignty over Hungary . Francis Joseph was the son of the Hungarian king . The Hungarian Diet rejected Francis Joseph's claim to the throne .
 Ferdinand refused to recognize Ferdinand’s concessions to Hungary . In turn, the young emperor refused to accept the concessions . Ferdinand's concessions were refused by Hungary .
 Hungarian leader Kossuth tried to rally support in Hungary against Austria . The liberal Hungarian leader was speaking in support of Hungary .
 The Hungarians defeated the imperial forces twice in the spring, taking Budapest and driving the Habsburg army out of Transylvania . The Hungarian army was driven by the Hungarians .
 On April 14, 1849, the Hungarian Diet proclaimed Magyar independence and made Kossuth president of the newly formed Hungarian republic . The Hungarian Diet declared Magyars' independence in 1849 .
 As the Habsburg Empire’s survival was now defiantly threatened, Francis Joseph called on the Russian tsar for help . Francis Joseph asked for help from the Russian Tsar .
 The recent European revolutions had made Nicholas I even more reactionary, he said . He added that the recent European revolution had made him more reactionary . Nicholas I was not the only monarch to be reactionary .
 Kossuth frantically implored the Frankfurt Parliament for assistance, but that body had no army . The Frankfurt Parliament was unable to respond to the request for help .
 The British government disliked the Russian intervention in Central Europe, but it wanted to preserve the Habsburg monarchy as a buffer against French and, above all, Russian interests .
 Hungarian resistance ended in August as Russian and Austrian forces advanced . Hungarian resistance in Hungary was the last stand-off in Hungary .
 Austria executed thirteen Hungarian generals for treason, imprisoned thousands of people, and imposed martial law . Austria executed thousands of Hungarian people . Austria also imposed a state of martial law in Hungary .
 The “Patent’s of December 31, 1851, officially restored imperial absolutism . The patent was issued in 1851 . The ‘Patent of 1851’ was issued by Napoleon III of France .
 The March ministries of 1848 fell from power as rulers abrogated constitutions granted that spring . One by one in the other German states, the ‘March ministries’ of the 1848 fall from power in Germany .
 Counter-revolutions orchestrated by rulers with the help of nobles left parliaments and assemblies with little or no effective power . Even where constitutions remained on the books, they were left with little power . Counter-revolutionaries orchestrated by monarchs orchestrated by nobles left parliament and assembly
 After being chased from his duchy in June 1849, the grand duke of Baden returned to oversee the trials of more than 1,000 people .
 On August 23, 1851, the German Confederation annulled the Basic Rights of the German People . The major work of the Frankfurt Parliament was annulling the Basic Right of the Germans .
 Frederick William proposed a loose confederation based on conservative political premises and expansion of Prussian influence . Frederick William took advantage of the insurrections against Austrian authority . Lajos Kossuth was Hungarian noble, lawyer, and patriot .
 Austria, Bavaria, and Wiirttemberg all expressed immediate opposition to the plan . Austria and Bavaria are among Germany's three largest states .
 The Habsburg dynasty no more wanted to see an expansion of Prussian influence in Central Europe than it had desired German unification under the liberal auspices of the Frankfurt Parliament . The dynasty wanted unification of Germany under the Liberal auspices at the Frankfurt .
 Austria unilaterally proclaimed the revival of the old German Confederation in 1849 . Austria pressured member states to withdraw concessions to constitutionalism and liberalism they had made in 1848 . Austria declared the revival on September 1, 1849, pressuring member states .
 Prussia and Austria both sought to assure the victory of counterrevolution as well as to secure a dominant position in Central Europe . Relations between the two powers deteriorated further as Austria and Prussia sought to ensure victory of revolution .
 In September 1849, Hesse asked the reconstituted German Confederation for assistance when his own people rebelled against the withdrawal of a liberal constitution he had earlier granted .
 Prussia objected to the involvement of the Confederation in Hesse because Hesse stood between two parts of Prussia . The government of Hesse, however, objected to its involvement because it stood between Hesse and Prussia.
 Prussia threatened to send an army into Hesse if the Confederation tried to intervene . Prussia had the right to move troops through Hesse, which had the power to move .
 Russian tsar was wary of possible expansion of Prussian power in Central Europe . But he forced Prussia to back down . Prussia was forced to withdraw from Russia in order to avoid further confrontation .
 In October, the German Confederation sent Bavarian and Hanoverian troops to Hesse, but Prussian forces blocked their way . The German Confederation, with secret Russian backing, sent Bavarians, Hanoverians and Bavarians into Hesse .
 The Prussian government backed away from war, agreeing to drop plans for a Prussian Union . However, the government agreed to end the war, ending the war .
 The Prussian government signed the ‘humiliation of Olmiitz” in which Prussia agreed to demobilize its army . The “humiliation’s” was the result of a treaty signed by Prussia in 1903 .
 The Counter-revolution in Central Europe and particularly in Austria spelled doom for Italian revolutionaries . The counter-revolution led to the death of many of the Italian states .
 As in the German states and in the Habsburg Empire, those espousing liberal reforms and the cause of nationalism were too few, scattered, and divided by divergent and even conflicting goals . And as in Germany and Austria, as well as Germany, the cause was too few and
 When Habsburg forces were fighting in Hungary, Piedmont-Sardinia pushed King Charles Albert toward a resumption of hostilities with Austria .
 Piedmontese army crossed into Lombardy, but Austrian forces defeated it at Novara in March 1849 . Austrian forces under General Joseph Radetzky defeated the army . The Austrian army crossed Lombardy in 1849, but was defeated .
 The new king signed an armistice with Austria in Milan in August, renouncing Piedmontese claims to Lombardy . He signed a peace treaty with Austria renouncing the region's claims to the region .
 In 1848, revolutionaries had challenged the authority of the pope in the Papal States . The papal States were the result of a revolt in 1848 .
 The next outbreak of opposition to papal authority came in Rome itself . The papal papal rule was the rule of Rome, not the Vatican .
 After one of the government s leaders was assassinated in November 1848, crowds stormed into the streets . Crowds called for a declaration of war against Austria .
 Pius Pius appointed more liberals to his government and called for parliamentary elections, before fleeing in disguise . Pius fled in disguise in disguise after appointing more liberals .
 He called for the overthrow of the government he had appointed under duress . From Naples, he called for an overthrow of his government . The government was overthrown by the Italian government .
 In Rome, the new cabinet met many of the workers’ demands, setting up charity workshops and ending the grain tax . The new cabinet has also set up a charity workshop and an end to grain tax in Rome .
 The new government confiscated Church property, turning some buildings into apartments for poor workers . Church property was confiscated by the new government . Some buildings were turned into apartments .
 In elections for a Constitutional Assembly, the radicals won an overwhelming victory . The radicals won the election for the Constitutional Assembly . The result was an overwhelming majority of the vote .
 The pope immediately excommunicated from the Catholic Church some of the republic’s officials . Some of the officials were ex-officials . The pope also ex-communicated some of those officials .
 The republic abolished the Inquisition and proclaimed freedom of the press and the secularization of university education . The republic, in turn, abolished the Inquisitions and proclaimed the freedom of press . University education was secularized in Spain .
 Some Italian nationalists were beginning to think of the Roman Republic as a center around which the peninsula could be unified . The Roman Republic was considered a center for the peninsula's unification .
 Mazzini’s arrival in Rome in early March 1849 to join the revolutionary government confirmed the pope's fears in this regard . The pope feared the arrival of the Italian revolutionary government in 1849 .
 With the armies of the Habsburgs tied up with struggles in Central Europe, the pontiff had to look elsewhere for a strong army to come to his rescue . The pontiff was forced to rely on the army of his own .
 Piedmont, the strongest Italian state, did not want a Roman Republic, fearing that if its forces came to the rescue, they might never leave . The pope did not solicit help from the strong Italian state . He feared that if the pope came to rescue, the forces might never
 Leaders of the Roman Republic learned that the French were coming to try to restore the pope’s temporal power . Beset by severe economic shortages and inflation, leaders were discouraged by the news of the Piedmontese defeat .
 Louis Napoleon Bonaparte was eager to consolidate the support of French Catholics . Napoleon was the first French Catholic leader to take over from Napoleon II II .
 With the approval of the French Constituent Assembly, an army of 10,000 French troops disembarked near Rome, and then, embarrassingly enough, had to retreat when they met fierce resistance .
 Pope Pius IX puts aside the liberal mask of Christ, revealing his true conservative face . Pope's conservative face is revealed in his first public address in Rome .
 French army began to shell the Eternal City in early June 1849 . Pro-papal forces sent by the king of Naples and the Spanish government approached Rome .
 French troops then occupied Rome, dissolving the Assembly and the clubs and reviving press censorship . French troops later occupied Rome and the Assembly .
 Of all of the governments formed by revolutions and uprisings in the Italian states in 1848, only the Venetian Republic now survived . Only one of the three governments formed in the 1848 revolution still survives .
 Austrians blockaded and bombarded Venice in 1849 after defeating Piedmontese in March 1849 . Austrians then bombarded and blocked Venice in the aftermath of the defeat .
 The king of Naples, the grand duke of Tuscany, and the pope were back in power . The pope was in power in the 13th century .
 Italian unification remained a dream of northern middle-class nationalists . Unification was a dream for northern Italians in the 1930s .
 The multiplicity of states and lack of strong popular support for unification had for the moment proven too powerful . The gap between liberals’ and workers’ goals was reflected in the gap .
 The Agony of the French Second Republic in France . The election of Louis Napoleon as president in 1848 seemed to guarantee a return to political stability .
 The ‘democratic-socialists’ expanded their appeal in the countryside . Their supporters had been drawn from France’s largest cities and some smaller market towns .
 They particularly gained followers in the south, winning support among many peasants . Low prices of agricultural depression had brought hard times .
 Montagnards called for the establishment of progressive taxation, higher wages, the abolition of the tax on wine, the creation of credit banks for peasants, and free and obligatory primary schools .
 The democratic-socialists effectively used written political propaganda to reach ordinary people . Stories, songs, lithographs, and engravings spread the popularity of radical candidates .
 The left won almost a third of the seats in the Constituent Assembly in May 1849 . The left harnessed the heritage of the French Revolution in regions in which it had found enthusiastic support .
 Ledru-Rollin attempted to provoke an insurrection on June 13, 1849 . He had been a candidate in the presidential election, but was not elected .
 His pretext was the Assembly’s readiness to send a French army to support the pope, which the left claimed violated the new constitution . The left claimed that French troops would be violating the freedom of the Romans .
 By-elections in the spring of 1850 reflected the growing popularity of the democratic-socialist program in some places . But by-election elections in 1850 reflected growing popularity .
 Napoleon's government claimed a massive plot threatened social order . Napoleon’s government claimed that a massive . plot threatened . social order. Backed by the “party of order/’
 Symbols of the French Revolution itself, including singing “The Marseillaise,’s, became illegal in France . The French Revolution was founded in France in 1777 .
 The government also outlawed red caps and belts, because red was identified as the color of the left . Red caps were also outlawed because they were identified as a symbol of left .
 The government curtailed the freedoms of assembly and association and banned many workers’ associations, including some that had been granted state funds in 1848 to establish producer and consumer cooperatives .
 Mayors and schoolteachers were replaced if they supported the left . Cafe cafes identified with the democratic-socialist cause were closed . Mayors, school teachers and mayors were replaced .
 Jeanne Deroin tried to run for election despite the fact that women were ineligible for election and could not vote . In 1849, she ran for election in France, despite being ineligible to vote .
 In March 1850, the Assembly passed the Falloux Law, which allowed the Catholic clergy to open secondary schools . The law also allowed them to serve on education committees . It was passed in March 1850 .
 One of the practical consequences was that villages could turn operation of their schools over to the clergy . Villages now can turn operation over to clergy .
 This reduced the electorate by one-third, eliminating 3 million voters . The country's electorate has been reduced by 1.5 per cent since 2000 .
 Many of the disenfranchised lived in the larger cities, where Napoleon and his candidates had not fared well . Napoleon's candidates had fared poorly in the smaller cities, such as New York .
 These societies, which started in towns, gradually spread into the surrounding countryside . These societies were formed in towns and gradually spread to the surrounding areas .
 Economic growth during the previous two decades had brought more rural artisans and peasants regularly into market towns . This occurred particularly where cash-crop agriculture and rural handicrafts were brought in .
 Louis Napoleon s term as president was, in principle, nearing an end, he had no intention of stepping aside . Napoleon was president of France at the end of his first term . Napoleon had no plans to step aside .
 On December 2, 1851, Parisians awoke to read an official poster that announced the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly . Napoleon Bonaparte's uncle's uncle’s victory at Austerlitz and the coronation of the emperor as emperor was announced .
 The secret societies then undertook the largest national insurrection in nineteenthcentury France . The secret society then undertook a national insurrection .
 Ragged forces of artisans and peasants armed with rusty rifles and pitchforks were easily dispersed by troops before they got very far . But the ragged forces were easily disarmed by troops .
 Military courts tried over 26,000 democratic-socialists, and almost half that many went into exile . Almost half of them were tried by military courts, and many went to exile .
 Support for the coup by Louis Napoleon was overwhelming in France as a whole . Yet support for Louis Napoleon's coup by the coup was overwhelming .
 The plebiscite that followed the coup approved the takeover by more than 10 to 1 . The takeover was approved by a majority of the vote by a referendum .
 On December 2, 1852, he took the title Napoleon III, emperor of the French . Napoleon III was born Napoleon III in 1852 .
 The wave of repression dashed the hopes of liberals, republicans, and nationalists throughout Europe . The wave was a wave that dashed hopes of liberal, republican and nationalists .
 It has often been said that in 1848, with the advantage of hindsight, European history reached its turning point and failed to turn . Prussia and the other German states, at least with reference to Prussia, failed to .
 The revolutions had succeeded because the French, Prussian, and Austrian authorities lacked sufficient military preparedness . The revolutions succeeded first because of the lack of military readiness .
 Jelacic, Radetzky, and Windischgratz. the era of civic or national guards, which had been demanded by the people of Berlin, Vienna, and Paris. The era was known as the "citizen guards" of the 1930s .
 Professional armies enforced the counterrevolution, restoring Habsburg authority in Bohemia, Hungary, and northern Italy . Prussian army crushed the last gasps of revolution in the German states; and the French army put down subsequent resistance to Louis Napoleon’s coup d'etat .
 Louis Napoleon’s plebiscite reinforced the centralized character of the French state . Napoleon's victory in the French Revolution gave him the right to the French throne .
 Revolutions of 1848 marked the first time workers put forward organized demands for political rights . The Revolutions were the first of the Revolutions in 1848 to organize organized demands .
 Radical peasants helped dispel the myth of the inevitably conservative peasant . Radical peasants in southern France helped dispel myth of inevitably conservative peasants .
 The Revolutions of 1848 ultimately failed, but left crucial political legacies . Although the Revolutions were ultimately unsuccessful, they left crucial legacies in the world .
 The period was one of political apprenticeship for republicanism in France and nationalism in the German and Italian states . During this period, the French and German states were republicanists .
 Portugal completed a liberal revolution begun in 1820 with the establishment of a parliamentary government . Portugal completed its liberal revolution with a parliamentary parliament in 1821 .
 The revolutions were not only separate national phenomena but also part of a common process that anticipated the emergence of mass politics in the last decades of the nineteenth century . The revolution was not only a national phenomenon but part of the common process .
 The Revolutions of 1848 had a popular quality characterized by demands for universal male suffrage, as well as by calls for political rights for women . Many of the goals of the revolutionaries centered on middle-class demands for liberal reforms .
 Hundreds of thousands of ordinary people participated, if only somewhat briefly, in political life . Hundreds of millions of people took part in the election .
 The mid-century revolutions influenced the subsequent political evolution of each country that had had had a revolution in the spring of 1848 . Each country had revolution in 1848.
 The experience of 1848 was revealing in that there was no revolution in 1848 . However, in Britain, too, the experience of the 1848 showed that there were no revolutions .
 In contrast to their French counterparts before the Revolutions of 1830 and 1848, English liberals avoided at all costs prodding workers into street confrontations with authority .
 Chartism was the mass petition movement in the 1840s for universal male suffrage . Chartism had its last gasp in 1848, with the last gasp of Chartism .
 Businessmen, anticipating trouble from a Chartist demonstration, hauled out hunting rifles and barricaded their offices . Businessmen feared trouble from the Chartist demonstrations .
 The Chartists were gradualists, with the exception of a very small radical component in favor of the use of “physical force,” the Chartists . In any case, the Chartist was gradualists .
 The Irish nationalist movement was dormant since a failed insurrection in 1798 . It reawakened in 1848 in part because of the revolutionary enthusiasm of Irish immigrants living in the U.S.
 British authorities searched ships arriving from the U.S. for weapons and funds intended for potential insurgents . British authorities also searched ships from the United States for weapons .
 The British army and emigration of great numbers of Irish to the U.S. limited Irish nationalists’ efforts in that revolutionary year to one minor uprising .
 A possible alliance between the radical Irish Confederation and “physical force” Chartists never took place . The Irish Confederation never took to an alliance with the Chartists .
 The press denigrated the Irish ‘Paddy’ as drunken, untrustworthy, and potentially revolutionary . At the same time, elite fears of Irish insurgency contributed to the persistence of anti-Catholicism .
 Counter-revolution scattered a generation of committed republicans, nationalists, and socialists throughout much of the world . The counter-revolution in Europe scattered many of Europe's most committed nationalists and nationalists .
 Thousands of Frenchmen were exiled to Algeria, while German and Italian political exiles left for the U.S. Thousands also left for Algeria and Germany .
 The Habsburg monarchy, too, survived the liberal and nationalist challenges of 1848 . It survived a series of challenges, including the liberal, nationalist challenges .
 Austrian government manipulated ethnic tensions with Croatian army against Hungarian uprising . Austrian government used Croatian army to fight Hungarian uprising in Hungary .
 Hungary remained within the monarchy as Austria’s junior partner . Perhaps as many as 100,000 people were killed during the fighting in 1848—1849 .
 peasants were now free from labor obligations previously owed to landowners . But peasants were also free from obligations owed to the landowners .
 The Austrian constitution of March 1849 established a parliament . Although the Kremsier constitution had been tossed aside, it did establish a parliament in Austria .
 Many Hungarians, Czechs, Poles, and other ethnic groups remained unachieved . Yet the goals of many Hungarians and Czechs still unachieve .
 Even in failure, however, the revolutions in Italy had only made Italian nationalists more determined to work for national unification .
 The defeat of the Hungarian and Bohemian revolutions, as well as the failure of the radical revolution in Vienna, by no means ended challenges to the Habsburg monarchy . Likewise, the defeat of Hungary and Bohemia in the early 1900s also ended challenges .
 A Prussian minister recognized that “the old times are gone and cannot return” A German minister said the old times were gone and “old times” cannot return . A German prime minister said “The old times cannot return.”
 The revolution did produce a Prussian constitution and an elected assembly, however, which the king only slightly modified in 1849—1850, when he again took control of the country .
 Many Germans believed unification could only be achieved under the auspices of either Prussia or Austria . The failure of the Revolutions of 1848 in Central Europe suggested to many Germans that unification could not be achieved in either country .
 German unification under any auspices would potentially change the European state system . It would alter the balance of power, especially in Central Europe, especially Central Europe .
 Unification of Italy and Germany during the 1860s and early 1870s shifted the balance of power in Central Europe and dramatically changed international dynamics . However, the unification of Germany and Italy in the 1870s and 1860s changed the international dynamics of the region .
 Ethnic minorities within the Habsburg Empire, in particular, demanded more rights, setting the stage for further conflict in Europe .
 During the nineteenth century’s last three decades, much of Europe entered a period of remarkable economic, social, political, and cultural change . During this period of change, Europe experienced remarkable economic and social change .
 During the Second Industrial Revolution, scientific and technological advances ushered in a period of rapid economic growth . During this period, the industrial revolution was known as the 'Second Industrial Revolution'
 Cities grew rapidly, their wide boulevards lined with department stores, cafes, and newspaper kiosks . Cities were filled with stores and cafes, cafes and newspapers .
 The emergence of spectator sports and flashy cabarets symbolized the fin-desiecle period . Spectators sported in the 1980s and '90s .
 Some of the rebellious writers and artists of the avant-garde worried that Western civilization was moving too rapidly and seemed out of control . However, some of the . rebellious writers . worried that . Western civilization . seemed to be moving too fast and seemed to have lost control .
 On the continent, political parties developed, which helped bring about the age of mass politics . Political parties developed in Africa in the 1930s and 1940s, bringing about mass political parties .
 Despite a general improvement in the quality of life, the difficult conditions of the laboring poor encouraged the creation of Socialist parties . The Socialist Party was formed in 1903 .
 This forced shortlived political reforms and encouraged reformers and revolutionaries alike . It forced short-lived political reformers to take action .
 For more than half a century, liberals had championed the interests of the middle class . Liberals had basing the right to vote on the ownership of property . The vote on property ownership is a key part of the debate on the issue .
 They did so in the context of constitutional government, pushing for the rights of legislative assemblies . They pushed for the right to have legislative assemblies, they said .
 In the three decades following the largely unsuccessful 1848 revolutions, liberalism prevailed in Great Britain, France, Austria, Italy, Greece, and Sweden . Liberalism prevailed in many countries following the failed revolutions .
 The British Parliament in 1867 had greatly extended the right of men to vote . The secret ballot was approved in 1872 and in 1884 enfranchised almost all remaining adult males .
 France became a republic early in the 1870s, and universal male suffrage subsequently was adopted in Germany, Belgium, Spain, Austria, and Italy . France was the first country to adopt universal male male suffrage .
 Universal male suffrage in much of Western Europe, followed by political democracy in many states, would not have occurred . Without the liberals’ determination to expand the franchise, universal males’s rights would have not occurred .
 Liberal democracy emerged as the dominant form of European politics from the second half of the nineteenth century to the present day . Liberal democracy has been dominant in Europe since the late 1800s .
 Liberalism was on the defensive in the last decades of the century, attacked from left and right . However, liberalism was attacked from both sides of the political spectrum .
 Nationalism increasingly became part of the expanding contours of political life within states and between them . Nationalism is now a key part of national politics in Europe .
 During the French Revolution and Napoleonic era, nationalism had been an ideology identified with the political left . Nationalism had been a political ideology during France's Revolution . nationalism was an ideology associated with the left .
 Liberals had believed that laissez-faire economic policy and parliamentary government combined with an expansion of the right to vote would provide a firm base for the establishment of nation-states . Liberals had hoped to establish a nation-state .
 During the first half of the nineteenth century, liberalism and nationalism were closely entwined . Liberals and nationalists were often the same people, as in Britain, France, and Italy .
 Many nationalists trumpeted primacy of the nation over claims of popular sovereignty or belief in human equality . By the end of the century, many nationalists, convinced that their people were superior to any other, trumpeted the primacy .
 Nationalism became an ideology championed, above all, by right-wing parties . Nationalism is now an ideology of the past and present .
 Waves of strikes and demonstrations frightened conservatives from Norway and Sweden to Austria and Spain . At the same time, waves of protests and demonstrations scared conservatives from across Europe .
 Fear of socialism pushed social elites and some in the middle class to the nationalist right . The fear of socialism, espousing internationalism, pushed social . elites to the right .
 Entangling alliances led the European powers into two heavily armed camps, linking Germany and Austria-Hungary against Britain, France, and Russia . Germany, Austria, Hungary, and Germany fought against each other .
 The growth of nationalism in the Balkans fueled the rivalry between Russia and Austria-Hungary . The two countries were each backed by strongly committed allies . Russia and the Austrians were each supported by strong allies .
 Liberals and nationalists were often the same people sharing the same goals . Liberals, nationalists often share the same goal as nationalists . Liberal nationalists and nationalists often shared the same ideals .
 Many revolutionaries in 1848 had demanded national unification, notably the lawyers and professors of the Frankfurt Parliament in the German states and the Italian liberals and nationalists opposing Austrian domination of northern Italy .
 Germany and Italy were not unified by the popular movements that typified the revolutions that in 1848 brought a republic to France, forced constitutional changes in Prussia and Austria, and sparked insurrections against Austrian control of northern Italy . But the outcome of the 1848 revolutions notwithstanding, Germany
 Italian unification came largely as a result of expansion of Piedmont-Sardinia, the peninsula’s strongest and most liberal state . The unification came not because of the utopian nationalism of Giuseppe Mazzini nor the frenzied dashes of Garibaldi and
 Italy was unified politically under the liberal auspices of the Piedmont-Sardinian monarchy, the House of Savoy . Italy unified politically in 18th century under the Savoy monarchy .
 German unification was effected by autocratic Prussian King William I and Chancellor Otto von Bismarck through shrewd manipulation of both diplomacy and warfare .
 The German Empire, like the Prussia that forged it in ‘blood and iron,” was defiantly reactionary, flying in the face of currents of European liberalism . The Empire was like Prussia and the German Empire was defiant .
 The emergence of Italy in the 1860s and of Germany in 1871 changed the history of modern Europe . Without question, the emergence of the two countries changed the world's history .
 Austro-Hungarian monarchy was confronted by demands from its ethnic minorities for their own independence . Ethnic minorities remained a factor for instability in its domestic and international politics .
 In some ways, the Habsburg monarchy seemed an anachronism, out of place in the age of nationalism . In some . ways, it seemed an .achronistic, out-of-place in the era of nationalism.
 Since the end of the Roman Empire, Italy had been politically disunited, a cacophony of competing voices from different regions and peoples . Italy has been a disunited state since the Roman empire ended in 2011 .
 Marked differences in economic development compounded political fragmentation . Political differences have compounded political divisions in recent years . President Barack Obama was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 Northern Italy has always been considerably more prosperous than the south . Northern Italy is more prosperous in the south than the rest of Italy .
 The popes influence and temporal control over the Papal States around Rome posed another barrier to Italian unification . The papal states around Rome were also a barrier to unification .
 Powerful local elites dispensed patronage, constituting unofficial parallel governments in much of the south and Sicily . The island nation was once ruled by a state of power .
 A unified Italy would be governed by a monarchy or a republic, or even by the pope . Nationalists and elites disagreed about whether a monarchy would be a republic or a monarchy .
 Many forces were working against Italian unification . Some factors promoted the ultimate Risorgimento of Italy .
 Nationalist sentiment developed among the liberal aristocracy and the upper middle classes, particularly among northern lawyers and professors . Nationalist sentiments developed among liberal aristocracy, upper middle class .
 A common hatred of Austria, the latest of the outside powers that had held parts of Italy since the end of the fifteenth century, was fanned by nationalist brochures .
 Most Italian nationalists envisioned a Risorgimento independent of the pope and the Catholic Church . Most of the Italian nationalists wanted an independent state independent from the pope .
 Leadership for Italian Unification could be two possible sources of leadership for Italian unification . There seemed to be two potential leaders for unification in Italy .
 Victor Emmanuel II of the House of Savoy, king of Piedmont-Sardinia, wanted to unify Italy by gradually extending his control over the peninsula . He wanted to gradually extend his control of Italy .
 Piedmont-Sardinia was far and away Italy’s most prosperous region . It boasts a significant concentration of industrial production, fine sources of water power, and accessible markets .
 It inherited from French revolutionary and Napoleonic eras a relatively efficient bureaucracy . It had inherited from the French revolutionary . eras of the French . era a relatively inefficient bureaucracy .
 King Victor Emmanuel II was poorly educated and uncouth . He loved horses and hunting more than anything else . His 16-year-old mistress was the daughter of a palace guard .
 In 1852, Victor Emmanuel appointed Count Camillo di Cavour to be his prime minister . Victor Emmanuel at least had the good sense to appoint him to be the prime minister.
 Born into a family of Piedmontese nobles during the Napoleonic occupation, Cavour was a pampered child who grew up to be headstrong, somewhat lazy, and bad tempered .
 Cavour entered a military academy where he did well in mathematics and engineering . His older brother inherited the family title of marquis, and Cavour inherited the title .
 Cavour’s political radicalism was unlikely to win him promotion in the army . Cavour's political . radicalism is unlikely to have him promoted in the Army .
 He resigned his commission as a military engineer, pleading poor eyesight and bad health, the latter at least partially due to a lifelong pattern of eating and drinking too much . He resigned from his post as an engineer in 2010 .
 Cavour read widely in economics and politics and traveled to France and England . Cavour was impressed with the prosperity and efficient administration of the French and English .
 Cavour's first language remained French, although his command of Italian improved . Cavour was born in Paris, France, in 1946 .
 On his property, he made a good deal of money by utilizing crop rotation, land drainage, and mechanized farm machinery . He also used crop rotation and land drainage to make money .
 Triumphs in banking and business followed, but none brought the morose Cavour happiness . Cavour died at the age of 92 in February 2011 .
 He became determined to effect political unification by gradually expanding the constitutional monarchy of Piedmont-Sardinia . He was determined to succeed in the unification of the country .
 He bragged that he liked to reduce political problems to graphs on which he had plotted all possible factors and outcomes . He said he likes to reduce problems with graphs .
 He initiated the first of a series of loose coalition liberal governments based on the political center . Elected to the Piedmontese Parliament in 1849 in the new constitutional government .
 He facilitated the availability of credit for businessmen, helped attract foreign capital by lowering tariffs, built railways, and strengthened the army . He also lowered tariffs, lowered tariffs and built railways .
 Cavour made the clergy subject to the same civil codes as everyone else and taxed Church property . Cavour's Piedmontese liberal secular values were reflected in Piedmonese secular values .
 Like the French Orleanist monarchy and the early Victorians in Britain, however, Cavours liberalism stopped well short of republicanism . Like the . liberalism of the . Orleanists in France and Britain, it was not republicanism, however .
 A second, more popular nationalist tradition survived the Revolutions of 1848 . The Revolutions were the broken dreams of ‘the springtime of the peoples,” the Rev. Revolutions . A second popular nationalism tradition survived .
 Genoese-born Mazzini had as a boy watched Piedmontese patriots leave for exile after an ill-fated revolutionary uprising in 1820-1821 .
 Mazzini frequently dressed in black (often in the company of his pet canaries, who wore yellow), vowing to remain in mourning until Italian unification could be achieved . He often wore black to show solidarity with his family .
 The failure of conspiratorial uprisings led him to espouse a nationalist movement that had wider range of support . The goal of establishing a republic that would implement social reforms was to establish a republic .
 Mazzini was a determined enemy of monarchism and aristocratic privilege . He rejected socialism as overly materialistic and considered classical liberalism devoid of moral values .
 He embraced unification as a moral force that would educate and uplift the people of Italy, providing a common faith and purpose that would unlock their potential, he said .
 Mazzini believed unification of Italy should not be achieved merely through expansion of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia . Unification of Italy had to be the work of the people themselves, he said . The unification should not merely be achieved through expansion, he added .
 Mazzini's secret society, “Young Italy,” hoped to mobilize the European masses, beginning in the Italian states, to rise up for nationalism and democracy . Drawing on the conspiratorial tradition of the Carbonari, ‘Young Italy’s secret society hoped to
 He supported other nationalist groups in Europe, including Hungarians, Poles, and Slavs, in the hope that ‘Young Europe’ would eventually come into existence .
 Mazzini was undaunted by the failures and repression that followed the Revolution of 1848, including the ill-fated attempt to proclaim the Roman Republic in 1849 .
 These debacles discredited his movement among the middle classes, he says . However, they discredited him among middle class, he adds .
 Cavour tipped off the Austrians that Mazzini was planning an insurrection in Lombardy . Four years later, Cavour was tipped off of the plans by the Austrian Republic .
 Mazzini’s effective propaganda kept the Italian question alive in European diplomatic circles . He attracted the interest of lawyers and liberal landowners in some of the northern Italian states . Yet, he also attracted interest from lawyers and landowners in northern Italy .
 Italian unification would be impossible as long as Austria dominated much of northern and central Italy . Alliances and Warfare to Further Italian Unification would be needed to further unify Italy .
 Cavour first concentrated on reforms within Piedmont-Sardinia . Cavour next began a series of diplomatic moves that he hoped would bring the support of Great Britain and France .
 He wanted to form an alliance with France against Austria that would further the cause of Italian unification . He wanted the alliance to further his cause of unification .
 Austria was not about to withdraw from Lombardy on its own, and Piedmont-Sardinia was too weak to defeat the Habsburg army alone . Austria's army was not going to be able to leave Lombardy alone .
 Cavour initiated commercial agreements with France and Great Britain . Piedmont-Sardinia’s political and economic liberalism . Cavour was trying to impress both powers with his liberal policies .
 The cagey Cavour worked to make the war serve the interests of Piedmont-Sardinia and Italian unification . Cavour made the war in order to make it happen for the Italian government .
 Cavour informed the French and British governments that Piedmont-Sardinia would be willing to join the coalition against Russia in exchange for a role in determining new frontiers in Eastern Europe at the war’s end .
 Cavour sent 15,000 soldiers to Crimea in January 1855 . Cavour wanted more troops for the fight . The Crimean War began in 1855.
 Mazzini bitterly opposed intervention as irrelevant to his vision of a united republican Italy . The Italian Prime Minister opposed intervention, saying it was irrelevant to him .
 Piedmont-Sardinia signed the Peace of Paris in 1856, which ended the Crimean War . Cavour used the occasion to focus diplomatic attention on the Italian situation in Italy .
 Cavour was now eager to ally with imperial France in the interest of working toward Italian unification . Cavour now wanted to work toward working toward unification of Italy .
 Napoleon III was eager to extend his country’s influence in Italy and hoped to annex Savoy and Nice from Piedmont-Sardinia . Despite a failed assassination attempt against him by an Italian nationalist republican in 1858, French Emperor Napoleon III hoped to expand his country's
 Napoleon proposed marriage between Victor Emmanuel’s 15-year-old daughter and his own young cousin, Prince Napoleon Bonaparte . Victor Emmanuel's daughter was 15-years-old when he proposed marriage to his cousin .
 Cavour devised an agreement with France against Austria . The agreement was signed in July 1858 at Plombieres, a spa in eastern France . Cavour created an agreement between France and Austria .
 Napoleon III agreed to support Piedmont-Sardinia in a war against Austria . Napoleon III now agreed to war with Italy . Napoleon agreed to fight Austria in the war .
 In January 1859, Piedmont-Sardinia and France formalized the Plombieres agreement in a treaty . The treaty was signed in 1859 and was ratified by France .
 Peace of Paris deprived Russia of the right to have a fleet in the Black Sea . Russia had in 1856 been deprived of right to fleet in Black Sea by Paris .
 Russia would look the other way if events in Italy altered the settlements enacted by the Congress of Vienna in 1815 . In turn, Russia would be willing to look after the settlements in Italy . The settlements were enacted in Vienna in the wake of the 1815 Congress .
 Austria provided an excuse for war, announcing that it would draft men from Venetia and Lombardy into the imperial army . Austria provided the excuse for the war .
 Piedmont-Sardinia made it known that it would accept deserters from Austrian conscription . The Italian government mobilized troops in March, and it mobilized troops . Austria's conscription is a source of instability in the region .
 Cavour denounced a “conspiracy of peace"" and threatened to resign . Cavour: The British government lobbied so effectively for a peaceful solution that Cavour threatened to quit . But the British government successfully lobbied for peace .
 Napoleon III hesitated, asking PiedmontSardinia to demobilize its troops . Napoleon III . Napoleon . II II II: Napoleon III. II: "I don't think it's a good idea to have troops demobilized"
 Austria saved the situation for Cavour by issuing an ultimatum to Piedmont-Sardinia on April 23, 1859 . Austria hoped that other German states would support it .
 With Austria now appearing as the aggressor, Prussia and the other German states felt no obligation to come to its aid . Austria now appears as the . aggressor . Prussia felt no . obligation to help its neighbor .
 After Piedmont-Sardinia rejected the ultimatum, Austrian troops invaded the region, which brought France into the war . Austria's invasion of the region brought the war to France .
 Napoleon III led 100,000 troops into northern Italy by train . Many of the troops went by train, the first time that a railway played a major part in warfare .
 A crushing defeat of Austria might yet bring Prussia and other German states into the war against France, with the bulk of the French armies still in northern Italy .
 Unification of Italy by Piedmont-Sardinia included territory acquired in 1859, 1860, 1862, and 1866 . Unification sparked several nationalist insurrections against the Austrians in Tuscany, Bologna, Modena, and Parma, whose rulers
 Further revolts in the Papal States failed . The pope’s Swiss mercenaries recaptured Perugia, looting the city and shooting unarmed civilians .
 Piedmont-Sardinia might become a rival to Victor Emmanuel’s expanded kingdom . The French emperor feared that if Piedmond-Sarbia were too successful, it might be a rival instead of a compliant neighbor .
 Napoleon III arranged an armistice at Villafranca with Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria in July . Without consulting Cavour, Napoleon III agreed to the end of the conflict .
 By the Treaty of Turin on March 24, 1860, Napoleon III agreed to Piedmont-Sardinia’s annexation of Tuscany, Modena, Parma, and Bologna, in addition to Lombardy . Napoleon III also agreed to the annexation of
 Piedmont-Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice, which passed to France after a plebiscite . Savoy, Nice and Savoy were ceded to France in exchange for Savoy . In exchange, Savoy was given the Italian city of Savoy in
 Almost all of northern and central Italy had now been united under the constitutional monarchy of Piedmont-Sardinia . With the exception of Venetia, almost all of the country was now under the monarchy .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi and the Liberation of Southern Italy . The colorful republican revolutionary revolutionary . Giuseppppe Garbaldi now leapt onto the stage .
 Born in Nice, the charismatic and courageous Garibaldi had joined Mazzini’s Young Italy movement in 1833 . Born in France, he was born in Nice .
 He fought against the Austrians in Lombardy in 1848 and against the French in Rome in 1849 . After twelve years in exile in South America, he fought in Italy and Italy .
 The war of 1859 provided him with another opportunity to fight Austria . The war was the first time he had a chance to do so in 1859 .
 Garibaldi formed an army of volunteers after the Villafranca armistice cut short what he considered a war for Italian unification . He hoped to drive Austrians from Venetia and the French from Rome .
 In April 1860, a revolt began against Francis II, the Bourbon monarch of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies . The revolt began as a protest against the milling tax and the high price of bread .
 Garibaldi's followers outfought the larger Neapolitan army, taking Palermo on May 27, 1860 . The battle took place on May 28, 1860, with the help of the Italian army .
 This success swelled Garibaldi’s ragtag army of nationalists and adventurers . It was a success for the Italian leader .
 Garibaldi then announced that he was assuming dictatorial power in Sicily on behalf of King Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia . He then announced he was taking over from the king .
 Aided by a popular insurrection, the Red Shirts took Naples, Italy’s largest city, in September . The Red Shirt took Naples in September after a popular uprising .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi’s victories now put Piedmont-Sardinia in a difficult place . Piedmon-Sadinia is now in the hands of the Italian revolutionary leader .
 If Garibaldi marched against Rome, France might declare war because of the threat to the pope . France might also declare war against the pope because of his threat .
 If Garibaldi moved against Venetia, which seemed inevitable, Austria would almost certainly fight again, perhaps this time with Prussia’s support . Austria would probably fight again with Prussian's support .
 Cavour sent Piedmontese troops into the Papal States the same day that Garibaldi’s troops took Naples . Cavour was the first Italian to send troops into Papal states in Italy in 1883 .
 The ostensible goal was to join Garibaldi, but the real intention of the expedition was to stop the adventurer’s dramatic independent operations . The expedition was an attempt to stop Garbaldi's independent operations.
 The combined forces of Piedmontese troops and Garibaldi’s army put an end to papal resistance and that of the royal Bourbon family of Naples . The combined force of Piesmontese forces and the Italian army put the papal and royal resistance to Garib
 Italy Unified Plebiscites in October in Naples, Sicily and the Papal States demonstrated overwhelming support for joining the expanding Italian state of PiedmontSardinia .
 The annexation of these states angered Napoleon III, as Cavour had promised that an international conference would provide arbitration . Napoleon III had promised to provide arbitration, but the annexation angered him . Cavour promised that the annexation would be arbitration .
 Only Venetia, still Austrian, and Rome and its region remain unincorporated into the new Italy . Rome and the shrinking kingdom of the pope is still a shrinking kingdom .
 Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia triumphantly entered Naples with Garibaldi in November 1860 . He was the first Italian monarch to enter Naples with the Italian revolutionary .
 Garibaldi retired in semi-exile after his daring exploits made it possible in Italy . He is credited with saving the lives of the world's greatest hero .
 Cavour died on June 6, 1861, at age fifty-one . Cavour's death deprives Italy of his effective decision making and political acumen . He died in 1861 .
 Italy had lost either the great hero of the Risorgimento or a scheming Machiavellian—probably something of both . Italy lost either a great hero or an ambitious Machiavelian .
 In 1866, Austria went to war with Prussia, its rival for the leadership of the German states . Austria was defeated by Prussia in the war of 1866 in Austria's first war .
 When Prussian forces defeated the Austrians in July, Venetia became part of Italy . Venetian territory was part of the Italian Republic .
 French troops left Rome in 1870 at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War . The final piece in the Italian jigsaw puzzle fell into place when French troops arrived in 1870 .
 Italian troops occupy Rome, making it the capital of the new Italian state . Italian troops occupied Rome after the fall of the Roman Empire .
 On May 13, 1871, the Italian Parliament passed the Law of Papal Guarantees, which reduced the holdings of the pope to the Vatican . The Vatican is barely larger than Saint Peter’s Basilica .
 Limits to Italian unification became increasingly apparent during the next decades .
 The Italian state, despite its phalanx of civil servants and police, seemed irrelevant to many, perhaps even most, of the people now called Italians . The state seemed to be irrelevant to most of the Italian people, perhaps as well as most .
 Most remained loyal to their families, towns, regions, and to the Catholic Church . Most were loyal to powerful local leaders, families, or factions . Most of the survivors were Catholic .
 In 1860, almost 98 percent of the population of Italy spoke dialects in daily life and not Italian . Almost 98 percent spoke dialect in Italian, not Italian, in 1860 .
 Schoolteachers sent to Sicily from the north were taken for Englishmen . Englishmen were sent to the north of the island to teach .
 In southern Italy, crime organizations of the Camorra of Naples and the Mafia of Sicily, with similar codes of honor, served as the real basis of authority . In southern . Italy, the crime . organizations of Naples . and Sicily, . with similar . codes of . honor,
 Family feuds and vendettas, often accompanied by grisly violence, went on as before . Families still feuds, but the violence was never solved .
 To the poor farmers and impoverished laborers trying to scratch out a living, local notables at least could provide what they considered ‘justice” for the poor . The poor .
 The brigands had traditionally received assistance from the local population, who viewed them as fellow resisters to the state, if not Robin Hoods .
 The state managed to drive bands of brigands out of business in the 1870s, but only through a savage repression that killed more Italians than all the wars of the Risorgimento combined . The repression was only through savage repression, intensifying suspicion and mistrust .
 The liberal free-trade policies of Cavour, who had never been farther south in Italy than Florence, further served to concentrate industry in the triangle formed by Milan, Turin, and Genoa by driving out smaller and less efficient manufacturers .
 Northerners dominated Italian politics, as they had Italian unification, treating the people of the south as colonial underlings . The south of Italy was treated by the north of Italy as colonial .
 Mass emigration, principally to the United States and Argentina, could only partly resolve the problems of overpopulation and poverty . Mass emigrants to the U.S. and Argentina could not solve the problems .
 In the meantime, the popes portrayed themselves as Roman prisoners of a godless state . The popes were portrayed as prisoners of the Roman prisoners . Pope Francis was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Church refused to accept the Law of Papal Guarantees of 1871, which gave it title to the Vatican and authority to make ecclesiastical appointments within Italy .
 Popes refused to recognize Italy’s existence, banned faithful from running for electoral office or even voting . Popes also banned the faithful from voting or running for office or electoral office .
 Some Italian Catholics simply ignored such stern papal warnings, others systematically abstained from casting a ballot . While some Italian Catholics ignored the papal warning, others ignored it .
 The state paid the salaries of the clergy, but it also confiscated Church property . Church property was confiscated by the state in the 1930s .
 Secular reforms removed the teaching of theology from the universities, closed convents and monasteries, made priests eligible for military conscription . Also banned public religious processions and made civil marriage obligatory .
 Italian governments lurched from one political crisis to another in the 1880s, buffeted by rampant corruption as well as rapidly changing coalitions . The process became known to critics as trasformismo —“transforming” political opponents into allies .
 King Umberto I stood aside until his intervention became absolutely imperative . King stood aside from his intervention until it was absolutely necessary .
 Italy’s king was lazy, so uneducated that he did not even like to sign his own name if someone was watching, and considered himself above politics . The king considered himself a lazy king who was lazy and uneducated .
 The arrogant Premier Francesco Crispi built political alliances between northern industrialists and southern landowners, who also favored protectionism . Crispi's political alliances included those who wanted high tariffs and high tariffs .
 Crispi used the army against strikers and demonstrators . He used the police to cow opponents daring to organize electoral opposition against him . Crispi's use of the army and police was used to scare opponents .
 In 1901, King Victor Emmanuel III signed a decree granting the premier authority over cabinet posts . The decree was signed in 1901, giving the premier the power of the cabinet .
 Giovanni Giolitti was Italian Prime Minister of Italy in 1903 . He was the first Italian prime minister of the 19th century . He ruled Italy from 1903 until the end of the war .
 Giolitti was a master of trasformismo . He made party labels meaningless by building a series of makeshift but effective coalitions . He was master of making party labels essentially meaningless .
 Giolitti won the loyalty of enough deputies to remain in office through negotiations, cajoling, promises of jobs and favors, threats, and outright bribery .
 With the motto “neither revolution nor reaction,” the premier’s balancing act depended on votes from the anticlerical Radicals . Radicals, a party based in the north, supported increased administrative efficiency .
 Giolitti opposed any land reform on behalf of the rural poor that would break up large estates . But he also depended on southern Catholic moderates, and therefore opposed land reform .
 His government also had to appease the Church by refusing to meet the anticlerical demands of the Radicals .
 Giolitti also sponsored legislation that turned over education in southern Italy to the clergy . He also sponsored a law that turned education in Italy's southern regions to religious schools .
 The premier left the Mafia and Camorra alone because they could bring him votes in any region or town they controlled . The premier ordered the release of more than a thousand mafiosi from prison in exchange for their votes .
 He prepared an invasion of the East African state of Abyssinia from the Italian colony of Eritrea in 1896, circumventing parliamentary opposition and refusing to heed the warning of generals that such a move might fail .
 When the Abyssinian tribesmen had crushed the Italian army at Adowa, Crispi resigned . Crispi had referred to them as "barbarians"
 Giolitti’s social reforms had frightened employers and many other conservatives, and the ranks of the anti-parliamentary right swelled . The Italian prime minister's social reforms were feared by employers and other conservatives .
 Nationalist candidates demanded further aggressive moves in the Mediterranean . Nationalist candidate demands further aggressive move in Mediterranean .
 The right objected to the fact that it seemed mismanaged, and the left did not want the invasion at all . Although the war in Libya went reasonably well for Italian troops, the left objected to it .
 Socialists divided by Libyan war and unwilling to be ‘transformed’ into temporary political partners, Giolitti now had to turn to Catholic leaders . Socialists are divided by the Libyan war .
 Giolitti convinced Catholics to support his Liberal candidates if the Liberals agreed to end the campaign against Church schools and for legalized divorce . He convinced them to back his candidates if they agreed to stop opposing Church schools, divorce .
 Angered by Giolitti’s promises to the Church, the left tripled its vote, forcing him from office in March 1914 . The left tripled their vote in Italy in the aftermath of his defeat .
 A nationalist proclaimed that the role of his new party was to teach Italians to respect ‘international struggle,” even if the result was war . The role of the new party is to teach Italy to respect international struggle, even if it was war, he said .
 The Italian liberal state had survived many challenges, but even greater ones lay ahead . Italian liberal states have survived many of the country's greatest challenges . Italy's liberal state has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 The Unification of Germany would not come through liberal auspices . The unification of Germany wouldn't come through Liberal auspices. The unification would come through a democratic process .
 In the German states, too, growing nationalist sentiment existed within the middle class . Growing nationalist sentiment exists within the German middle class, too .
 There were also formidable obstacles to German unification . Yet, as in the case of Italy, there were also obstacles to unification .
 First, in the wake of the Revolution of 1848, the upper classes were wary of any change that might threaten the status quo . Second, the British aristocracy was wary of change, and third, of the revolution .
 They feared the strong nationalist feeling unleashed by revolution, the extension of which might lead to the proclamation of the equality of all citizens, they reasoned .
 Austria or Prussia, Germany could achieve national unification . Second, it was still not clear around which power, Austria or Germany, could achieve unification .
 Some believed in the “small German’s solution in which Prussia might effect German unification and exclude Austria . Some believed Prussia may have been able to effect unification .
 In both Prussia and Austria, the 1850s brought repression that made it clear to most nationalists that German unification would not come under liberal auspices .
 The repression following the Revolutions of 1848 had scattered thousands of German democrats and socialists across Europe and as far as the U.S. Thousands of people had been scattered across Europe .
 Prussia held several trump cards toward achieving German unification, including territorial additions in the industrializing Rhineland after the Napoleonic Wars . Prussia had a relatively strong economic position, bolstered by the Zollverein customs union .
 Prussia's population was almost entirely Germanspeaking and Protestant . Prussia’s population was quite homogeneous, as it was almost all Germanspeakers and Protestants .
 The Prussian royal family, the Hohenzollerns, were supported by an ambitious, powerful landed nobility, the Junkers, who dominated the Prussian army .
 The expansion of Prussian power seemed to many Prussians to be perfectly natural . Prussian expansion of power was thought to be a natural phenomenon .
 Catholic Austria, on the other hand, dominated a multinational population . Catholic Austria dominated the population in the 1930s .
 The Habsburg monarchy had much to lose by the encouragement of national movements that might catch fire among the varied peoples within the imperial boundaries . The Hapsburg monarchy lost much to the loss of national movement .
 All German nationalists, however, did not agree on what political form a unified Germany should take . All of them disagreed on what the political form should take.
 Most Prussian Junkers had been unrelenting in their opposition to the liberal movements that had championed popular sovereignty during the 1848 revolutions . Most Junkers were unrelenting against liberal movements .
 They rejected the liberalism of Rhineland industrialists, eager to enhance their own political power . The Rhineans rejected the liberalism of Rhinean industrialists .
 Many republicans wanted a unified Germany to have a parliamentary government free from domination by either autocratic, aristocratic Prussia or imperial Austria . Many liberals, particularly republicans from the more liberal southern German states, wanted a united Germany .
 Some republicans still hoped Prussia, not Austria, would lead Germans to unification . Despite Prussia’s autocratic and militaristic traditions, some hoped it would lead Germany to unification.
 Prussian Junkers feared that if the ‘big German’ plan for unification came to be, their influence would be greatly diluted by Austrian influence .
 Austria attracted interest of German nationalists who mistrusted Prussia . Austria continued to attract the interest of Prussia.
 Many southern Germans wanted the Habsburg monarchy to champion the cause of the smaller German states, leading to a decentralized federation, not domination by Prussia . Prussia was ruled by the Spanish monarchy in the 18th century .
 The first step in the unification of Germany was the ascension to power of a monarch equal to the task . William I, Bismarck, and the Resolution of the Constitutional Crisis . The resolution of the crisis was the first step to unifying Germany .
 William I made clear from the outset of his reign that he would look beyond the small group of reactionary Prussian Junkers and bring some more moderate conservatives into his cabinet . William I was Crowned following Frederick William’s death in 1861 .
 Voters turned out unprecedented numbers to vote in the 2016 presidential election . Voters responded by turning out in unprecedented numbers for the first time .
 Liberals won a clear victory in the 1858 elections to the Prussian Parliament . Liberals brought to that assembly a number of men enriched by the economic boom in the early 1850s .
 Liberals who favor unification now have a public forum in which to be heard . Liberals who favored unification now had a chance to voice their views .
 Many businessmen believed that German unification would be good for them, as the Zollverein customs union had benefited them in the 1840s .
 In the meantime, the Austrian war against Piedmont-Sardinia and France in 1859 divided Prussians . In the meanwhile, the Austrians were fighting in Italy and France .
 Some were torn between dislike for Austria and irritation with French Emperor Napoleon III . Napoleon III helped engineer the outbreak of war .
 Austria was a member of the German Confederation and had the right to expect assistance from fellow members of the Confederation . Austria was not allowed to rely on the help of other members of its Confederation .
 Austria was Prussia’s major rival for power within the German states . But Austria was also Prussia's major rival within the state of Prussia .
 Prussia remained neutral in the war, but Italy’s move toward unification greatly impressed German nationalists . Prussia was neutral in WWII, but was impressed by the Italian move .
 Those who looked to Prussia to forge German unity welcomed Austria’s defeat . Austria's defeat was Austria's first major defeat in the history of Germany's history .
 In 1858, several “Pan-German’ associations had been formed as pressure groups supporting German unification . In 1818, several "Pan-Germans" associations were formed . The unification movement was first organized in 1858 .
 The largest and most influential, the National Union, wanted a constitutional and parliamentary German state . The National Union wanted a constitution and a parliamentary state . It was the largest party in Germany .
 The Prussian government remained suspicious of the National Union . Many of its members favored the extension of political freedom within the German states .
 As in the old Frankfurt Parliament, its members were overwhelmingly middle class, including intellectuals, lawyers, officials, and small businessmen . Members included several industrialists, including industrialists .
 The National Union rebuffed an attempt by workers’ organizations to join in 1863 . It contributed to the resurgence of political liberalism within Prussia by demanding an effective constitution that would limit the domination of the monarchy .
 The question of army reform raised the issue of parliamentary control over the budget . The army reform is a key issue for the country's future .
 The Prussian constitutional crisis that followed became a critical step in the unification of Germany along lines that turned out to be anything but liberal . The crisis was a crucial step in unifying the country .
 Prussian liberals wanted all citizens to serve in the army, but also hoped that the National Guard would replace the professional, Junker-dominated army .
 Prussian Parliament did not enjoy many prerogatives in autocratic Prussia . But it did have the right to approve new taxes .
 In 1861 the parliament passed a provisional bill that gave the army the money it needed until the reform could be considered . In 1861, in response to government pressure, in . 1861 the . parliament, despite its liberal majority, passed the bill .
 Liberal approval of the provisional bill was a fateful event in German history . It provided parliamentary sanction to the virtually unchallenged power of the Prussian army .
 Liberals refused to vote for the new military budget when the minister of war refused compromise . Liberals declined to vote on the new budget . Liberals say they will not vote again for the military budget .
 William dismissed parliament, new elections returned another liberal majority . New parliament rejected a second army budget . William was the prime minister of Wales .
 Count Otto von Bismarck was prime minister of Germany in 1862 . He was a strong-willed and intransigently conservative Junker . Count Bismerck was appointed as prime minister by the King of Germany .
 Bismarck was the son of a dull Junker father and a lively, intelligent mother from a family of middle-class bureaucrats . He was born in Berlin, Germany, in 1918 .
 In his Berlin school, Bismarck was more noted for dueling scars earned in student fraternities than for academic success . In Berlin, he was known for his dueling scarred scars from student fratoms .
 After receiving his law degree, he passed the entrance examination for the Prussian bureaucracy . He passed his entrance exam for the Prussian bureaucracy .
 Bismarck was appointed Prussian representative to the German Confederation in Frankfurt in 1851 . He was the Prussian representative to the German Confederation .
 He was sent to Saint Petersburg as ambassador in 1859, perhaps to mute his noisy denunciations of Austria .
 Bismarck was convinced that he could create a new German state that would not be too large for Prussia to dominate, nor too democratic for the tradition of the Hohenzollern monarchy .
 He wanted to create a modern, bureaucratic state that would be strong and secular, he said . He wanted the state to be strong, secular, strong and strong .
 Bismarck’s shrewd manipulation of domestic and international politics dominated relations among the European powers . The German dictator dominated relations with the world's leading powers .
 The ‘iron chancellor’ patiently made uncanny assessments of every possible option and then moved with determination to strengthen Prussia’s position . ‘Iron chancellor” patiently assessed every possible possible option, then moved .
 Bismarck's type of politics came to be known as Realpolitik y the pursuit of a nation’s self-interest based on a realistic assessment of the costs and consequences of action . The pursuit of national self interest is based on an assessment of costs, consequences of
 Inherent in Realpolitik was an absence of moral or ethical considerations, overrun by Bismarck’s determination to enhance the power of the Prussian monarchy and nobility, and therefore of Germany .
 A large man, he looked like a senior military officer stuffed into a uniform that was too small . He was a large man with a large body and a large beard . He looked like he was wearing a large military uniform, too small for a uniform .
 At times outgoing and charming, Bismarck could lapse into moods of intense, gloomy isolation . At times, he was also moody and moody, often moody . He died in Berlin, Germany, in 1945 .
 Bismarck now announced that the government would operate without constitutional authorization . The government would be operating without constitutional approval .
 It did so for four years, using tax money previously voted to finance army reforms . The government did so in the 1970s using the money previously used to finance reforms .
 In June 1863, Bismarck struck against the liberal Progressives by restricting freedom of the press, refusing to confirm the election of Progressive mayors, and banning discussion of political issues in municipal council meetings .
 The fact that public opinion and even Crown Prince Frederick William opposed these measures did not dissuade him in the least . Crown Prince William opposed the measures in the past .
 The election of even more liberals to the parliament in October 1863 did not last long . Nor did the election of more liberal members of parliament in 1863 .
 Bismarck’s stridently anti-Austrian policy helped split the liberal parliamentary opposition . In the meantime, the opposition was split between the liberal and pro-Austrians .
 Russia and France were the two powers that would be most threatened by a unified Germany . France and Russia would be the two countries that would most likely be at risk .
 The 1863 Polish revolt against Russian domination presented Bismarck with a perfect opportunity to ingratiate himself to the tsar . The 1863 revolt was the result of a revolt against the Russian domination against the Tsar .
 Bismarck immediately voiced support for Russia . Whereas the other major powers sympathized with the Poles, Bismrck supported Russia . The other major nations sympathized .
 Prussian government then signed an agreement with Russia to assist each other in pursuing insurgents across their respective frontiers . Prussian and Russian governments agreed to help each other pursue insurgents across each other's borders .
 Austria, which also had a sizable Polish population within its borders, found its relations with Russia soured . Austria's relationship with Russia has soured since the fall of communism .
 The duchies were ruled by the king of Denmark although not incorporated as part of the kingdom of Denmark . They were not incorporated into the kingdom but ruled by Denmark .
 Both German and Danish speakers lived in Schleswig, which was not part of the Confederation . German Confederation was formed in 18th century .
 In 1848, the king of Denmark had declared the union of Schleswig with Denmark, and revolution broke out in both duchies . The union was declared by Denmark in 1848 .
 Prussian army on behalf of the German Confederation intervened in defense of the revolutionary provisional government in Holstein, which demanded autonomy . During the summer, a Prussian military intervention was made in support of the government .
 International opinion rallied to the cause of the Danes . The Danes were killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The two duchies essentially retained their former status . Although they were administered by a DanishGerman commission, they were essentially administered by DanishGerman .
 A small war followed in 1849—1850 between Prussian and Danish troops, ended by another armistice . The status of Schleswig and Holstein is still up in the air .
 The London Protocol of 1852 placed Schleswig-Holstein under the authority of the Danish king, but forbade their incorporation into Denmark . The treaty was made in 1852 .
 In March 1863, the Danish king enacted a new constitution that seemed to incorporate Schleswig into his kingdom . The new constitution was enacted by Danish king in March 1863 . However, it was not until March 1863 that the constitution was changed .
 Bismarck capitalized on the wave of nationalistic support, then found an ally in Austria . The German-Austrian alliance became an important ally in the war of Austria .
 Prussia issued Denmark an ultimatum in January 1864, demanding that the new constitution for Schleswig be redrawn . Denmark refused to comply with Prussia's demands .
 Danish government incorrectly assumed that because of Schleswig’s strategic importance, France and Britain would rush to its defense, rejected the ultimatum . The Danish government found itself at war with Prussia and Austria .
 The Treaty of Vienna established the joint administration of Schleswig-Holstein by Prussia and Austria . Austria would administer Holstein, and Prussia would administer Schleswig . Austria and Germany would administer both Holstein and Schleswick .
 Prussia had a military corridor and communications line through Austrian-controlled Holstein and use of the port of Kiel . This awkward arrangement left Prussia with a military . corridor and . communications line .
 Bismarck now viewed a military showdown with Austria as inevitable, even desirable . The German dictator now viewed the situation as inevitable and desirable .
 He tried to tempt Austria into making an agreement that would divide influence in the German states into north-south spheres . Yet, he failed to persuade Austria to make such an agreement .
 Bismarck persuaded Napoleon III that France would receive territorial compensation in the Rhineland if it would stay out of an Austro-Prussian war . Napoleon III died in 1918 .
 He signed a secret treaty with the Habsburg monarchy that would give French Venetia and establish a French protectorate in the Rhineland after an Austrian victory over Prussia . The treaty was signed by the French and Austrian monarch .
 Bismarck then drew Italy into a secret alliance, signed in April 1866, by promising it Venetia in the event of a Habsburg defeat . The alliance was signed by the German dictator in 1866 .
 Prussian troops entered Holstein after Bismarck secured the temporary alliance with Italy and assured France’s neutrality . Prussian forces entered the state of Holstein in 1883 .
 Austria allied with some of the smaller states (including Hanover, Saxony, and HesseKassel) of the German Confederation . Austria was part of the Confederation of Germany .
 Prussia left the German Confederation, which then voted under Austria’s leadership to send troops against the Prussian army . Austria then sent troops against Prussia, which left the Confederation . Prussia was defeated by Austria's troops .
 The Prussian army bested the Austrian forces in the Battle of Sadowa in eastern Bohemia on July 3, 1866 . The battle took place in the eastern part of the Czech Republic .
 Superior military planning as well as the rapid military planning, deployment, and concentration of troops, talented officers, and more modern weapons— particularly the breech-loading “needle gun”—brought the Prussian army success .
 Bismarck restrained the Prussian officer corps, many of whom wanted to push on to Vienna . The North German Confederation was formed in 1883 .
 Bismarck realized that he would ultimately need the support of the South German states, some of whom had been allied with Austria, if Germany was to be unified under Prussian auspices . Some of these states had been allies with Austria .
 Chancellor did not want to provide France or Russia with an opportunity to enter the conflict, he said .
 The Treaty of Prague eliminated Austria as a rival for the domination of the German states . Austria was eliminated from the German state of Austria in 1918 .
 The Habsburg monarchy recognized the North German Confederation (see Map 17.2), a new union of twenty-two states and principalities north of the Main River, with a constitution and parliament . Prussia would dominate with William I as president and Bismarck as federal chancellor
 Bavaria signed an alliance promising to join Prussia if it were attacked by France . France had been alarmed by the relatively easy Prussian victory . Bavaria joined Prussia in the Prussian war .
 By virtue of the annexation of Hanover, Frankfurt, Nassau, and Hesse-Kassel, Prussia was no longer divided into two separate provinces . Prussia no longer was divided into a province .
 Berlin government intimidated, bribed, or cajoled these smaller states into compliance . The Berlin government intimidates, then cajoles, or bribed them into compliance, with the help of the Berlin government .
 Bismarck left no doubt that he considered the North German Confederation a provisional solution until Germany could be united under Prussian leadership . Germany was united under the Prussian rule .
 The old Zollverein customs union, which included the South German states, was expanded to include an assembly of elected delegates . In the meantime, the old customs union was expanded into a customs union .
 Bismarck received support from Prussian businessmen who would profit from the removal of customs barriers and the centralization of railway networks . The former German president was assassinated in July 1918 .
 Bismarck was the man of the hour, the Prussian state a dynamic force with which to be reckoned . The Prussian army was a powerful force in the world, and was the most powerful in Europe .
 Bismarck’s bitter quarrel with the liberals over the military budget disappeared in the enthusiasm of the German state . The war of the 1930s and '90s saw the rise of the Second World War II .
 Liberal newspapers accepted the triumphs of Prussian foreign policy and military might . But liberal newspapers willingly accepted their triumphs .
 Some of the South German states were moving closer to Prussia through economic and military alliances . At the same time, some of them were moving toward Prussia . Prussia was one of the most powerful powers in Europe .
 Prussian victory in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871 completed the unification of the German states, with the exception of Austria . Austria was the last surviving member of the Prussian-Austria alliance .
 Napoleon III foolishly seized upon the issue of the Hohenzollern candidacy for the vacant Spanish throne as an occasion to go to war against Prussia .
 Bismarck fanned the embers of the crisis he had hoped would lead to a war he considered inevitable and necessary . The war was a war that he considered necessary and necessary, he said .
 The Russian tsar warmly remembered Prussian support during the Polish rebellion of 1863 . The Prussian army supported the uprising in 1863 .
 Austria had not forgiven France for joining Piedmont-Sardinia in the war of 1859 . The Austrian government had not forgave France for its part in the conflict .
 Documents prove French emperor demanded Belgium and Luxembourg as compensation for Prussia’s increased power . Bismarck played his real trump card with the British, coolly revealing documents .
 Napoleon III ended any chance of support for Napoleon III by the British government . The British government would never tolerate a potentially hostile power in Belgium .
 Prussian forces besieged Paris after the surrender of French armies in August and September . The siege was the first of the fall of the French capital .
 Bismarck signed a convention with the provisional French government . The convention was awaiting the election of a National Assembly in France that could conclude a peace treaty . The election of the French National Assembly could conclude the treaty .
 Bismarck demanded the annexation of Alsace, where German speakers predominated, and much of Lorraine . The annexation was prompted by a surge of nationalist sentiment in the South German states and Prussia .
 The German Empire was officially proclaimed at Versailles on January 18, 1871 . It was the first German Empire to be officially declared in 1871 by the French Empire .
 The North German Confederation and its constitution provided the framework for German unification . The constitution of the Confederation was the basis for unification .
 The German Empire took on the auto-cratic political structure of Prussia . Prussian troops cut a French railway line in the Franco-Prussian War .
 Industrialists and merchants trusted that unification would provide a boost to large-scale industrialization in the new Germany .
 Hamburg merchants traded the traditional independence of their city for the economic advantages of operating within a centralized state . Hamburg merchants thus traded traditional independence for economic advantages, operating within the state of Hamburg .
 Bismarck harnessed economic liberalism to the goals of conservative political nationalism . The German dictator harnessed liberalism to his political goals .
 Many Germans remained indifferent to unification and others preferred the particularism of their region . Over the long run, most Germans came to accept with growing enthusiasm the politically unified state that had been forged by Bismarck .
 The empire had a parliament, but the Reichstag had little real authority . The Reich's parliament, however, was little more than a parliament .
 Its members were elected by a franchise system that in Prussia grossly overrepresented landed interests . Members could not hold cabinet posts, and they were not allowed to hold posts .
 The chancellor was responsible not to the Reichstag, but rather to the emperor . The emperor was responsible for the fate of the German state, not the German parliament .
 Foreign policy and military affairs remained in the hands of the emperor and the chancellor . The emperor and chancellor were in charge of foreign policy .
 The Reichstag’s control over the budget could not limit the prerogatives of the throne, the king says . The throne's prerogative power is not limited, he says .
 Each of Germany’s twenty-five states sent a delegate to a federal council , over which the chancellor presided . The council is based in Germany .
 Germany’s growing economic power was unaccompanied by the evolution toward effective parliamentary government that characterized Britain and then France, as well as to some extent Italy . The rise of Germany's economic power has not been accompanied by an evolution of parliamentary government .
 In exchange for loyalty, they were exempt from most taxation, receiving what amounted to state subsidies for their immense estates . They were exempt in exchange for most tax paid .
 Prussian Junkers retained their full measure of political power . Inevitably, as in England, noble economic clout declined with the agricultural depression .
 Unlike their counterparts in Victorian England and France, the German middle class largely remained outside political life in the German Empire . The middle class remained outside of political life, as they had been in Prussia before unification .
 Most middle-class Germans willingly acquiesced to imperial authority and noble influence . Most of them willingly acquiesce to imperial power . But most of them succumbed to imperial influence .
 To Bismarck, this meant that one day the pontiff might simply order German Catholics to not obey the government . Bismartck: "One day, one day, a German Catholic might order the government to obey"
 In 1873, Bismarck launched a state campaign against Catholics, the Kulturkampf * Priests in Germany henceforth had to complete a secular curriculum in order to be ordained, and the state would now recognize only civil marriage . Priests had to now complete a
 Subsequent laws permitted the expulsion from Germany of members of the Catholic clergy who refused to abide by discriminatory laws against Catholics . Members of the clergy were expelled from Germany following the expulsion .
 An assassination attempt against Bismarck by a young Catholic in 1874 and papal condemnation of the Kulturkampf the following year only hardened the chancellor’s resolve . The chancellor's resolve hardened the resolve after the assassination attempt .
 Catholics were still systematically excluded from high civil service positions, as were Jews . The chancellor quietly abandoned the Kulturkampf ‘ although Catholics were systematically excluded . Jews were excluded from the civil service .
 The state helped German Protestants purchase bankrupt estates in Prussian Poland so that they would not fall into the hands of Catholics, who made up most of the population there . The estates were purchased by the state to prevent Catholics from taking over .
 Alsace and the parts of Lorraine annexed from France, where Catholics formed a solid majority, were administered directly from Berlin instead of being considered a separate state of the Reich . Lorraine was administered from Berlin rather than being considered separate from Germany .
 Bismarck became obsessed with destroying the socialists, who improved their gains in the elections, although they still held only a couple of seats in the Reichstag . The socialists gained a few seats, but still held a few of the Reich's seats .
 Two attempts to kill Emperor William I in 1878 provided Bismarck with an excuse for his war on the socialists . Neither would-be assassin had even the slightest contact with socialist leaders .
 The Reichstag obliged Bismarck by passing antisocialist legislation . It denied socialists the freedoms of assembly, association, and the press .
 Police arrested socialists, shut down their newspapers and periodicals, and intimidated workers into quitting trade unions . The police arrested socialists and shut down some of the country's most prominent trade unionists .
 Bismarck was pitted against the pope in the German chancelors campaign against German Catholics . The image was a contemporary image of the two opposing sides .
 The German emperor compensated for his withered left arm with a love of military uniforms and swords . He was known for his love of swords and uniforms .
 His education had proceeded in a hit-or-miss fashion that mostly missed . His education was a hit or miss, but he had a lot of success, he said .
 William’s favorite reading included the pseudoscientific racist ramblings of the English writer Houston Stewart Chamberlain . William's favorite reading was that of Chamberlain, a writer of the same name .
 William II considered himself an expert on military affairs, but was not . William II was not an expert in military affairs . He considered himself to be a military expert .
 He was lazy, yet talked at great length superficially about any conceivable subject, rushing to conclusions without reflection, he said . "He was lazy. Yet he was lazy."
 His lack of tact was a common topic of conversation in imperial circles . He invariably referred to the diminutive King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy as “that dwarf”
 Bismarck wanted to win mass support by sponsoring more legislation that would improve working conditions . He wanted to cultivate as much popularity as possible by sponsoring legislation to improve conditions for workers .
 The iron chancellor's less able successors were unable to keep William from impulsively antagonizing Germany’s rivals . William was the iron chancellor of the Iron Iron Germany . He was the prime minister of the 1930s .
 The emperor's personal foibles became increasingly important as international relations entered a new and dangerous stage . The emperor’s personal . foibles . become increasingly important .
 He personally contributed to the rise of aggressive German nationalism and the Anglo-German naval rivalry . He contributed to rise of aggression in Germany .
 William zipped around Germany and the North Sea eagerly reviewing troops and christening ships . William visited Germany, the UK and christened ships with troops .
 He enthusiastically supported the expansionist goals of the Pan-German and William II and Emperor Francis Joseph Naval Leagues . He supported expansionist expansionist policies .
 The National Liberals wanted a strong, secular state, and mistrusted parliamentary democracy . They wanted strong secular state and a strong secular democracy .
 Protectionist economic policies began in 1879 and culminated in 1902 with a 25 percent duty on manufacturing and food imports . The resulting alliance between industrialists and agriculturists led to protectionist policies .
 Liberalism continued to be closely tied to the defense of small-town interests . Liberalism continues to be tied to small towns .
 In the meantime, the German conservatives became increasingly nationalistic and anti-Semitic . In the past, they have become increasingly anti-Semitism . The German conservatives have become more nationalistic, anti-semitic, says the author .
 Following the economic crash of 1873, newspapers selected Jewish bankers, industrialists, and rival publishers as scapegoats . Jews received full legal emancipation with the proclamation of the empire .
 The operatic composer Richard Wagner and his circle of friends were outspokenly anti-Semitic . Wagner's circle was known for its anti-Semitism . Wagner was an outspoken critic of the Jewish community .
 Wagner believed that the theater stood as a center of German emotional national culture, which he did not believe included Jews . Wagner believed theater was center of national culture which he believed included Jews.
 Social Democrats won more seats in the Reichstag in 1912 than any other party . Yet, the Social Democrats still have the most seats in Germany's parliament .
 Socialist deputies voted for the augmentation of funds for naval expansion, but did so in part because of the issue of direct versus indirect taxation was at stake . They wanted to establish the principle of direct taxation so as to end the tax privileges of wealthy families .
 German socialists manifested little anti-militarism, giving every sign that they would support the government in time of war, particularly against Russia . Unlike French or Italian socialists, German socialists showed no sign of militarism .
 The German Empire embodied the decline of liberalism and the rise of aggressive nationalism in late nineteenth-century Europe . The Empire was a symbol of the decline and rise of nationalism .
 Ethnic tensions within the AustroHungarian Empire, the second largest European state, were in many ways those of Europe itself . Ethnic tensions in Austria were the source of many of Europe's tensions .
 Unification of Germany, as well as that of Italy, altered the balance of power in Central Europe . In the meantime, the unification of Germany and Italy altered the power balance of the continent .
 Unified Germany now unquestionably the strongest state in Central Europe . Unified Germany, not Austria, was now unquestionable . Unsurprisingly, it was now unassailable to Austria .
 Ethnic Composition of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1910 . Germans 12% of the population in 1910. Germans 12.7% of population .
 Croats 2. major nationalities lived within the territorial boundaries of the empire . These included Czechs in Bohemia and Slovaks to their east; Poles in Galicia; Slovenes, Croats, Muslim Bosnians, and Serbs in the Balkans; Romanians and Ukrainians
 The traditional Hungarian crown lands formed the largest territory in the empire, divided into Hungary, Croatia, Transylvania, the Vojvodina, and the Military Frontier . Hungary was one of the largest territories in the Hungarian empire .
 The Germans and Hungarians were outnumbered by the various Slavic groups, who together accounted for about 45 percent of the empire’s population . Yet the Germans, Hungarians and Germans were outnumbered in the empire's population .
 Inadequate transportation networks accentuated the insular and overwhelmingly rural nature of many ethnic regions . There was no railroad between Vienna and the Croatian capital of Zagreb .
 The answers tell us something of the process of statemaking from the point of view of the nonnational state . The answers to the questions are answered by the non-national states .
 Habsburg monarchy was an important force for cohesion, rooted in centuries of Central European history . First, the tradition of the monarchy itself was important force of cohesion, says historian .
 Emperor Francis Joseph, who was eighteen when he came to power in 1848, had taken the second part of his name from his enlightened ancestor Joseph II to invoke the tradition of the House of Habsburg .
 The Habsburgs depended on the support of the German middle class and of the enormous German-speaking bureaucracy . Second, the Habsburys depended on support from the middle class, the German-language bureaucracy, and the German government .
 The most salient cultural traditions of the imperial capital, Vienna, were overwhelmingly German . Vienna's cultural traditions were dominated by German .
 The grand artery was built on the traces of the city’s fortifications, which Francis Joseph had ordered dismantled in 1857 . The fortifications had long since lost all military function except to separate the wealthy center from the proletarian suburbs .
 The boulevard also took shape with military motives in mind . Troops could be moved rapidly in the event of a working-class rebellion .
 The architecture of central Vienna reflected the taste of the aristocracy and the Catholic Church . Vienna was home to the Austrians and the Vienna Cathedral .
 Public buildings (including the university, the opera, and the parliament building) and residences of manufacturers and bankers that bordered the Ringstrasse reflected the secular cultural tastes of the Viennese upper classes . In contrast, public buildings including the university and the opera were built on the Ring
 The empire’s largest Czech and Austrian towns were largely Germanspeaking . In Prague, Germans outnumbered Czechs by more than three to one, although the percentage of Germans there declined during the second half of the century .
 To get anywhere, one had to speak German, migrants to the cities . German migrants to cities learned by non-German migrants to get anywhere .
 The German middle class also benefited from freetrade policies, and profited from the beginnings of industrial concentration in Bohemia .
 Third, the monarchy enjoyed the support of Austrian and Hungarian nobles, as well as their Croatian, Polish, and Italian counterparts, landed nobles .
 The latter three nobilities depended on the Habsburg monarchy to maintain their position . A view of Vienna and its Ringstrasse was published in 1873 .
 Croatian nobility had a long tradition of military service to the Habsburgs . The small Croatian nobility needed the cooperation of the Hapsburgs for the retention of their own privileges .
 The monarchy depended on the preservation of the status of the favored nationalities, above all, the Germans and Magyars, from the challenges of other national minorities, such as Slovenes, Slovaks, Ukrainians, Serbs, and Czechs .
 Catholicism, the religion of the majority of the peoples of the Habsburg domains, was another factor for unity in Austria . Catholicism was also a factor in Austria's unity . Austria was ruled out of Austria in 17th century .
 The centuriesold support of the Catholic Church for the Habsburg dynasty also undercut nationalist movements among predominantly Catholic nationalities like the Slovaks, Croats, and above all, the Poles .
 Protestant north and Catholic south represented at least a potential force for disunity . In the newly unified Germany, by contrast, the religious division between the Protestants north and the Catholic south was at least possible force for ununity .
 German speakers dominated the officer corps, as they did the bureaucracy, holding 70 percent of military positions . They also dominated the bureaucracy .
 Soldiers drawn from the different nationalities continued to serve loyally in the army . Soldiers drawn in France were unpopular with workers . Soldiers rarely intervened in local strikes, unlike in France .
 Francis Joseph's long rule was shaped by the fact that he had come to power as his monarchy seemed to be breaking apart . He was as devoted to the army as it was to him .
 In the 1850s and 1860s, nationalism among the ethnic minorities remained limited to a relatively small number of intellectuals and people from the liberal professions, particularly Poles and Hungarians . The Habsburg Empire was the most repressive state of Austria's rule .
 The Habsburg monarchy feared that demands for autonomy, or even outright independence, would pull the empire apart . The monarchy feared it would pull apart the empire .
 Nationalism, which had frequently been tied to political liberalism, could also challenge the empire’s authoritarian structure . Nationalism had been frequently linked to political liberalism, but could challenge that .
 The success of German and Italian nationalism also threatened the empire s territorial integrity . It raised the possibility that the very small Italian and, above all, the German-speaking parts of the empire might prefer inclusion in Italy or Germany .
 After the mid-century revolutions, the Habsburg monarchy, like the German states and France, continued an unrelenting repression of liberal and national movements . After the revolution, the French and German states continued to suppress the liberal movement .
 Beginning with Francis Joseph’s accession to the Habsburg throne, the monarchy entered a period of “neo-absolutism,” codified in the “Patent” of December 1851 .
 Alexander von Bach was the minister of the interior (and essentially prime minister without the title) He sent out a hierarchy of officials and police sent out from Vienna into the imperial provinces .
 The nobles, some of whom resented the abrogation of peasant obligations after 1848, in general welcomed the restoration of Habsburg authoritarianism .
 They also had lost some regional privileges and prerogatives to the state . But they had also lost some of their regional privileges .
 Bach signed a Concordat with the Catholic Church in 1855, restoring many of its privileges and extending ecclesiastical authority, including the right of prelates to judge the clergy . Bach's Concordat restored many of the privileges of the church, including right to judge clergy .
 The monarchy eliminated civil marriage and restored the Church’s de facto control over education . The monarchy also restored the de facto controls over education in the country .
 Protestants were not allowed to teach in Catholic schools, and new restrictions limited the right of Jews to acquire property . Jews were also limited to acquiring property, and Protestants were banned from attending Catholic schools .
 Alexander von Bach was dismissed as the head of government in August 1859 . In the wake of the defeat of Austrian forces in Italy and amid mounting hostility between Germans and non-Germans, Francis Joseph dismissed Bach . Bach was the first Austrian leader to be dismissed by Francis Joseph in
 He then promulgated a new constitution, the October Diploma of 1860, which reestablished a form of conservative federalism . He then issued a constitution which reestablished a new form of conservatism .
 Provincial assemblies received new authority, placating the nobles . Provincial assemblies were given new authority to placate the noble .
 Anton von Schmerling drafted the February Patent of 1861, a constitution that established a bicameral parliament in which all the empire’s nationalities were to be represented . The constitution was drafted by the interior minister of the interior .
 The number of non-German representatives, as elected by the diets of the respective crown lands, would not equal those of the Germans . Electoral restrictions favored urban elites, as electoral restrictions favor urban elites .
 Magyars, Croats, and Italians refused to participate in the first election, and Schmerling dissolved the regional parliaments . Magyar, Croat, and Italian refused to vote .
 The February Patent perpetuated the most salient elements of Bach’s neo-absolutism . It placed virtually no constitutional limitations on the emperor's power, placing virtually no restrictions on his power .
 Bach’s neo-absolutism made internal enemies, but foreign policy failures seriously undermined the monarchy‘s international position’, writes David Gergen . Gergen: ‘Bachmann’’ was a ‘Nebraska-style’
 The Habsburg monarchy’s status as a power in European affairs declined . Relations with Russia and Prussia deteriorated as relations with Russia deteriorated .
 When Francis Joseph went to war with Prussia in 1866, he could not look for support from the tsar, or from the British or French . Austria resented the fact that Austria had joined Prussia against Denmark two years earlier .
 Prussia's victory over Austria cast doubt on the efficiency of Bach’s neoabsolutism . The other preeminent nationalities—particularly the Magyars, but also the Croats and Poles—to demand a greater share of political power, since the monarchy seemed
 Some of Francis Joseph’s subjects blamed the authoritarian structure of neo-absolutism for the defeat . Francis Joseph was humiliated twice in seven years on the battlefield .
 The empire’s military defeats heightened Magyar demands for more power . The empire's military defeats increased Magyars demands for power .
 Francis Joseph feared the possible alliance of German liberals with the Magyars . The Magyar demanded the reincorporation of Transylvania into Hungary in 1865 .
 Ferenc Deak has proposed a solution that would reconcile Magyar demands with imperial power . He had already asked Ferec Deak to propose a solution to the issue . Deak's solution would be a solution for both sides .
 Deak, a wealthy Magyar noble and lawyer, believed Hungary’s identity as a nation depended on the continued existence of the Habsburg monarchy . Deak was the son of a wealthy Hungarian noble .
 The emperor realized that as long as the Magyars remained dissatisfied and uncooperative, he could not contemplate a war of revenge against Prussia . Prussia was defeated in the war of 1881 .
 The Hungarian Parliament proclaimed Francis Joseph constitutional king of Hungary, as well as emperor of Austria . Francis Joseph was declared constitutional king and emperor of Hungary by the Hungarian Parliament .
 Vienna bureaucracy will continue to carry out matters of finance, foreign policy, and defense . Vienna bureaucracy would continue to be responsible for matters of foreign policy and finance .
 Hungarian now became the language of administration in Hungary . Magyar domains henceforth had their own constitution, parliament, and bureaucracy .
 The halves of the Dual Monarchy would negotiate economic tariffs every ten years . The two sides would negotiate trade deals every 10 years .
 The parliaments of Austria and Hungary elected representatives to the Imperial Assembly, or Delegation . The Imperial Assembly is the largest body of parliament in the world . Austria, Hungary and Austria were both elected representatives .
 The Ausgleich left intact the dominance of German speakers in Austria and of Magyars in Hungary . It also left intact a German-speaking minority in Austria .
 The new constitution maintained the disproportionate advantage enjoyed by Austria’s Germans in the Austrian Imperial Council in Vienna . While in principle recognizing the equality of all nationalities, the constitution nonetheless maintained a disproportionate advantage .
 The emperor routinely appointed Germans to important ministries . He could easily circumvent parliamentary opposition by ruling by decree when parliament was not in session .
 The Hungarian Constitution of 1867 allowed the Magyar nobles to hold sway in the Hungarian Parliament, since the emperor s powers as king of Hungary were now more limited .
 Hungarian ministers were not responsible to Francis Joseph, but rather to the Hungarian Parliament’s lower house . The lower house, elected by leading Magyar property owners, was elected by property owners .
 The Nationality Law of 1868 gave the peoples of each nationality the right to their own language in schools, church, and in government offices . But it did not recognize any separate political ethnic identity .
 Serbs increasingly identified with Russia, which saw itself as the protector of all Slavs . Many Serbs saw themselves as the protectors of Slavs, especially in the eyes of Russia .
 In Austria-Hungary, ethnic tensions generated continued political division . Hungarian resentment of Austrian preeminence within the Dual Monarchy . The demands of subordinate nationalities were the demands of submissive nationalities .
 Croatia, which was technically part of Hungary, sent five representatives to the imperial Delegation in the 1870s . Slovaks, Serbs, and other minorities were left out of the delegation .
 Hungarian government relentlessly carried on with program of Magyarization . Dissolving non-Magyar cultural societies and banning non-magyar names for villages and streets .
 Hungarian remained the official language and the government refused to allow administrative or cultural autonomy of the other nationalities . Hungarian was the only nationalities to have their own autonomy .
 Czech nobles and intellectuals earlier in the ima » e had worked toward a literary and linguistic revival, compiling and publishing Czech dictionaries and books of Czech grammar .
 Czech nationalists demand recognition of historic Kingdom of Bohemia . Czech nationalists demanded recognition of the historic kingdom of Czechoslovakia .
 German speakers in Bohemia and Magyars feared similar demands from minorities within Hungary . Francis Joseph refused such recognition, leading to opposition from German speakers .
 Taaffe placated the Czechs, the third largest ethnic group, by declaring their language on an equal footing with German in the state administration in Bohemia and Moravia in 1880 .
 Intellectuals within the ‘Young Czech’ movement wanted national independence . But intellectuals within the 'Young Czech' movement wanted independence from Czech Republic .
 Taaffe resigned over the issue of increasing the number of eligible voters in Austria in 1893 . Taaffe was the first Austrian politician to resign in 1883 . He resigned over a proposal to increase the electorate .
 Czechs demonstrated against withdrawal of edict that ordered officials to know both German and Czech . One of his successors would later resign after the government had to declare martial law .
 As movements of cultural nationalism grew, they almost inevitably added the goal of national independence to them . The goal of independence was to be independence .
 Polish nationalism revived during the 1880s, but the relatively favored position of Poles in Austrian Galicia (where they held sway over Ukrainians in eastern Galicia) and the dispersion of the Polish people in three empires reduced any immediate Polish threat to the Habsburgs .
 The absorption of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the Habsburg Empire in 1878 added a large Serb, as well as Muslim, population at a time when the Pan-Slav movement was growing in Russia and Balkans .
 Serbs, Croats, and some Slovenes want to form an integral third part of the monarchy . This increased demands from South Slavs have been met with increased demands . Serbs and Croats are among those who want to be an integral part of monarchy .
 Serbia's independence formalized in 1878, many Serbs in Austria-Hungary wanted to be attached to Serbia . Now, with Serbia’s independence formallyized, they wanted to become part of Serbia . Many Serbs still wanted to remain part of the country .
 Hungarians demanded that their language be put on an equal footing with German in the army . Hungarians demand their language is put on a footing with their language in the military .
 Emperor Francis Joseph threatened to dissolve Hungary’s parliament and to declare universal suffrage . Emperor Joseph believed that giving in to Hungarian demands would have meant the end of the Dual Monarchy . Emperor feared giving in would have ended the Dual monarchy .
 Relations between the Habsburg emperor and the Hungarian Parliament deteriorated . The Austro-Hungarian Empire and Russia were at the center of the Austra-Hungary-Austria-Austrian Empire .
 Some made an infernal noise violently opening and shutting the lids of these desks . Some made the noise violently open and shut the desks .
 The sum of uproar thus produced was so infernal that it drowned the voice of a man who was evidently talking from his seat in another part of the house, for one could see his lips moving, and the veins in his temple swelling . One of the men in the house was talking
 The unification of Italy and that of Germany had both largely been effected by the expansion of the most powerful of the states that would become part of the unified state .
 Camillo di Cavour first had transformed Piedmont-Sardinia into a liberal monarchy through reforms, before achieving the unification of Italy . Camillo Di Cavour was the first Italian monarch to achieve the unification .
 Liberal Italy struggled from one political crisis to the next, despite reforms . Its expanding electoral franchise more than doubled in 1912, adding even more divisions to those provided by the gap between north and south .
 Giovanni Giolitti as premier in Italy stabilized Italian politics in 1903 . The advent of Italian premier in 1903 stabilized Italy's political system .
 At the same time, socialists, growing in strength, opposed the liberal regime from the left, while nationalists attacked from the right . At the end of the 1930s, the Soviet Union was in full control of Russia .
 Otto von Bismarck harnessed economic liberalism to the goals of conservative political nationalism in achieving the unification of Germany . Whereas Cavour achieved Italian unification through liberal political means, Bismrck had achieved German unification through economic liberalism .
 Although having universal male suffrage, Germany remained dominated by reactionary monarchs supported by reactionary Junkers . The Reichstag was almost powerless against autocracy, despite the growth of a mass socialist party .
 In the Habsburg lands, nationalism was a force that came to challenge the very existence of the empire . In sharp contrast, nationalism came to be the most powerful force in the country .
 Ethnic tensions within the Austro-Hungarian Empire would become those of Europe . In the age of militant nationalism, ethnic tensions within Austria's empire would become a factor in Europe .
 Each of Europe’s three other powers had been politically unified for centuries . In contrast, each of Europe's three other nations had been political unified for decades .
 France emerged from the tumultuous period with an authoritarian empire . In contrast, France, the third, emerged from . The third, France emerged .
 In the next chapter, we will consider Britain, Russia, and France during the great period of change, 1850-1914 .
 Crystal Palace is a vast structure built of glass and iron in London’s Hyde Park . It housed the Exposition of 1851, the first world's fair . Crystal Palace was built in 1851 to host the first World's Fair .
 Gaslight provided illumination, and, for the first time, public toilets were installed for the convenience of visitors . The first time public toilets had been installed in the park .
 The machinery on exhibit, above all, captured the attention and imagination of observers, including Queen Victoria .
 To the British subjects of Queen Victoria, the Great Exposition of 1851 represented the ascendancy of the British constitution, free trade and manufacturing, and Christianity . Queen Victoria's reign was reignited by the event .
 Britain’s long tradition of constitutional monarchy reflected its liberalism and economic prosperity . The remaining authority of the monarch more than balanced by Parliament, reflected its liberal and prosperous history .
 In the parliamentary constitutional monarchy, reform in 1867 expanded the number of those males eligible to vote . In 1867, the majority of males were allowed to vote in the UK .
 Besides Britain, the other dominant powers during the age of liberalism were France, which was more slowly entering the industrial age, and Russia, which remained an autocracy .
 France during the period 1852-1870 was a highly centralized empire . Emperor Napoleon III was determined to bring economic progress through the strong involvement of the state . Napoleon III died at the age of 70 in 1870 .
 Napoleon III implemented universal male suffrage in the first year of his reign . Napoleon III was the only monarch to implement universal male voting rights .
 Following a disastrous war against Prussia, the empire fell, replaced by the Third Republic . The Third Republic was created out of fear that yet another Napoleon might emerge .
 In contrast, Russia remained an autocracy . The absolute authority of the tsar was limited only by bureaucratic inefficiency and the impossibility of reaching into every corner of the vast empire .
 Unlike Britain and France, Russia had no representative political system and only a tiny middle class, despite economic growth . Russian nobles dominated the peasant masses and dominated the peasants .
 Tsar Alexander II shocked many of his own nobles by emancipating the serfs in 1861 . The Tsar shocked many with his decision to emancipate his serfs .
 The tsar’s reforms did not significantly alter the autocratic nature of the Russian Empire . But unlike the political reforms enacted in Britain and France, the reforms didn’t significantly alter .
 Russia, too, was transformed by new ideas and increasingly courageous opponents of autocratic authority . Yet Russia also has been transformed by opposition to autocratic rule .
 Like France, imperial Russia also had to worry about the consequences of a unified Germany . And, like France, Russia had to deal with the consequences .
 Victoria bore children only because she thought it was part of her duties as queen . Victoria thought she had to have children because of her role in the role of queen .
 She raised her children with little visible affection, as if managing a business from afar . She raised them without visible affection . Her children were raised without any visible affection.
 The queen projected a maternal image both in Britain and in the colonies over which she also ruled . Yet the queen was also seen as a maternal figure in her own country .
 Albert's tendency to be narrow-minded, socially awkward, and tactless irritated cabinet ministers and other highly placed people . Albert's "narrow-minded and socially awkward" tendency irritated cabinet minister and others .
 He hovered about the government, dashing off letters and memoranda when the mood struck him, meddling when he could . He dashed off letters, memoranda and meddled in the government when he was in office .
 Victoria made clear from the beginning that she would serve as a queen without a king . But her devotion to Albert sparked some anti-German feeling in Britain .
 Anglican archbishop made the connection between Britain’s prosperity and the era of relative peace that had prevailed since the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 .
 The course of government has never been for a day interrupted in the island . Meanwhile, in our island, our island has never had a day of government interrupted. Meanwhile, the course of the island, in fact, is never interrupted .
 At the Great Exposition of 1851, more than 6 million visitors could choose among more than 100,000 exhibits put forward by 14,000 exhibitors . More than 6. million visitors, most from Britain but many from the continent and beyond, attended .
 Many assured themselves that science and industry offered hope for continued peace in Europe . These seemed somewhat out of place in a venue where many assured themselves of peace .
 Most of the visitors to the Great Exposition, ranging from the wealthy and famous to the poor, arrived by railroads . The Great Exhibition was held in 1893 .
 When Albert died of typhoid in 1861 at age forty-two, Victoria was devastated . Albert was devastated by the loss of his life .
 She retreated into lonely bereavement and isolation, ignoring most public duties . She retreated from public duties to mourn the loss of her life .
 The queen remained the personification of the 'respectability' that gave her name to the Victorian age . But the queen remained a personification .
 The Victorian Consensus was first used in 1851, the year of the Great Exposition . ‘Victorian’ evokes a sense of contentment and confidence that middle-class Britons enjoyed .
 Victorian consensus was formed around the capitalist entrepreneurial ethic, emphasizing self-reliance and faith in progress . Victorian consensus formed around capitalist entrepreneurial ethos .
 In the Victorian entrepreneurial ideal, the individual demonstrated his moral worth through hard work, in contrast to the evils of the old system of patronage . The Victorian entrepreneur ideal was the individual demonstrating moral worth by hard work . The idea of the Victorian entrepreneur was to show that hard work was worth worth
 Competition would determine those who were fit to rule, not aristocratic monopoly or unearned privilege, not working-class demands for a greater share in the prosperity .
 Darwin overcame chronic anxiety, self-doubt, and severe depression to undertake determined, systematic research and analysis on the evolution of living organisms . Darwin was the son of a domineering father .
 Darwin’s work seemed to suggest that the state should stand back and. leave individuals alone to compete on the playing field of life . Darwin's work suggested that . individuals alone should be able to compete in life, he said .
 Darwin’s book taught that mankind evolved from other animal forms over millions of years . This was more good news for many confident Victorians, but not for churchmen . Darwin's book challenged description of God creating the world in seven days .
 Darwin’s research and analysis were a major event in the battle between science and religion in nineteenth-century Europe . Darwin's research was a major battle between religion and science .
 Religious images and references permeated Victorian social and political discourse . The Victorian era was dominated by religious imagery and religious references .
 Entrepreneurs believed that they were doing God’s work by becoming successful and rich . Entrepreneurs believe that they are doing God's work by being rich and rich. Entrepreneurs thought that they would be God's help .
 Many Victorians insisted that the pervasive influence of religion more than prosperity explained the apparent social harmony of their age . But many Victorians still believed that religion more important than prosperity .
 Out of a population of almost 18 million people, only slightly more than 7. million attended church . Only slightly over 7.million people had attended church in the country .
 If everybody in England and Wales had decided to attend church, only 58 percent of the population could be accommodated . Only 30 percent of Londoners could also attend church if they wanted to .
 Between 1841 and 1876, Anglicans built 1,727 new churches and restored more than 7,000 old ones . Congregationalists and Catholics doubled their churches, and Baptists multiplied their churches by five .
 The Church of England, closely looking at human ancestry identified with the British elite, remained a target for liberal reformers . Darwin's work was published in Darwin's book, "Darwinism"
 Parliament repealed Corporation and Test Acts in 1828, eliminating two significant discriminatory laws that had kept Dissenters who refused to take communion in the Anglican Church from holding office . Parliament had repealed the corporation and test Acts in the 1828 .
 Parliamentary decrees in 1854 and 1856 allowed non-Anglicans to attend Cambridge and Oxford Universities . Oxford University students were allowed to study in 1856 .
 Catholics, most of whom were Irish immigrants, still faced popular suspicion . Catholics still faced suspicion, reflecting deep roots of anti-Catholicism in British national identity . Catholics faced suspicion of Catholics in Britain in the 1930s .
 Congregationalist and Baptist evangelicals won converts among the lower classes, perhaps because leaders of these churches demonstrated far more interest in the conditions of the poor than did the Church of England .
 Temperance movements proliferated in a wave of concern about lower-class drunkenness . One-third of all arrests were for drunk and disorderly conduct . Temperance movement proliferated .
 Charity Organization Society was founded in 1869 . It promoted charitable giving to those who steered clear of drink . Charity organization society was founded by 1869.
 Salvation Army began its work in 1875, offering assistance to those who would participate in religious revival services .
 In 1853, Russian forces occupied the Ottoman Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia . The move solidified Russia’s position in the Balkans to solidify its position .
 The Russian Empire sought control over the Straits of Constantinople, which divide Europe from Asia from Asia . It could provide the Russian navy with access to the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas .
 The Ottoman Empire had controlled virtually the entire Balkan region until the early nineteenth century . Such ambitions inevitably brought conflict with the Ottoman Empire, which had controlled the region .
 Following defeat after the Greek revolt in the 1820s, Ottoman rulers had undertaken a series of major reforms of the army . They replaced the janissary corps with a more European army in 1826 .
 Crimean War, 1853-1856 Russian, British-French-Piedmontese, and Austrian troop movements involved in this war between the great powers . The Crimean War was fought between Russia and the British Empire .
 Sultan Mahmud II had reorganized the treasury and ordered a census of the empire in 1831 . Mahmud I ordered the treasury to reorganize the treasury .
 Mahmud IPs successors decreed further reforms during the period known as Tanzimat—the ‘Reorganization’ - that lasted from 1839 to 1878 . The reforms were decreed during the reign of the Ottoman Empire .
 By the Rose Chamber Decree of 1839, the sultan guaranteed the life and property of all Ottoman subjects and their equality before law . The sultan also initiated military conscription and a more organized system of taxation . By the same Decree, the Ottoman sultan established military cons
 Britain and France viewed stability of the Ottoman Empire as necessary to temper Russian dreams of further expansion toward Constantinople and the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits . Such reforms pleased British and French governments in part because Ottoman markets were more open to foreign trade .
 A century earlier, perhaps as much as 80 percent of the population of the Ottoman Empire in Europe had been Christian . A century later, perhaps up to 80 percent was Christian in the Ottoman empire .
 Each religion had the right to worship freely, and non-Muslims had access to Islamic courts . Non-Muslims were able to access Islamic courts in Saudi Arabia .
 The structure of the empire had for centuries encouraged the conversion of Christians to Islam . Christians were considered second-class subjects and faced a heavier tax burden than Muslims . Christians faced heavier tax burdens than Muslims, and faced higher taxes .
 In the late eighteenth century, the sultans had begun to tighten their control over the various religions in the empire . The sultan had begun tightening their control .
 Each religious community was organized into what became known as the “millet’s system . The system was organized by Greek Orthodox, Jewish, and Armenian communities .
 The sultan brought the hierarchy of Muslim religious and cultural leaders under administrative control in the middle of the nineteenth century .
 In addition, stories of persecution of Muslim minorities in Russia and suspicion of Western powers toward Islam contributed to the emergence of Islamism in the Ottoman Empire .
 Religious leaders began calling for a return to the fundamental values of Islam . Religious leaders have called for the return to Islam's fundamental values .
 At the same time, Turkish economic development brought the emergence of a group of prosperous merchants . They turned away from and even rejected the organization of communities along religious lines .
 Officials replaced the old Ottoman ruling class, which had originally been drawn from the servants of the sultan s household . They had held positions in the imperial administration and army, who had previously been in imperial administration .
 The Ottoman ministries of the interior, finance, and foreign affairs, among others, reflected Western influence . The Ottoman government was largely dominated by the Ottoman Empire .
 Russia presented itself as the protector of Slavic and Orthodox Christian interests in the Balkans, encouraging agitation against the Turks . The Russians presented themselves as the protectors of the Slavs and Christians in the region .
 This challenged the Islamic character that had existed for centuries as an essential part of the empire . This challenged Islamic character, which had existed as an important part of empire .
 Britain was ill disposed to the expansion of Russian influence in Afghanistan . With interests in Afghanistan, Britain was keen to avoid it .
 Increased British trade with the Ottoman Empire had become another factor in British support for the Turks . Increased trade between Britain and the Ottomans was also a factor in support of the Turks.
 Napoleon III of France stood ready to stop Russian expansion by supporting the Ottoman Empire . Napoleon III was eager for a military victory to solidify support for his regime . The Ottoman Empire was the last Ottoman Empire to be established in Russia .
 French emperor saw himself as the protector of the Catholic Holy Places of Judea, which were under Ottoman authority . The French emperor wanted to protect the Catholic holy places .
 Napoleon III demanded at least Catholic equality with the Orthodox religion in Jerusalem’s Church of the Holy Sepulcher . To placate Catholic supporters, Napoleon III wanted equality with Orthodox religion . Napoleon III died in 1877 .
 Russia refused to veto any changes in the status of the Holy Places and the situation of the entire Ottoman Christian population . This Russia refused, demanding the right to veto the changes . The Russian government refused to accept the request .
 Russian Tsar Nicholas Is fleet defeated the Ottoman fleet in the Black Sea, setting fire to the sultan’s wooden ships with incendiary shells . The sultan's wooden ships were set alight by the Russian fleet .
 The tsar’s confidence that Britain and France would soon quarrel proved ill founded . But the tsar was wrong founded .
 British public opinion eager for the flag to be shown even after the withdrawal of Russian troops from Moldavia and Wallachia . The British Royal Navy sailed into the Black Sea .
 British and French forces first moved against the Russian port of Sebastopol . Sebastopol is on the peninsula of Crimea on the edge of the Black Sea . The port is located on the Crimean Peninsula of Crimea, Crimea .
 Sebastopol could only be stormed from land . Invulnerable to sea attack, Sebastopol was only to be stormed by sea attack .
 French army seemed better trained, as well as better fed and supplied than that of the British . The French army was better trained and fed than the British.
 Most British officers owed their commissions to the fact that they were aristocrats, not because of particular competence . Most British officer's commissions were due to their aristocratic status, not their competence .
 One commander spent each night on his private yacht dined on meals prepared by a French chef . His men shivered in the wind and mud of the Crimean winter and ate ghastly rations .
 Britain’s poet laureate, Alfred Tennyson, helped make famous the ‘Charge of the Light Brigade,” in which British cavalry rode into “jaws of death” at Balaklava . Far more men died of disease than in battle, although more
 The first war correspondents sent dispatches by telegraph to eager readers in Britain and France . Interest in the distant siege dramatically increased newspaper circulation .
 The daughter of a prosperous family, she had shocked her parents by becoming a nurse . The occupation had a reputation as providing a refuge for ‘disorderly’ women .
 Florence Nightingale. wounded and those sick with cholera and dysentery. wounded . Florence Nightedale. injured and sick . Nightingales . wounded . wounded and sick with disease . Florence nightingale . . .
 She bombarded the government with highly detailed information on what was wrong and what was needed . She also bombarded government with detailed information about what is wrong and needed .
 Raising funds through private contributions, she succeeded in improving conditions in the hospital . She succeeded in raising funds to improve conditions in hospital .
 Nightingale had to overcome the conviction of officers that she would “spoil the brutes,” that is, the sick and wounded enlisted men, as well as overcoming prejudices against a woman making forceful demands on the government .
 The government several years later enacted a series of reforms to improve food and health care for the men in its army . The reforms were enacted in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Florence Nightingale’s highly publicized work throughout the remainder of her career, nursing emerged as a more respected profession . In part a result of her work, the nursing profession has emerged as more respected .
 Crimean War ground to a halt after Sebastopol capitulated in September 1855 . Sebastopol finally capitulated after the Crimean War began in 1855. Sebastopol was the only major city to break into Crimea .
 The Peace of Paris guaranteed the autonomy of the Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia . It also guaranteed the independence of Turkey, and the neutrality of the Black Sea . The peace of Paris was signed in 1878 .
 Crimean War left little doubt that Victorian Britain remained Europe’s strongest power . Victorian Britain was Europe's strongest power in Europe .
 Britain entered a period of relative social harmony in the Victorian era . The Liberal Era of Victorian Politics was the period of the Liberal era .
 British workers seemed to accept the belief that hard work and savings would inevitably be rewarded . Most British workers accepted the belief hard work would be rewarded.
 Victorians of all social classes increasingly felt themselves part of a nation with which they could identify . Most Victorians felt that they were part of the nation, especially in their youth .
 Membership in such groups rose from less than a million in 1815 to 3 million in . 1849 and 4 million in the 1872, four times that of unions . Membership in . such groups is four times the size of unions.
 They provided members with minimal assistance in times of unemployment or illness and a decent burial . Members of the community were given minimal assistance and burial costs .
 Such organizations did not offer the socialist vision common among workers in France, Belgium, or the Rhineland . Preaching individual self-help and respectability, such organizations preached individual self help .
 They helped inculcate a sense of what the British called “respectability,” which discouraged militancy . The British called it ‘respectability’ which discouraged militantism .
 Like the friendly societies, Britain’s ‘new model unions’ also embodied the concept of self-help . The unions are Britain's 'new model union' unions .
 Members of these unions first and foremost saw their organizations as representing craftsmen and skilled workers of specific crafts, such as carpenters and printers from the ‘aristocracy of labor” who could afford dues .
 Workers constituted about 15 percent of the working class, standing apart from the mass of unskilled laborers . They constituted about . 15 percent .
 Some of them taught in Sunday schools, working men's colleges, reading rooms, and improvement societies . Others taught in working men’s colleges and improvement society .
 There was no talk of revolution or even of eventually restructuring British economic, social, and political life . Even when local unions within a single trade joined to form national organizations, there were no plans for a revolution .
 Strikers in the 1860s were increasingly willing to accept arbitration boards and to compromise to achieve limited goals . Striker: "Strikers were more likely to be willing to compromise with limited goals"
 Whigs governed Britain for most of the 1850s and 1860s . Benefiting from the 1832 enfranchisement of more middle-class men, the Whigs ruled the country .
 Henry John Temple, the Viscount Palmerston, began his political career as a Conservative, led the Whigs . He was the first Whig to win a seat in the House of Lords .
 The notorious philandering of the shrewd and feisty “Lord Cupid,” as he was known to his detractors, stood out in an age of public prudishness .
 Palmerston outraged Queen Victoria by trying to seduce one of her ladies-in-waiting in Windsor Castle . Palmerston was outraged by the incident in which he tried to woo her .
 Palmerston held together a coalition of Whigs who were determined to uphold laissez-faire economic policies . Palmerston was the leader of the Whigs in the 1880s .
 Dissenters, Catholics, and liberal Anglicans wanted the Anglican Church to lose its status as the Established Church of England . Anglicans want to lose their status as Established Anglicans .
 Crowds cheered when he ordered the blockade of the Greek port of Piraeus in 1850 to enforce claims against the Greek government by Don Pacifico, a Britishborn Portuguese Jew whose house was destroyed .
 Palmerston boastfully compared the might of classical Rome and Victorian Britain . Palmerston had remained one of the “protecting powers” of Greece since its independence in 1832 .
 Palmerston ther lurched into a short war against China in 1857, after the Chinese govern ment seized a pirate ship that had formerly been registered under the British flag . The Chinese government seized the pirate ship, which was formerly registered under British flags .
 Palmerston refused to resign anc called for a general election . Palmerston called for the general election after being rebuffed by a majority in Commons .
 Gladstone was the son of a wealthy and unscrupulous merchant who had made a fortune in trade with India and the West Indies . Gladstone died in 1841 .
 Gladstone was deeply religious and wore his moral vision of the world or his sleeve . The young Gladstone went out into the night to try to convince prostitutes to abandon their trade .
 Gladstone sought to impose his own self-discipline anc sense of Victorian Christianity on the nation . Gladstone wanted to impose a sense of Christianity on Australia .
 During his early years in gov. eminent, he worked to assure laissez-faire economic policies . He campaigned for the abolition of even the very modest income tax .
 Gladstone had waged war against extravagance and waste in government . As chancellor of the exchequer, Gladstone waged war on extravagance .
 He opposed colonization as being too expensive . In contrast to his Conservative rivals, he opposed colonization .
 Queen Victoria loathed Gladstone, blaming him for almost every domestic and international problem . Queen Victoria blamed Gladstone for many of her many problems . Gladstone was the prime minister of the Victorian era .
 She resented his de facto campaign to reduce the already limited role of the monarchy in the constitutional government of Britain .
 He wanted to make the Liberals the party of reform . Having supported the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, he wanted to become a reformer .
 Robert Peel split the Conservatives by supporting the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 . Robert Peel had split the party by supporting repeal of Corn Laws .
 After Peel s death in 1850, Benjamin Disraeli became Prime Minister . William Gladstone became Liberal Prime Minister in 1850s .
 Disraeli seemed an unlikely leader of a party dominated by landed wealth . A Jew who had been baptized into the Anglican Church, he was a member of the party . He was the only Jewish leader in the British House of Representatives .
 He was an energetic, skilled politician and an impressive orator . But he had the good sense to realize that further Conservative attempts to revive economic protectionism were doomed .
 Unlike Gladstone, Disraeli got along famously with the queen, whom he flattered on every possible occasion . Unlike Gladstones, he was flattered by the queen .
 Since 1832, the majority of British subjects had regarded further political reform as a certainty . The Reform Bill of 1867 was passed by the British House of Lords in London .
 A growing number of middle-class voters wanted to end aristocratic influence in British political life . A growing majority of voters supported some expansion of suffrage in Britain .
 John Bright represented Manchester and then Birmingham in the House of Commons . Bright campaigned for electoral reform in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In 1866, the National Reform Union and the Reform League allied with Bright’s parliamentary radicals . Bright was a middle-class craftsman in the middle class . The Reform League, which many craftsmen joined, allied with him .
 Their goal was household suffrage, that is, the right of the adult male head of family to vote . The goal was to ensure that the adult head of the family could vote for the first time .
 Gladstone, typically, was convinced that political reform was not only expedient but also moral . Gladstone: "Political reform is not only an expedient, but also a moral imperative."
 He wanted to let down the electoral drawbridge only long enough to let in artisans and skilled workers, the ‘aristocracy of labor,” but not all males, he said . But he said he wanted to open doors to artisans, skilled workers .
 Conservatives feared that the enfranchisement of more people would add to the ranks of the Liberals . Conservatives feared it would lead to legislation that might weaken the political influence of wealthy landowners .
 The Liberal government proposed a bill to reduce the minimum amount of tax one had to pay to be eligible to vote in the countryside and in towns . The bill would reduce the tax rate to be lower in rural areas and towns .
 The proposed reform would still exclude ordinary workers and other poor people . The proposal still excludes ordinary workers, according to the proposal .
 The House of Lords rejected the bill because a majority of members opposed any change . However, the bill was rejected because of the opposition of the majority of Lords .
 Reform Bill of 1867 passed, like that of 1832, under Conservative auspices . Reform Bill was passed in 1867, the same year as the Reform Bill in 1832 . Reform bill was passed by the Conservatives in 1864 .
 This doubled the ranks of voters but still left Britain short of universal male suffrage . Britain still has not yet reached a point where men can vote .
 In France at the same time, every adult male could vote during the Second Empire, to be sure . Every adult male was allowed to vote in France during the French Second Empire .
 Napoleon III cynically manipulated universal male suffrage by presenting government-sponsored candidates and utilizing that old Bonapartist tool, the plebiscite . Napoleon III used government- sponsored candidates to present government-backed candidates .
 The German Empire, too, had universal male suffrage, but the Reichstag (assembly) had little real authority . The Empire, also known as the "Reichstag," had universal suffrage .
 In Russia, there were no national elected bodies at all . Local assemblies initiated in 1864 were elected by local electoral colleges . They were dependent upon officials named by the tsar .
 In Italy, only a small percentage of adult males were eligible to vote, by virtue of their ownership of property . Only a small majority of adults were eligible for voting in Italy .
 The reformed electoral system in Britain enfranchised many more voters, but gave them more influence . The House of Commons exercised great authority in Britain’s constitutional monarchy .
 Britain seemed to lead the way in the gradual emergence of democratic politics . Here, too, Britain has led the way for democratic politics.
 Disraeli’s Conservatives, however, failed to woo many of the new voters . The Conservatives failed to win many new voters in the first term .
 The Liberals won a large majority in Parliament, boosted by support from workers who now could vote . The Liberal Party won a majority of seats in Parliament in 2014 .
 The major goal of the Chartist campaign more than two decades earlier had been reached . The chartist campaign had reached the goal of reaching the milestone .
 Another act in 1884 added 2 million more voters to the rolls by enfranchising agricultural laborers . Another act of reform added 2million more voters by enacting agricultural workers .
 Only adult males who could not vote were those without a fixed residence, sons living at home with their parents and not paying rent, and domestic servants . Women still excluded from the vote .
 The Redistribution Act of 1885 disenfranchised some underpopulated districts while increasing representation of many urban areas . The Act was passed in 1885 and disenfranchised many districts in the districts .
 The establishment of single-member constituencies compensated Conservatives, balancing potential Liberal gains in urban areas . However, it also compensated Conservatives for the loss of rural areas .
 Victorian consensus rested upon a strong belief that the “invisible hand” of the economy would generate economic growth . The Victorian consensus was based on the belief that economic growth would generate growth . Other Victorian Reforms were introduced by the Victorian government .
 Victorians believed the Poor Law of 1834 was self-defeating because it provided minimal resources to the poor for which they had not worked . Many Victorians had believed the poor were being given minimal resources .
 Most middleclass Victorians by mid-century had changed their minds about the role of government in society . But increasingly aware of the devastating poverty of millions of workers, most middleclass had changed minds .
 Edwin Chadwick, a journalist and associate of Jeremy Bentham, drafted the Poor Law . The Poor Law was passed by Bentham in 1763 .
 His Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Laboring Population of Great Britain served as an impassioned plea for government action after cholera had ravaged poor urban neighborhoods . The report was published in 1897 and published by the British government .
 Parliamentary commissions began to call upon experts to gather information and assess conditions of British life . Thereafter, parliamentary commissions began calling upon experts .
 Chadwick’s revelations about public health—or rather, the lack of it—encountered ferocious opposition from those who were against any government intervention as a matter of principle .
 Chadwick was driven to resign from the General Board of Health in 1854 . The right of the state to intervene in matters of health had already been established .
 Parliamentary acts in the 1860s extended regulations of working conditions in mines and factories with more than fifty employees and where women and children worked . Women and children were not allowed to work in mines or factories .
 The Public Health Act of 1866 gave local government more authority to assure a cleaner water supply . The Act was passed in 1866 and gave local authorities more authority .
 State inspectors for the first time obtained legal access to workplaces . Five years later, state inspectors finally got access to workplace inspections .
 Parliament soon established health boards in towns and country districts . Local business and political interests often combined to foil the efforts of reformers .
 Reform leagues, such as the National Education League, became part of British political life . Yet, reform leagues, like the NED, are still part of the political life of the UK .
 Liberals ended the purchase of army commissions, enacted land reform in Ireland, and the government recognized the legal existence of trade unions . The Reform Act of 1867 was passed by the Liberal Party in Ireland .
 The Conservatives returned to power in 1874, they sought to get the support of workers from the Liberals by getting Parliament to approve a number of reforms, including a law that forbade labor by disinfectors in London .
 More than altruism lay behind a shift in middle-class attitudes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Middle class attitudes have been on the rise in recent years .
 Manufacturers knew that demand for their products depended on workers having money to spend . Manufacturers also knew that . Demand for their . products depended . on their products .
 Queen Victoria once asked someone to define “bureaucracy” a term she didn’t know . Queen Victoria did not know what it was called .
 In 1841, the British government employed 40,000 men and 3,000 women; by 1911, 271,000 people worked for the state . By 1911, there were 271,00 men and 50,000 workers for the British state .
 The administration of the Poor Law itself served to strengthen the role of government in local affairs . The Poor Law was the first Poor Law to be passed in England .
 Municipal councils took over the role of administering local government from the justices of the peace from the sixteenth century . The justices of peace had been in charge of local government since the 16th century .
 Municipalities were now responsible for education, as well as for health, housing, roads, and policing . Municipalities now have responsibility for education and housing .
 Service in local government, once little more than another honor awarded a landed gentleman, now required participation of paid officials . Service now required the participation of government officials .
 With increased responsibilities, the British civil service became professionalized . The civil service has become more professionalized in recent years .
 The government administered competitive examinations on which appointment and promotion depended . The exams were administered on the basis of the results .
 Applicants who had attended one of the expensive, elite public schools had a far greater advantage on the examinations than those who had not . Applicants had attended the expensive public schools (so called because they accepted students from all over Britain)
 As the role of the British state expanded considerably during the middle decades of the century, the era of laissez-faire liberalism came to a close . The role of Britain's state thus expanded considerably .
 Benjamin Disraeli sought to accommodate Conservatives to the era of mass political life . Disraelian sought to adapt Conservatives to mass politics after passage of the Reform Act .
 He created a modern national party organization . Realizing that his party, long tied to the British landed elite, would have to outbid their Liberal rivals .
 Disraeli supported the Turks, despite the massacre of about 10,000 to 15,000 Bulgarians in 1876 by Turkish troops . When the Turks and Russians began to quarrel over the Balkans, he backed the Turks .
 Gladstone was horrified by the bloodbath and made a political issue of the Balkans . Gladstone, however, was horrified at the bloodshed and made the Balkans a major issue .
 Britain had less to fear from the Ottoman Empire in decline than from an aggressively expansionist Russia . Russia was less interested in the Ottoman empire than an aggressive expansionist state .
 The traditional split between ‘city’ and ‘country/’ which had characterized politics since the seventeenth century, had largely ended. “City’s” and “country’ had been a key part of the political process. ‘City
 Conservatives now found new support among some of the wealthiest businessmen, who abandoned the Liberals . Conservatives now find support among wealthy businessmen who abandoned Liberals .
 Many aristocrats were themselves now actively involved in the management of banks and modern industries .
 The English business elite that had been formed during the first decades of Victoria’s reign became as conservative as the aristocrats they emulated . The business elite became more conservative in the 1930s and 1940s . Victoria's reign was the first decade of her reign in England .
 Some wealthy businessmen deserted the Dissenters to join the Established Anglican Church . Some of them were wealthy businessmen .
 This new Conservative political culture, supported by a faithful minority of nationalist “Tory workers,” survived the economic and social changes that were transforming Britain . This new political culture has survived the social and economic changes that are transforming Britain.
 Gladstone himself embarked on whistle-stop ‘Midlothian’ campaigns . The campaign was so named for one of Gladstone’s first stops in 1879 .
 His audiences were made up of anyone who wanted to come to the railroad station to hear him . His audiences included anyone who came to see him perform at the station .
 Because of parliamentary districting, the countryside remained overrepresented in Parliament, again to the advantage of landed gentlemen . The countryside was overrepresented because of parliamentary districts .
 In 1871, about 1,200 people owned a quarter of the land of England . The holdings of 7,000 families amounted to half of the country . The land was owned by about 1.200 people .
 Landed gentlemen dominated the House of Commons until 1885, the cabinet until 1893, and the aristocratic House of Lords well into the twentieth century . Landed men dominated the British Parliament until the end of the nineteenth century .
 The Liberals continued to be faced with the problem of Ireland, which reflected the dilemmas of national identity in late nineteenth-century Europe . The Liberal Party continued to face the dilemma of Ireland .
 A year later, the Liberal prime minister pushed through both houses of Parliament a bill that disestablished the Church of Ireland . Ireland was 80 percent Catholic, since it had become part of the United Church of England in 1800 .
 This meant that the Episcopal Church in Ireland no longer received state support . It was the first time the state had withdrawn support for the church in Ireland .
 To many Irish, it seemed that only by owning land could Irish peasants reach any degree of prosperity . To many . Irish peasants .
 The Irish Land Act of 1870 provided tenants with compensation for improvements they had undertaken . It protected tenants from being evicted from property without just cause . It also protected them from being evicted from property without just cause .
 The fall in the price of agricultural commodities made it more difficult for tenant-farmers to meet their rent payments . The fall is due to the fall in agricultural commodities making it harder for tenants to meet rent payments.
 In 1879, the Irish Land League, drawing on the remnants of the secret Irish Republican Brotherhood (known in Gaelic as the Fenians), began to pressure Parliament for land reform .
 Charles Stewart Parnell began to build a small parliamentary coalition in favor of Home Rule . Home Rule meant the establishment of a separate Irish Parliament, but not outright independence .
 Parnell’s program fell short of the demands of the Land League and the revived Irish Republican Brotherhood . The Land League wanted immediate and sweeping land reform .
 Irish tenants and laborers began to shun farmers who took over the leases of peasants evicted for nonpayment of rent . The peasants were evicted from their homes for not paying rent .
 A certain Captain Boycott, the agent of a large landowner, was one of the first targets . His name became synonymous with such a strategy . A certain captain Boycott was the first target .
 The writ of habeas corpus was suspended in Ireland in 1881 . The British government responded with repression, suspending the writ .
 Gladstone also pushed through a bill protecting any Irish tenant from eviction who could pay one year’s back rent . Gladstone threatened to dissolve Parliament by threatening to dissolve the Irish parliament .
 Opposition to Home Rule mounted in Parliament among MPs who argued that concessions had encouraged violence .
 The British government ordered Parnell’s release from prison in 2010 . A year later, the UK government ordered his release in exchange for passage of another bill to help Irish tenants .
 In 1882, Irish republicans hacked to death two British officials who had been walking in Phoenix Park in Dublin . Two British officials were killed by republicans in 1882 .
 A Coercion Act facilitated the British government’s repression of the republicans by eliminating some rights of those arrested . In response to the murders of more than thirty republicans in Ireland, the Act was enacted in response to those killed .
 Five of those responsible for the Phoenix Park assassinations were arrested and hung . Five of them were killed in Phoenix Park shootings .
 Joseph Chamberlain led the defection of the ‘Liberal Unionists’ over Home Rule . Joseph Chamberlain was the leader of the Liberal Unionists . He led the party to the defeat of Home Rule in the 1930s .
 Parnell fell into disgrace three years later when news broke of his affair with Kitty O’Shea, wife of a Liberal Irish MP active in the campaign for Home Rule . He was accused of having an affair with the wife of an Irish MP .
 She endeared herself to her people on the occasion of her silver jubilee in 1887 by wearing a simple bonnet instead of her crown .
 Edward could not have been more different from his mother, with whom he constantly battled and whom he often embarrassed . Edward's mother: "Edward's mother was a very different person, not a very good person"
 Edward ‘the Caresser’ indulged his extravagant tastes in beautiful women, prize horses, good food, fine wines, and gambling . He indulged in his lavish tastes in fine wine, fine horses, fine wine and gambling, and beautiful women .
 The Liberal Unionists had allied with the Conservatives over Home Rule . Home Rule was the first Home Rule vote in the UK .
 In 1895, Joseph Chamberlain joined the Conservative government as colonial secretary . Chamberlain was the leader of the Liberal Party . He joined the Conservatives in 1895 and became colonial secretary in 1895 .
 British trade unionism entered a more aggressive phase during the last two decades of the nineteenth century . Frustrated by the Conservative government’s refusal to initiate parliamentary bills of social reform .
 The Trades Union Congress had provided a forum for organized labor, although the financial resources of unions became even more depleted . The financial resources were depleted .
 A more militant ‘new unionism’ was characterized by the organization of semiskilled workers, including many iron and steel factory workers . Now, a more militant . “New unionism,” was characterized as a more . militant .
 In 1887, for the first time since the last Chartist marches in London in 1848, English workers went into the streets in great numbers to protest . Demonstrators demonstrated against unemployment and the high cost of living in London .
 On November 13, “Black Monday’s” in central London, was the first since 1848 . Store owners slammed their doors shut amid a ‘red fear’ in London . The first time such a “red Monday” has happened in London since
 In 1889, gas workers in London strike achieved the eight-hour workday . Dockworkers struck for a minimum wage after gas workers' victory in 1889 .
 Tillett had at the age of seven begun cutting slabs of clay in a brickyard . He then ran away with Old Joe Barker’s Circus as an acrobat, before joining the merchant marine and then the navy .
 Finding work as a dockyard laborer, he helped organize thousands of unskilled laborers in a massive strike . The strike was a massive labor strike in the 1930s and '60s .
 Hundreds of thousands of casual laborers, including those living in London’s East End, still were not unionized, nor in friendly societies .
 Strikes in 1897—1898 (including Britain’s first national walkout, which ended in the workers’ defeat) revealed the growing reach of the new unions . The strikes in 1897-1898 were the first national strike in Britain .
 Taff Vale decision made unions legally responsible for losses sustained by companies during strikes . In 1901, in resolving a railway case in Wales, the House of Lords made unions and their officers legally responsible . The decision was made in 1901 in a decision made by the Lords of the Lords .
 Scottish miner provoked the House of Commons by chiding members for congratulating the queen on the birth of a great-grandson instead of condolence to the families of several hundred miners killed in a mine shaft in Wales .
 A split within the Liberal-Unionist-Conservative bloc brought ten years of Conservative government to an end . A split in the party brought 10 years of Tory government to a close end .
 Some political leaders, including Joseph Chamberlain, campaigned for protective tariffs . They believed that they would increase British prosperity by creating a large imperial market .
 Balfour resigned in December 1905 after a split within his party split . The Liberals swept to victory in the following year .
 Promising to repeal the Taff Vale decision, they garnered many working-class votes . Promising repeal of the decision, many campaigned for repeal of decision .
 Under the Liberal government, Parliament reversed the Taff Vale decision with the Trade Disputes Act of 1906, which legalized picketing and relieved unions of the legal responsibility for financial losses caused by strikes . The Act relieved unions from the legal liability for financial loss caused by striking .
 Welshman David Lloyd George (18631945) was the rising star of the Liberals . Lloyd George was a dynamic, ambitious, and charismatic Welshman .
 Lloyd George had come into the public eye for his opposition to the Boer War . He preferred to speak his native Welsh rather than English . Lloyd George was a Welshman who opposed the war .
 Liberal government established local boards to set minimum industrial wages . It involves the British government in bargaining between employers and workers to an extent hitherto unseen .
 In 1909, Lloyd George proposed a budget that called for increased public benefits to be partially funded by taxes on inheritance and on unearned income and uncultivated land . Lloyd George's budget was proposed in 1909, but was largely funded by inheritance taxes .
 He compared the costs of maintaining ‘a fullyequipped duke’ to that of a new battleship . He compared aristocratic families as parasitical leeches maintained at public expense .
 The House of Lords ruled in favor of a railway worker who had sued his union with the goal of keeping union funds from being used to support Labour candidates for the House of Commons or to pay them while they served .
 Osborne judgment struck a damaging blow against the unions . Like the Taff Vale case, the Osborne judgment was struck by the unions, it struck a blow against them .
 The House of Lords provocatively vetoed the 1909 budget, which it viewed as an attack on the wealthy . It had not used a veto power for decades, exercising a right that had not been used for decades .
 Asquith’s Parliament Act of 1911 proposed to eliminate the right of the House of Lords to veto any financial bill . The Parliament Act was passed in 1911 and proposed to end the veto of financial legislation .
 Many Britons viewed the passage of such a bill as a final blow to noble privilege . Many Britons saw the passage as a last blow to their privilege .
 Asquith threatened to ask King George V to create enough new peerages to pass the bill . Despite opposition of intransigents, the so-called Diehards approved the Parliament Act .
 The House of Lords eliminated its own constitutional veto, completing the long revolution in British political life that had begun with the Reform Act of 1832 . Reform Act first reduced the disproportionate power of British nobles .
 In 1911, a walkout by seamen, stevedores, bargemen, and ship repairers spread rapidly in London, Manchester, and Liverpool .
 When Miners’ Federation called the first general coal strike, more than 800,000 men went out, leaving another 1.1 million without work . Miners also went out in the first coal strike .
 The miners gained a minimum wage, but when dockers failed to achieve their strike goals in 1912, Britain’s largest wave of strikes to date ended in failure .
 Many strikes ended in defeat may have helped turn British workers toward reformism . That many strikes ended up losing may have turned British workers towards parliamentary reform .
 Collective bargaining had become commonplace in the 1890s . Conciliation and arbitration boards had been established in many localities .
 Irish Home Rule, still a major political issue, now seems almost inevitable . Irish home rule, still an issue, is still a political issue .
 Irish politicians, peasants, and poets shared the burst of nationalist sentiment characteristic of the first decade of the 20th century . The burst of nationalism was characteristic of a decade of Irish nationalism .
 The Gaelic League popularized Irish music and encouraged people to speak Gaelic, not English . The League was formed by the Gaelic National League in 1903 .
 Such literature tended to romanticize the Irish as peasants made virtuous by poverty and hard work . Such literature also romanticized the Irish peasants as virtuous .
 In the collection of short stories Dubliners by James Joyce (18821941), the countryside appears as an idyllic escape from Ireland’s rapidly growing, impoverished metropolis, which had once been his home .
 If some Irish nationalists would accept nothing less than complete independence from Britain, others advocated Home Rule . Some Irish nationalists have called for complete independence .
 Century-old wounds split open again, and Ireland seemed on the verge of civil war . Century old wounds split up again again, with Ireland on verge of a civil war.
 Britain and all the powers of Europe going to war, the details of the future are left for the uncertain future . But with Britain and Europe already at war, it's unclear how much details will remain .
 Liberal Britain was swept into international events it could not control . Liberal Britain, too, was being swept into events it couldn't control. Liberal Britain too, too .
 Autocratic Russia was an absolutist state based upon an alliance of the tsar and the nobles . It presented a sharp contrast with Great Britain, with its long tradition of parliamentary rule .
 Since the sixteenth century, the Russian tsars had slowly expanded their empire through the conquest of vast stretches of territories and peoples to the south and into Asia . The Russian empire was slowly expanding its empire through conquest of territories .
 Like the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the much larger Russian Empire was multinational . The Empire of Russia was multinational, with many of the world's largest powers .
 Ethnic resistance to the empire and to the Orthodox Church, from Polish Catholics, challenged Russian domination . Ethnic resistance against Russian domination increased in recent years .
 Russia had seen no major reforms, except the emancipation of state-owned serfs in the 1840s . Since the brief and ill-fated Decembrist uprising of 1825, Russia had not seen any major reforms .
 The structure of the state remained the same, with no institutional constraints on the tsar’s authority . The state of the Russian Empire was abolished in 1903 . The Russian state was ruled by the Tsar, who died in 1905 .
 Liberal ideas from the West had begun to filter into Russia via intellectuals . Yet liberal ideas from Russia had begun filtering into the country via intellectuals, he says .
 Some peasants believed revolution inevitable, but some believed it was inevitable . The revolution was born from a society built upon serfdom, which legally bound most peasants to their lords .
 Serfdom not only was inhumane, it was also economically inefficient, says the author . Serfedom was an inhumane form of serfdom, according to the historian .
 This helped convince the tsar that only through reform and the emancipation of the serfs could Russia compete with the West . The tsar was convinced that through reform, the country could compete in the West again .
 Serfs served as intermediaries between the lords and the community . Like the gentry, they administered harsh physical punishments to serfs who failed to obey .
 Russia had a very small middle class and a tiny group of intellectuals and educated commoners . Russia's middle class was a minority of the population, but the majority was educated and educated .
 Nicholas I was obsessed with keeping Russia sealed off from Western ideas, which he blamed for the rebellion of military officers . Nicholas I became tsar just after the Decembrist revolt of 1825 .
 The Revolutions of 1848 in Western and Central Europe increased the determination of the Russian autocracy to stifle internal dissent . Russia's autocracy was determined to suppress internal dissent in the wake of the revolution .
 The ministry of education oversaw a policy of tight censorship and repression by the fearsome Third Section, the political police . The Ministry of Education oversaw tight censorship .
 Police found it impossible to seal off the colossal empire entirely . But the police were unable to seal it off entirely .
 In Eastern and eastern Central Europe, the Russian and Polish intelligentsia stood as separate social groups . They felt responsible for leading the fight for social and political change and for national independence . In Russia and Poland, they felt responsible .
 Many were gentry who could survive well enough without a university position or government post . Many of the gentry could survive without university or government posts .
 Unlike their counterparts in Western countries, they were not absorbed into the liberal professions and maintained their identity as a group . Unlike Westerners, they did not become absorbed into liberal professions .
 Some gentry were overwhelmed with guilt that they were well off while the masses suffered . During the 1830s and 1840s, some gentry felt guilty about being well-off while others suffered .
 Alexander Pushkin's mother exiled two serfs to Siberia with a nod of her head after they failed to bow as she passed by . Pushkin attacked serfdom in his short stories .
 The intelligentsia brooded in small groups, or “circles,” in Saint Petersburg and Moscow over how Russia might emerge from autocracy and relative backwardness . Steeped in a variety of intellectual currents, the intellectuals brooded .
 Several important writers emerged from this underground hotbed of intellectual and creative ferment .
 Fyodor Dostoyevsky presented brilliant psychological depictions of his characters . He adhered to populism and the Pan-Slavist cause, presented psychological depictions .
 He was sentenced to death in 1849 for participation in a reading circle that discussed socialism . He was blindfolded, placed before a firing squad, and then sent to prison in Siberia .
 He described his own suffering, but also that of Russian society, in the crucial years following defeat in the Crimean War . The Crimean War ended in defeat .
 Count Leo Tolstoy was a wealthy landowner who served in the Crimean War . Count Leo served as a Russian landowner in Crimean War. Count Leo was a realist writer .
 His monumental War and Peace depicts the struggle between his country and the West . His monumental war and peace depicts the conflict between the West and his country .
 Pyotr Chaadayev's Philosophical Letters slipped by the censors in 1836 . The letters were published in Russia in the summer of that year .
 Chaadayev presented a thinly veiled condemnation of Russia’s cultural history . The Russian president presented the speech at a state-run news conference in Moscow .
 Officials declared him to be mad, and the police hounded him for the rest of his life . The police declared him mad, he was declared mad .
 He pessimistically provoked heated discussion by suggesting that cultural backwardness would keep Russia from joining the ranks of civilized nations . He also suggested that Russia would not be able to join a civilized nation .
 Philosophical Letters opened the debate between “Westernizers” and “Slavophiles” who believed that Russia could never be reconciled with Western values . ‘Westernizer’ was a Russian intellectuals who, like Tsar Peter the Great in the seventeenth
 Most Slavophiles were social critics of autocratic Russia . Like Westernizers, they were anti-authorities in Russia .
 Russia argued that Russia could avoid the traumas of Western industrial development because in the village it already possessed the basis for a future socialist society . The village's residents say they want Russia to avoid the problems of Western development .
 The peasant commune, with a variety of communal buildings, enabled peasants to adapt their lives to unbelievably difficult conditions imposed by nature, the state, and the lords .
 The mir seemed to provide both a moral vision and revolutionary potential . It was the first time the mir appeared to have appeared to offer both moral and revolutionary possibilities .
 Vissarion Belinsky and Alexander Herzen forcefully made the case that Russia had to follow the example of the West to emerge from backwardness . The two men forcefully argued that Russia should follow the West's example of Russia's success .
 Belinsky was expelled from university for writing an article denouncing serfdom . Belinsky, the son of a doctor, had been expelled for writing the article . He was expelled for his part in the anti-serfdom article .
 Herzen vowed to carry on the work of the Decembrist martyrs . Herzen, a landowner’s son, was the son of landowner Herzen .
 Herzen was exiled for participation in a student discussion group, Herzen traveled to France . Arrested and exiled for participating in a discussion group . Herzen is now in France .
 He espoused the French Jacobin and socialist tradition and the belief in the inevitability of progress .
 Herzen expressed confidence that Russia, even while following the lead of the West, would take its own path to socialism . In From the Other Shore, Herzen wrote in voluntary exile in Paris after the Revolution of 1848 .
 The village commune already existed as a community of social equals in the face of autocratic and noble exploitation . Socialism could be easily established in Russia because the commune .
 Herzen implored Russian officials to struggle for peaceful liberal reform . Herzen: "Herzen is not satisfied with the way Russia has dealt with Russia's problems."
 Both radical reformers and the men of the tsarist state shared a suspicion of Western ‘bourgeois’ political and social life . Interestingly enough, both men of Russia shared suspicion of the West .
 The Slavophile current of reformism thus had much more in common with Alexander Herzen than Herzen . Herzen was the first Slavophile to join the reform movement .
 Slavophiles celebrated the religious faith of the Russian masses, believing that an era of social harmony and equality had existed in Russia before Peter the Great transformed the Russian state in the late seventeenth century by importing Western ideals and bureaucracy .
 The Emancipation of the Serfs was the most ambitious attempt at reform in Russia during the nineteenth century . The emancipation of the serfs in 1861 by Tsar Alexander II (ruled 18551881) was the biggest attempt in Russia .
 Serfdom dictated the organization of taxation, the army, the courts, and virtually every other institution of government . Serfsdom dictated taxes, taxes, and the army .
 Because landowners had a virtually unlimited source of labor, many showed little inclination to try to increase agricultural yields . Landowners had virtually unlimited supply of labor .
 Alexander II, who succeeded his father Nicholas I as tsar in 1855, was shocked by Russia’s defeat in the Crimean War . Alexander II succeeded Nicholas I in Russia's Crimean War victory in Crimea .
 The tsar and some of his officials began to believe that his country could not compete with the West if the serfs were not emancipated . He believed that the tsar believed his country would not be able to compete if it did not .
 Russian industrial development and effective agricultural production required free wage labor that could be taxed . Despite an increase in agricultural laborers hired for wages, agricultural laborers were not hired .
 Even if some lords had attempted to increase the productivity of their land, serfs only worked halfheartedly . Who could blame them? Even though some lords tried to increase their land productivity, Serfs worked half-heartedly .
 Serf rebellions during the first half of the century shook the empire . More than 1,500 rebellions were held during the early 1900s . The empire was founded in 1881 .
 Serfs had joined the army during the Crimean War, believing that they would be freed upon returning home . Many serfs had hoped to be freed after returning home from the war .
 The flight of thousands of serfs toward the open spaces of the east, or to Crimea, undermined the agricultural economy upon which Russia depended . Russia's agricultural economy was dependent on the serfs .
 As rumors spread that the tsar would end Russia’s “peculiar institution,” peasant rebellions became even more widespread . Many peasants considered the father of his people .
 Intellectuals continued to denounce serfdom, as did bureaucrats, at least in private . Intellectuals and bureaucrats denounced serfism, but did not denounce it in the public .
 Russia became the last European state to abolish serfdom in 1861 . On April 5, 1861, Russia was the last state in Europe to abolish the practice . Russia was also the last country to abolish slavery .
 Alexander II emancipated the 22 million serfs by a proclamation made through the Orthodox Church . Alexander II freed the serfs of 22 million by decree of Alexander II . The Serfs were emancipulated by Alexander II in 1881 .
 Peasants hailing Tsar Alexander II after the emancipation of the serfs in 1861 remained essentially in place . For two years, however, the old serfs hailing Alexander II remained essentially unchanged .
 Serfs received land through the commune, the mir, administered by male heads of household . Serfs then received land from commune through commune—the mir —which was administered by head of household. Serfs were then given land through communes .
 The state compensated nobles for their land, and peasants had to repay the state through annual redemption payments . The peasants were compensated for land by the state, and had to pay the state back .
 Many nobles lost in the emancipation, as in many cases they received bonds of little value, as well as losing the value of the serfs . Yet nobles also lost their value as they received little value from their serfs, as did serfs.
 Many peasants wanted complete and immediate freedom without compensation . Yet many peasants were disappointed by the terms of their freedom .
 Former serfs were rather like hostages to their own villages . Villagers were collectively responsible for land redemption payments and taxes .
 Instead of owing labor to the lords, the lords owed taxes to the state, which would be collected by the communes . The communes would then collect the taxes .
 They were dependent upon the village patriarchs for permission to go find work elsewhere . The children were dependent on their village fathers' permission to leave the village .
 In tsarist Russia, serfs were freed practically without bloodshed, while in the United States the slaves found freedom only after one of the most violent struggles—the Civil War —of the nineteenth century .
 The tsarist state exercised more centralized authority than did the relatively weak central government in the U.S. Despite the vast expanse of the Russian Empire, the tsarist government exercised more central authority than the United States .
 Americans considered private property more of an absolute right than did even Russian nobles, who wanted, above all, to extract services from peasants .
 The vast wealth of the Russian nobles could still pay for such services . After emancipation, the vast wealth could still be used to pay for the services .
 Alexander II rooted out some incompetent ministers and officials and asked the ministry of finance to keep regular budgets . Alexander II asked for regular budgets for ministers to be kept in charge .
 In 1864, the tsar decreed the establishment of district or village assemblies called zemstvos . The assemblies were established in the Russian Empire .
 He created similar urban institutions called dumas with the authority to assess taxes and organize public services and education . Six years later, he created similar institutions with the power to assess tax and organize services .
 The ministry of the interior controlled the z emstvos y and provincial governors ignored them, some treating their members as seditious agitators . But the interior ministry controlled the ministry .
 The zemstvos provided some political apprenticeships to ordinary people . Wealthy landowners elected the members of the members, but their votes were given more weight than those of peasants .
 Russian law had been codified in the 1830s, but the emancipation of the serfs necessitated an expanded administrative apparatus . Millions of people were now subject to the justice of the state .
 The tsar introduced regional and lower courts modeled on those of Britain, as well as public trial by jury . Russia's first tsar ruled Russia in the early 1900s .
 In 1864, for the first time, a separate judicial branch of government came into existence in Russia . The tsar could override any court decision, but the tsar was able to override any decision .
 The army was no longer made up of loyal, poorly supplied, illiterate, beaten serfs but rather of loyal and poorly supplied peasants . The army no longer consisted of loyal peasants, but of loyal serfs .
 In the past, few soldiers had been expected to survive the twenty-five-year term of service . Few soldiers had survived the service term .
 Wives of soldiers had the right to remarry three years after their husbands left for military service . Indeed, wives of soldiers could remarry after three years of service . Wives were allowed to do so even if their husbands were in the military .
 Alexander II established a Prussianstyle general staff, took steps to modernize weapons, and reduced the term of military service to six years . The term of service was six years followed by nine years in the reserves and five years in militia .
 Alexander also ordered the elimination of some forms of corporal punishment, including the brutal—and often fatal—floggings . Alexander ordered the end of the brutal and often fatal floggingings .
 The arbitrary power of the tsarist state and its Third Section police to repress dissent remained largely intact . However, the arbitrary power was still largely intact in Russia .
 Most political cases are handed over to trial by secret court-martial . Most cases are dealt with by secret military court martiales . Most of the cases are heard in secret court martial .
 Alexander restored censorship apparatus, which was temporarily weakened in the years before the emancipation, to full strength . Alexander restored the censorship apparatus to fully strength .
 The tsar had no intention of creating any kind of national representative institution that would undercut his authority . Moreover, the tsar did not intend to create a national representative .
 Russia now confronts nationalist movements among peoples within the empire . Russia now confronted nationalist movements . Russia faced nationalist movements within the Empire .
 After two years of public demonstrations, the uprising in Poland occurred in 1863 . The uprising was the result of a Polish uprising in 1863.
 Rebels proclaimed a “national government’s” government before being crushed by Russian troops . Rebels declared a ‘government’ before Russian troops crushed them . Rebels proclaimed an “government” before being defeated by Russia .
 Tsar Alexander II cracked down, ordering confiscation of some Polish lands as punishment for participating in the revolt . Closure of monasteries, closing monasties and not permitting the creation of zemstvos or juries in law courts .
 Poland is transformed into a province with all illusions of autonomy ended . Poland was transformed into an autonomous province . Poland is now a province .
 In the Ukraine, Polish national consciousness helped inspire emerging Ukrainian identity . In the country's history, Poles have been involved in Ukraine's conflict with Russia . In Ukraine, Poles were involved in the struggle for Ukrainian independence .
 In 1863 the state forbade the publication of nonfiction works in the Ukrainian language . In 1863, in response, in 1863, the state banned publication of works in Ukraine .
 In the Ottoman Balkans, Russian troops intervened on behalf of Bulgarians, who were fellow Slavs . Russian forces intervened against Bulgarians in the Ottoman Balkan region .
 Pan-Slavism enthuastically proclaimed that all Slavs were in the same family . It was a belief that all of the Slavs in the family were in one family .
 In Herzegovina, peasants had rebelled against Ottoman tax collectors and soldiers . The revolt was in response to tax collectors, soldiers and tax collectors .
 In the subsequent Russo-Turkish War, Russian army drove toward Constantinople . In the aftermath of the war, the Russian army was driven to Constantinople . The war was the first Russian invasion of Constantinople .
 AustroHungarian forces and the British navy readied to prevent the Russians from reaching the Dardanelles strait . The Russians were forced to withdraw from the strait in order to prevent them from reaching it .
 Defeat forced the Ottoman Empire to sign the Treaty of San Stefano with Russia . Defeat forces the Ottomans to sign a treaty with Russia, which was signed by Russia in 1897 .
 The other powers called for an international conference to discuss the matter . Then the other countries called for the international conference .
 Bulgaria became a principality, but remained a vassal state of the sultan of Turkey . Bulgaria is now a Principality of Bulgaria . Bulgaria was a state of Bulgaria, but was a member of Turkey's sultan .
 At Disraeli s insistence, the Congress of Berlin reduced the size of Bulgaria . Bulgaria was reduced to Bulgaria by the Treaty of Peace .
 Greece received Thessaly, which it had claimed, thus moving the Greek border to the edge of Macedonia, which is claimed by Bulgaria, Serbia, and Greece . Greece received the region, which had been claimed by the Greeks .
 There were then few Bulgarian nationalists, despite the fact that Bulgaria received its own Orthodox Church in 1870 . Not many decades earlier most educated people there had considered themselves Greek .
 The rising mood of Pan-Slavism (a movement aimed at promoting the interests and unity of all Slavs) in the Balkans alarmed Austria-Hungary and Britain . The fact that Russia would clearly dominate Bulgaria—Russians held key government posts— alarmed the British .
 Congress of Berlin recognized Serbia, Montenegro, and Romania as independent states . The Congress also recognized Serbia and Montenegro as independent countries . This reduced Ottoman territory in Europe, reducing Ottoman territory .
 Russia received a small part of Bessarabia, which allowed it to control the mouth of the Danube River . Russia also received a part of the region, which is now known as Bologia .
 Russian Pan-Slavs believed themselves aggrieved by Britain and betrayed by Bismarck’s Map 18 . But they believed themselves betrayed by the British .
 After territorial losses under the Peace of Paris, Russia turned eastward, expanding through Central Asia toward the Far East and its port at Vladivostok . The expansion of Russia began in Russia in 1903 .
 Bulgarian nationalists would increasingly feel that they had been cheated out of land in Macedonia that they believed Bulgaria had been promised by Russia . Likewise, they would also feel that the land they were promised by the Russian state .
 Alexander II then turned his attention toward Central Asia and the Middle East . Alexander II was the first king to conquer the Middle Eastern kingdom .
 Russian armies conquered Turkistan in 1859-1860, annexed Tashkent in 1866, and then reached Afghanistan . Russian armies then conquered Afghanistan and annexed Afghanistan .
 The wars that subdued the Muslim mountain people of the Caucasus ended in 1860 . The Caucasus was the heart of the region's history .
 Russian expansion seemed to impinge upon British interests near India, the gem of its empire . Russian expansion now seemed to have impinged upon British interest near India .
 The British army invaded Afghanistan in 1881 and put a puppet ruler on the throne . In 1881, Afghanistan was ruled by a puppet king . Afghanistan was invaded by the British army .
 In the Far East, Russian forces moved across Siberia, where the discovery of gold in the 1830s had attracted tens of thousands of settlers . The ever-expanding convict population gave the Russian navy access to the Pacific .
 The Russian Empire now included about one-seventh of the world’s land mass . The empire now included one-third of the globe's landmass .
 The Chinese emperors would be powerless in the face of Russian demands, as they were when confronted by those of Britain .
 Japan emerged from centuries of isolation following the Meiji Restoration in 1868 . Surprisingly, Japan proved to be a far tougher adversary for Russia .
 Nihilists and Populists replaced conscience-stricken gentry of the 1830s and 1840s as the principal critics of the Russian autocracy . Revolutionaries became the main critics of Russian autocrisy .
 They were drawn from a variety of social backgrounds, including the sons and daughters of nobles, merchants, peasants, and Orthodox priests . The children of the boys and girls were drawn into the family of wealthy people .
 They struck out on their own or in very small groups . Convinced that one spark might ignite a wave of rebellion, they struck out in small groups.
 Some Russian revolutionaries found the old debates between the Westernizers and Slavophiles irrelevant . Some Russians found the debates irrelevant .
 Nihilists accepted no dogmas, but rejected the materialist doctrines of the West . The nihilists rejected materialism, rejecting materialism and rejecting the West's doctrines .
 They disavowed many Russian traditions, and thus repudiated the Slavophiles . They also repudiated many traditions, such as those of Russian traditions .
 Some of them viewed the Orthodox Church as an institution of oppression, while others remained fervent believers . Some of the Orthodox Christians viewed the church as a form of oppression .
 Nihilists saw in the Russian masses an untapped revolutionary force, believing that the emancipation of the serfs had aided their cause by creating an independent peasantry . The emancipation of serfs helped their cause, they said .
 The nihilists believed in the power of literature to effect change . Like the conscience-stricken gentry before them, the nihilists believe in literature .
 Nikolay Chernyshevsky, a former seminarian, published What Is to Be Done? in 1863 . The novel had an enormous impact on several generations of intellectuals . In 1863, Chernysheshevsk wrote What Is To Be Done .
 Chernyshevsky described committed people of action as ‘rational egoists’ who would form a disciplined vanguard of change . He described them as “rational egoist’s” who would be a disciplined person of action .
 Karl Marx, founder of Communism. action seemed necessary to achieve their goals . Karl Marx was the founder of the Communist Party in Russia .
 In the 1860s, groups of nihilists turned to violent revolution, plotting the assassination of state officials and the tsar . The nihilists plotted to kill state officials, and the Russian tsar.
 The police infiltrated and drove groups like “Land and Freedom” and “The Organization” in 1866 . Police infiltrated and infiltrated groups like Land and Freedom, particularly after a student attempted to kill Tsar Alexander II in the 1866.
 In the meantime, Michael Bakunin became the most famous anarchist of his or any other time . Bakunin was the founder of the Bakunin movement .
 Anarchists rejected the very existence of the state, thereby quarreling bitterly with socialists, who wanted not to destroy the state but to take it over . Anarchists reject the existence of a state, with socialists wanting to take over .
 Bakunin was a professional revolutionary who complained, “Karl Marx is ruining the workers by making theorists out of them,” Bakunin left behind comfortable noble origins .
 He was a man of enormous energy who slept only a couple of hours a day, eating, drinking, and smoking cigars almost constantly, organizing and plotting between bites, gulps, and puffs . He was an enormous energy .
 He led the police on a chase from Paris in 1847 to Dresden and other stops in Central Europe in 1848, that year of revolution . He was captured in Dresden and Dresden, Dresden .
 Arrested and imprisoned in Russia, exiled to Siberia, managed to escape in 1861, reached Japan, and then arrived in London via the U.S.
 Bakunin believed that “destruction is a creative passion” and, like the nihilists, that the peasant masses had untapped revolutionary potential . Bakunin’s work was published in the Russian-language journal, The Anarchist Manifest .
 Marx insisted peasants, unlike the industrial proletariat, could never be truly revolutionary because they could not be class-conscious . Marx insisted that peasants, like the industrial workers, couldn't be revolutionary . Marx said peasants could never become revolutionary because of class consciousness .
 Anarchists rejected Marx’s belief that a militant working class organized in a centralized Tsarist Russia 71 5 party could make a revolution . Anarchists feared that Marxists wanted to replace a bourgeois state with a proletarian state .
 Sergei Nechayev held that a small, tightly organized revolutionary group could begin the peasant revolution that would sweep away autocratic oppression . Unlike revolutionary nihilists and anarchists who dreamed of a spontaneous peasant uprising, he said .
 "He has no personal interests, no affairs, sentiments, attachments, property, not even a name of his own," says President Obama .
 After murdering one of his colleagues, Nechayev was arrested and sent to prison, where he died . After murdering a colleague, he was sentenced to prison .
 The populists developed their doctrine in response to nihilism and retained the Slavophiles’ faith in the Russian peasantry . The Slavophilees’ doctrine was developed by the populists .
 They were romantic collectivists who idealized the Russian peasant community . They were idealized by the Russian peasants .
 In contrast to Chernyshevsky, the populists wanted to learn from them, says Vladimir Putin . Putin wanted to teach the peasants, says Putin . In contrast, he wanted the peasants to learn more from the peasants .
 In the early 1870s, several thousand young Russians went from Saint Petersburg and Moscow into the countryside . They had been members of circles of intellectuals, who had been . members of . circles of . intellectuals .
 Peter Lavrov lamented in his Historical Letters that the gap between intellectuals like himself and peasants had become greater over the previous decades . Many had been influenced by Peter Lavrov , who lamented in . Historical Letters .
 These upper-class Russians resembled the conscience-stricken gentry of the 1830s and 1840s . The Russian gentry resembled the gentry in the 1840s and 1830s .
 Some worried that the emancipation of the serfs might create a class of conservative peasant proprietors . Some of those attracted to direct revolutionary action worried that it might lead to conservative peasants .
 Time is running out for Russia to take its own path to socialism before capitalism became entrenched in Russia, as it had in Western Europe . Time seemed to be running out .
 In 1878, a revolutionary populist shot and wounded the governorgeneral of Saint Petersburg . St. Petersburg was the site of a revolutionary uprising .
 Another attack that year, carried out by the ‘disorganization section’ of Land and Freedom, struck down the head of the Third Section police .
 A wave of strikes by industrial workers convinced the terrorists that revolution was not far away . The terrorist group was inspired by a wave of industrial workers .
 Alexander disbanded the Third Section in the hope of placating his enemies without destroying the foundations of the autocracy . Alexander disbanded his Third Section .
 He dismissed the minister of education, whose restrictive policies on university admission were unpopular . He also announced the formation of a new consultative assembly .
 In 1881, members of “People’s Will” struck, hurling a bomb near Alexander's sleigh . Alexander was killed by the bomb in 1881 .
 When the tsar foolishly stepped from the sleigh to inspect the damage, another man threw a bomb that killed him . The tsar was killed by a bomb thrown by a man who threw it .
 The assassination did not prove to be the revolutionary spark anticipated by those who carried it out . However, the assassination did prove to not prove as revolutionary spark .
 Public opinion existed in the Russian Empire, but mass political life did not . Public opinion exists in Russia but mass politics did not exist in the Empire .
 Judicial authority shifted to the police, putting political trials in the hands of military courts . Political trials are now being held in military courts in the United States .
 "For the moment, exile was the only safe place from which to criticize the autocracy," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "I'm not going to live in exile. For the moment I'm in exile," Mandela says .
 Small colonies of political refugees, most of whom were socialists, lived in Geneva, Paris, and London .
 Professors and teachers were brought under stricter state control, and tuition was increased to discourage commoners from going to school .
 The resulting political trials may have actually helped the cause of reformers and revolutionaries . They may have served as tribunals where the autocratic regime was discussed and political issues were brought into the open . Political issues may have been discussed in the open during the trials .
 What went on in courtrooms helped shape Russian opinion, even when political trials were moved into military courts . Political trials were even moved to military courts, even though they were not military trials .
 Ukrainians, Poles, and Belorussians made up the next largest national groups . Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonians, Finns, Romanians, and Crimean Tatars, Armenians, Georgians, Azeri (in the Caucasus), and Muslim peoples of Central Asia
 Alexander ordered a vigorous campaign of ‘Russification’ in the western empire . Alexander ordered the campaign of 'Russification' in the west . Alexander was the founder of the Russian Empire in Russia .
 The tsar banned the use of languages other than Russian in school . He forbade publication in, for example, the Ukrainian language, despite the fact it was spoken by 25 million people .
 The Russian Orthodox Church launched campaigns against non-Orthodox religions, which held the allegiance of almost a third of the people of the empire . At the same time, the Russian Orthodox church launched campaigns .
 New laws enforced restrictions against Jews, who in principle where supposed to be confined to the ‘Pale of Settlement’ in Poland . In principle, Jews in Poland were supposed to stay in the Pale of Settlement . New laws were enforced against Jews .
 In 1899, the Finnish Assembly was reduced to a “consultative” voice, and Russians replaced Finns in most key administrative positions . Russians replaced most key positions in Finland .
 Poles were linked by long-standing cultural bonds, based on language and Catholicism . Poles were once united by language, Catholicism and language . Poles are now living in France, Belgium and Germany .
 National Democrats sought to build up the strength of the Polish nation within the context of the Russian Empire . Viewed Prussia and then Germany as the principal enemy .
 Polish Socialists wanted to organize another uprising, one that they hoped one day would lead to an independent and socialist Poland in which the rights of non-Poles would also be recognized . The Polish Socialist wanted one day to lead to a socialist Poland .
 By 1910, 70 percent of children aged 7 to 11 were likely to attend school for at least one year . About 60 percent of the population remained illiterate .
 In 1897, only 1 percent of the population had attended secondary school for any amount of time . In 1897 only 1 per cent of people in the U.S. attended secondary schools .
 Literacy in European Russia and the Baltic region, in particular, is rising . Literacy is rising in the region, and with it, the number of people who want reform .
 The reading public grew dramatically in Russia around the turn of the century, especially in Saint Petersburg and Moscow . The Russian city of Saint Petersburg grew in size in the early 1900s .
 Even seasonal workers and peasants migrating to Siberia began to carry books with them . Even those who traveled to Siberia carried books in their luggage .
 The taste for literature expanded from religious books and the emerging classics of the Russian literary tradition to relatively liberal magazines and newspapers . The taste of Russian literature expanded .
 Liberals had played a role in the expanding domain of Russian public opinion since the 1860s . Liberals played a key role in Russia since the emancipation of the serfs in Russia .
 The Russian army’s poor performance in the war against Turkey (18771878) proved that military reforms instituted following the Crimean War had been inadequate . Russia's poor performance against Turkey proved that the reforms were inadequate .
 Expanding opportunities for education, increased government bureaucratization, and industrial development have increased the professional middle class .
 This, combined with the expansion of heavy and light industry, and urban growth, seemed to make autocracy an anachronism . Autocracy seemed to seem to be anachronic, with the rise of urban growth .
 Liberals included a smattering of gentry, leaders of local assemblies (the zemstvos and the municipal dumas ), and, above all, members of the professional classes . Liberals included economists, agronomists, physicians, lawyers, teachers, and students .
 Some state bureaucrats sought a middle way between state and noble intransigence and revolutionary insurgency . They hoped that the tsar would grant political reforms to complement the gradual modernization of the Russian economy .
 Liberals in the Union of Liberation demanded an extension of the powers of the z emstvos y whose limited authority had been curtailed in 1890 . Liberals imagined little more than active consultation between those bodies and the tsar .
 The populist Socialist Revolutionaries became the largest radical group, with growing support among peasants . They believed they would one day overthrow the tsar and overthrow him .
 National movements developed in Poland, Finland, Ukraine, and the Baltic region . In the meantime, national movements developed .
 In the distant Muslim reaches of the empire, religion provided a new cohesiveness . Religion provided a strong sense of unity in the empire .
 They were confident that one day, though probably not in their lifetimes, the Russian proletariat would be sufficiently numerous and class-conscious to seize power . The Russians were confident they would seize power in their own lifetimes .
 The seizure of power could only occur, they believed, after a democratic revolution had successfully overthrown the Russian autocracy . But they believed this would only occur after the revolution had succeeded .
 Millions of peasants died during the famine that followed the severe drought and epidemics of 1891—1892 . Marxists claimed vindication for their view that peasants had no true revolutionary potential . Despite the terrible suffering and deaths, millions of peasants remained quiescent .
 By 1900, the tsar’s police had succeeded in disbanding most of the revolutionary groups within the empire .
 Most revolutionaries shared a belief that their country was far from revolution . Most revolutionaries believed that the revolution was not coming to an end .
 Lenin’s mother, whose family had originally been German, was the daughter of a doctor . His father served as the director of primary schools for the province and, as a result of loyal service, he obtained non-hereditary membership in the nobility . Lenin's mother was the
 Lenin briefly attended university, but was expelled for participating in a student demonstration . Lenin was expelled from university for taking part in student demonstrations . Lenin is a member of the Communist Party .
 In 1895, Lenin went to Austria, France, and Switzerland, meeting political exiles and socialists from many countries . Lenin's visit to Austria and Switzerland was the first time he went to Switzerland and Austria .
 Two years later, he was charged with organizing and writing articles in a clandestine newspaper and exiled to Siberia . Back in Saint Petersburg two years later he was arrested and exiled .
 Lenin’s few interests outside of politics and revolution included chess, hunting, bicycling, and mountain hiking . Lenin's few interests included chess and hunting .
 He viewed recreational activities as interfering with revolutionary struggle . But he viewed most recreational activities, even simple conversation, as interfering .
 Lenin combined a powerful ability to theorize with a facility for adapting to changing circumstances . Lenin was a genius who could theorize and adapt quickly to the world's most pressing issues .
 His steely resolve would carry him to cold fury when colleagues or rivals failed to agree with him . He would carry out a cold fury if colleagues or opponents disagreed with him, he said .
 A vigorous polemicist, he could be impatient and churlish in speech, cutting and sarcastic with his potent pen . He could also be impatient, churish in speech . He was impatient and sarcastic in speech and cutting with his pen .
 Lenin established what would become the basic tenets of a new revolutionary party . In this pamphlet, Lenin established the tenets of the party . The pamphlet was published by Chernyshevsky in 1903 .
 Lenin believed Marxist analysis could be applied to a backward, authoritarian nation with a relatively undeveloped working class and a small bourgeoisie . Lenin believed that Marxist analysis was applied to an authoritarian nation .
 He rejected all compromise with liberals and reform socialists, viewing as self-defeating the struggle of workers for small economic gains . He viewed the struggle as crumbs tossed from the posh table of the ruling class .
 Lenin believed that only a minority of workers would achieve consciousness and that these should join with intellectuals in a party that would direct the masses . Lenin rejected the common Marxist view that social experiences of workers lead them to revolutionary consciousness .
 Mensheviks believed that a proletarian revolution lay in the future, but not until a bourgeois uprising had first succeeded in overthrowing the tsarist state . The Menshevik believed that the revolution would take place only after the bourgeois uprising overthrowing tsarist government .
 Mensheviks believed that their role was to mobilize support for their party through propaganda, while undertaking timely alliances with liberal groups . Menshevik believed that they would mobilize support through propaganda .
 Lenin's supporters objected to the high degree of party centralization on Lenin's orders . Lenin insisted on centralization of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Russian Empire lurched toward war with Japan . The Russo-Japanese War was the first Russian-Japanese war .
 The acquisition of Manchuria would permit Russia to construct a more direct rail link to the ice-free Russian port of Vladivostok . That of Korea would protect the new port from possible attack and provide more ports .
 By the Treaty of Shimonoseki , the victorious Japanese took the island of Formosa and gained Chinese recognition of Korea’s independence .
 Russia viewed the expansion of Japanese interests in the Far East with concern . Russia was concerned about Japan's expansion of its own territory in Asia .
 Tsar Nicholas II signed a treaty with China and obtained a concession to build the Manchurian railway and to construct a port at Port Arthur . Port Arthur on the tip of the Liaodong peninsula provided a source of conflict between Japan and Russia .
 Japan, in turn, signed a treaty in 1902 with Great Britain, Russia’s rival for influence in Afghanistan . Japan signed the treaty with Britain in 1902, which was a treaty with Russia's rival . Japan and Great Britain signed similar treaties in 1902 .
 Britain would stay neutral if Japan and Russia went to war against each other . Britain would remain neutral if Russia and Japan went to go on to war .
 Britain would join Japan in any conflict that allied Russia with any other power in a war against Japan . But Britain would not join Russia if Russia allied with other nations in a conflict against Japan.
 Japanese torpedo boats launched a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur, destroying a number of ships while the Japanese army drove Russian forces away on land . In February 1904, the Japanese attacked Russian ships with torpedo boats and the Russian army drove them away .
 In March 1905, Japanese troops defeated the Russians in the bloody Battle of Mukden . The bloody battle was the first time two armies faced each other across trenches dug for protection .
 Two months later, the Japanese navy pounced on the Russian fleet . The Russian fleet had spent nine months at sea . The Japanese navy seized the Russian ships .
 The Battle of Tsushima ended with nineteen Russian ships sunk, five captured, and six forced to neutral ports . Six Russian ships were forced into neutral ports after the battle .
 Russian army was poorly commanded and fought with outdated artillery and rifles . The Russian army fought in Russia in the early 1900s . Russian soldiers were poorly commanded .
 Japan took over Russia’s lease of the Liaodong peninsula and Chinese concessions in Manchuria . The Treaty of Portsmouth (New Hampshire) was signed in September 1905 at a conference hastily arranged by President Theodore Roosevelt .
 Many of the tsar’s subjects had blamed government inaction for the murderous famine of 1891-1892, which had captured world attention . The Revolution of 1905 was the first Russian revolution since the Russian Revolution in 1903 .
 In 1902, peasants attacked noble property in some districts, and a wave of industrial strikes followed the next year . The strikes were the result of peasants attacking noble property . The strike was the first industrial strike in France since 1900 .
 Liberals organized support for political reform by sponsoring banquets similar to those employed by French republicans just before the Revolution of 1848 . Liberals organized a similar banquet to the French republics .
 Dissent mounted against forced Russification among subject nationalities, most notably the Poles and the Finns . Poles and Finns were among those who protested against the annexation of Crimea .
 Marxist groups were particularly active in Poland, where they faced anti-Semitism and bloody pogroms . The issue of Polish nationalism versus internationalism was debated in Poland .
 Shocking defeats in the distant Russo-Japanese War increased calls for liberal reform . Calls for liberal reforms increased in the 1930s and 1940s . Reformers were defeated in Russia-era-era Russia .
 A wide-ranging social and political alliance for change extended across classes . The alliance was formed across classes, including those of the poor .
 For the first time, liberals and socialists (except for Bolsheviks and Mensheviks), gentry, intellectuals, professionals, and workers, came together in common opposition to autocracy, embracing a loose ideology of reform . Both Russians and non-Russians came together, embracing an ideology
 Nicholas II appointed a more moderate successor in the hope of calming dissent . After the assassination of his minister of the interior in July 1904 by a Socialist Revolutionary, Nicholas II . Nicholas II's successor was the prime minister of interior .
 The tsar allowed a national congress of zemstvos and dumas to take place . Moreover, the tsar was allowed to take part in the national congress .
 In the meantime, the Russian labor movement remained small and faced constant police harassment . In the 1980s, the labor movement in Russia was still small .
 At the turn of the century, the police had authorized government-controlled labor associations in the hope of undercutting revolutionaries by encouraging workers to concentrate on economic grievances and achieve small victories through negotiation or conciliation .
 Workers in the U.S. had to take part in a series of halfway-means . But such halfway measures gave workers useful organizational experience . Workers say it was a good learning opportunity .
 In January 1905, a strike by 100,000 factory workers brought Saint Petersburg to a standstill . The strike was the result of a dispute between the city's factory workers and the government .
 On January 22, an Orthodox priest, Father Gapon, led a march of workers to the tsar’s Winter Palace, carrying a petition asking for ‘justice’ and political reform . The march was led by a priest who asked for “justice” and
 When the marchers locked arms and refused an order to disperse, a commander barked out the order to fire . The marchers were ordered to disperse when they refused to comply .
 Bolsheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries encouraged more strikes . The countryside was particularly influential in the countryside .
 A violent faction of the Socialist Revolutionaries carried out a series of terrorist attacks and assassinations . The violent faction carried out several terrorist attacks .
 Strikes spread to Poland, where they were bolstered by the nationalist movement, and to Ukraine, Latvia, and Estonia . Strikes also spread to Latvia, Estonia, Estonia and Ukraine .
 In some parts of Russia and in the Baltic provinces, peasants attacked the homes of wealthy landowners . peasants attacked wealthy landowners' homes in some areas of Russia .
 In southeastern borderlands, Muslim leaders announce formation of an All-Russian Muslim League . Muslim leaders announced the formation of the league in Russia's southeastern borderland .
 Workers began organizing trade unions in huge numbers and newspapers appeared in defiance of censorship . Newspapers appeared in open defiance of censors .
 In June, sailors on the battleship Potemkin mutinied on the Black Sea, killing the captain and several officers . The ship's captain was killed in the mutiny, killing him and several others .
 Nicholas appointed Sergei Witte (18491915) as prime minister . The bulk of the army was fighting the Japanese in Manchuria . Witte was the prime minister of the Russian Empire .
 Witte was eager to make Russia a modern industrial power . Witte believed that he could do so if the tsar granted minimal reforms .
 He persuaded Nicholas to rescind redemption payments to the state for land acquired when serfs were emancipated in 1861 . He also campaigned to allow Poles and Lithuanians to use their own languages .
 Some state officials and most nobles viewed these particular reforms as unacceptable, associating them with the parliamentary regimes of the West . Some of the reforms were seen as unacceptable by state officials .
 Progressive nobles and businessmen were encouraged by the sudden, unexpected turn of events . But progressive nobles and businessman were encouraged .
 They demanded constitutional rule, insisting that even the promised reforms left the essential structures of autocracy unchanged . They insisted that even promised reforms had to be left unchanged .
 Mensheviks championed the establishment of Saint Petersburg workers’ councils, known as soviets . In the meantime, the Menshevik had championed the creation of Saint . Petersburg workers' councils known as 'soviets'
 Neighborhood councils were made up of delegates from factories, shops, trade unions, and political parties . Locals helped organize strikes, which became legal in December .
 The Mensheviks now were willing to collaborate with the liberals to bring further reforms to workers and peasants . Menshevik was willing to work with liberals in order to get further reforms .
 A violent uprising in Moscow in December 1905 brought on vigorous counter-revolution . The uprising in the Russian capital was a violent uprising against the government .
 Army units returning from Manchuria crushed nationalist demonstrations in Poland and Georgia . They brutally restored order in the Russian and Ukrainian countryside . Russia and Ukraine were devastated by the fall of communism .
 In the Baltic provinces of Latvia and Estonia, punitive expeditions ordered by the tsar killed over 1,000 people while crushing strikes and rural unrest . The tsar ordered the punitive expedition in the Baltic province of Latvia and Estonia .
 Fanatical Russian nationalists known as the Black Hundreds unleashed a wave of violence against Jews . Violence against Jews (and against Russian, German, and Polish property owners, as well) lasted more than a year .
 The Black Hundreds were led by small traders and agricultural laborers who feared that economic change would cost them what limited security they had . Police who opposed political reform opposed the Black Hundreds .
 Jews could be conveniently blamed for agitating against autocratic rule . Jews could also be blamed for the rise in anti-Semitism in the Middle East .
 The Duma met for the first time in April 1906 . The first meeting took place in 1906 .
 The majority of the Duma members were Kadets . The Marxist Mensheviks and Bolsheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries refused to participate in the election . The most Kadets were members of the Communist Party .
 With members to be drawn from the high clergy, the army, or other loyal institutions, it would counteract the influence of the Duma .
 The tsar then dismissed Witte and announced that he would promulgate any decree he pleased while the Duma was not in session . Witte was dismissed by the tsar . He then announced he would promulgate any decree while the Duma was in session .
 When the Kadets petitioned Nicholas to abolish the State Council, make ministers responsible to the Duma, and turn over some noble estates to the peasants, he dissolved the first Duma . Nicholas abolished the first .
 The Revolution of 1905 ended in failure, but its memory could not be effaced . The Revolution ended in 1905, but the memory of the revolution was never effaced.
 The tsar had been forced to grant a parliament and the promise of limited civil rights . He was forced to give the tsar a parliament in return for his promise of a parliament .
 Many people within the Russian professional class, particularly bureaucrats and lawyers, remained sympathetic to the reforms after they had been undone by the tsar .
 The Revolution of 1905 heightened the divisions among exiled Russian socialists . It was the first Russian revolution since the revolution in 1903 .
 Mensheviks contended that compromise with bourgeois reformers would increase socialist support within Russia . Menshevik claimed compromise would increase support for the Communist Party .
 Lenin and the Bolsheviks believed that the failed revolution had clearly demonstrated that the Russian proletariat in the large cities was already a revolutionary force . The first stage of Marx’s promised revolution could be achieved if workers and peasants joined together .
 Nicholas II named Peter Stolypin prime minister, and in June 1907 ordered the dissolution of a second elected Duma . The second Duma was more conservative than the first Duma, though it was a more conservative government .
 Tsar Nicholas II established military field courts in Russia . Tsar established military court courts .
 This law resulted in nearly 1,000 hangings before it expired six months later . The law was passed by Congress six months after it expired .
 A third Duma was elected in 1907 that was more to the tsar’s liking . Nicholas changed the rules of election to increase the power of noble votes at the expense of peasants and workers .
 It was dominated by the “Octobrists, who believed that the tsar’s promises in the October Manifesto of 1905 represented sufficient reform . The Octobrists wanted to stop at that .
 Stolypin hoped to defuse political intensity of the agrarian question and reduce unrest without confiscation of land owned by the gentry . But he nonetheless undertook rural reforms beginning in 1906 .
 His goal was to create a class of prosperous peasants while increasing agricultural production by allowing peasants to leave their villages and set up independent farms . His goal is to create an economic class of peasants .
 He hoped enclosure of common lands and consolidation of holdings would expand the number of peasant plots . He hoped that the enclosure would expand number of plots .
 A considerable amount of land passed from communal to private ownership . Indeed, a lot of land was given to private owners .
 Even peasants with fairly large plots of land still had to struggle to survive . Yet prices for farm products fell, and even peasants with a large plot of land struggled to survive.
 By 1914 more than 5 million Russians had crossed the Ural Mountains, most of them peasants attracted by the possibility of land . Siberia thus became something of the equivalent of the American West .
 The minister may have been killed with the approval of the tsar at the instigation of noble advisers . The tsar considered him too liberal and rejected agrarian reforms .
 A surge of industrial strikes and peasant violence over the next three years demonstrated continued popular dissatisfaction . A surge in industrial strikes, peasant violence continued to demonstrate continued public dissatisfaction .
 Liberals, Socialist Revolutionaries, and Menshevik and Bolshevik Social Democrats mobilized support against the regime . With political parties now legal, although facing police constraints, and the press in principle free, they mobilized support .
 Growing popularity of Bolsheviks among organized urban workers reflects impatience with the path of moderate reform . Bolsheviks gained popularity in trade union elections in the 1930s and 1940s .
 France's traditionally most revolutionary country remained France . Second Empire and Third Republic were France's most revolutionary .
 Louis Napoleon Bonaparte completed his destruction of the Second Republic with his coup d’etat on December 2, 1851 . Napoleon was born in 1848 .
 Napoleon III proclaimed himself emperor as Napoleon III in 1881 . The following year he proclaimed himself Emperor Napoleon III . Napoleon III was Napoleon's first emperor .
 Napoleon III consistently demonstrated considerable energy when it came to behind-the-scenes intrigue and the pursuit of women . Napoleon III was the son of Napoleon Bonaparte, the grandson of Napoleon III .
 During the Second Empire, wealthy businessmen became the equivalent of an imperial aristocracy in France . Money stood as the measure of value that blue blood had been in the early modern period .
 Enjoying access to the emperor, some of the emperor lived in Parisian residences and owned country houses . Some of them would have made eighteenth-century aristocrats drool with envy .
 France was the only European power with universal male suffrage, however distorted by government pressure . France was one of Europe's only countries to have universal male voting rights .
 The emperor promoted economic growth, encouraged urban rebuilding projects . He created institutions that provided credit, and constructed more railways . The emperor encouraged urban reconstruction projects .
 Napoleon III initiated the ‘liberal empire,’ encouraging a series of reforms . Napoleon III authorized a liberal trade treaty with Britain in 1860 and permitted the legalization of strikes in 1864 .
 Napoleon III ruled with the help of a handful of worldly, trusted cronies who held ministries or who served on the Council of State . Napoleon III's cronies included ministers, officials and members of the Council .
 Ministers were responsible to the emperor, who alone could propose legislation . Ministers are responsible for the emperor's decisions .
 The state clamped down on the remnants of political opposition, maintained press censorship . The state sponsored ‘official’ candidates in the elections held every six years for the Legislative Body, the lower house of the National Assembly .
 Napoleon III was Napoleon III, who promoted economic growth . Napoleon III promised to maintain social and political order . Napoleon II was Napoleon's first king .
 The French state, more than its decentralized British counterpart, could buy political support by dispensing patronage, through prefects, the most powerful local officials . The Second Empire further centralized economic and political power in France .
 Legitimists were supporters of the Bourbon royal family and its exiled pretender, the count of Chambord . A good many Legitims supported the emperor, but many of them did not support him .
 The clergy remained grateful that during the Second Republic over which Napoleon had presided as president and then destroyed, the Falloux Law of 1850 had returned much control over education to them . The clergy was grateful for their control of education in France .
 Never before had any state taken such a direct role in stimulating the economy through encouragement and investment . The UK has invested heavily in the country's economy .
 Government officials coordinated the efforts of the ministries of agriculture, commerce, and public works, while keeping in close touch with wealthy bankers and industrialists who backed the regime .
 French entrepreneurs have often found it difficult to raise investment capital . French entrepreneurs had often been often found to find it hard to raise money for their businesses .
 Most companies remained family concerns, hesitant to open investment possibilities to outsiders . Most companies remain family concerns .
 In 1852, the Pereire brothers created the Credit Mobilier, a French investment bank . The brothers, who were Protestants, were Protestants like many many French bankers .
 Until its collapse in 1867, it provided loans to businessmen . Selling shares to raise capital until its collapse, it sold shares to sell capital .
 Other smaller deposit banks, too, attracted large and medium-sized investors .
 Napoleon Ill’s pet project, a mortgage bank, aided the development of the agricultural sector . A mortgage bank was another one of Napoleon Ill's pet projects . Napoleon Ill helped develop the country's agricultural industry .
 Some major French industries reached a scale of production and concentration comparable to that of their British rivals . At the same time, some major French companies reached similar levels of production .
 Most French industries remained relatively small in scale, producing luxury goods such as gloves, umbrellas, silk, jewelry, jewelry and fine furniture . But most French industries remain relatively small, producing small amounts of luxury goods .
 French investors financed the construction of Russian, Spanish, and Italian railroads . They also provided timely loans to Portugal, Austria-Hungary, and Mexico . The railroads were built by French investors .
 Ferdinand de Lesseps raised enough money through loans to finance the construction of his brainchild, the Suez Canal . The canal opened with suitable fanfare in 1869, but was never completed .
 State encouragement of economic development may be most clearly seen in the French railways . State encouragement for economic development can be seen in France's railways .
 The Bank of France had seventy-four branches by 1870 . It provided financial aid to companies that completed the main railway lines that helped stimulate the country's commercial and manufacturing boom .
 Between 1851 and 1869, the railway network expanded by five times, reaching almost 10,000 miles of track . The railway network was expanded five times between 1851-1869 .
 President Obama would diffuse opposition by implementing some of the very reforms his opponents on the left desired . He would have to implement those reforms to diffuse opposition .
 Five republicans had been elected to the Legislative Corps two years earlier . The republicans were elected to a Legislative Corps .
 France and Britain signed a liberal trade agreement lowering tariff barriers between the two nations in 2010 . That same year, the French and British trade agreement lowered tariff barriers .
 Cobden-Chevalier Treaty of 1860 was the idea of the emperor himself and an adviser, Michel Chevalier, who had been a utopian socialist as a young man . In France, the treaty was the result of a treaty between the emperor and a socialist adviser .
 Treaty provided sliding scale on import duties, aiding Bordeaux wine producers selling to England . Treaty provided a sliding scale of import duties on wine imports .
 The National Assembly received the right to approve the imperial budget . The imperial budget was approved by the National Assembly . The budget is the first of its kind .
 The liberalization of political institutions helped republicans increase their support . Republicans increased their support in the late 1980s .
 Press controls relaxed, and the right to strike was established in 1864 . Press controls were relaxed and the rights to strike were established in 1863 .
 In 1864, several French artisans were among the founders in London of the first international workers’ organization, the First International . The First International was formed in hopes of strengthening socialist movements within individual countries .
 The French army defeated the Austrians in northern Italy at Magenta and Solferino . Emperor himself commanded the French troops on horseback, if at a safe distance from the actual fighting .
 By the Treaty of Turin, France gained Savoy and Nice, both long coveted . France gained the title of Nice and Savoy . The treaty was signed in 1815 .
 Napoleon III ordered the expansion of French control in Senegal and sent troops to protect missionaries in Lebanon and distant Indochina . Napoleon III then ordered the annexation of CochinChina as a colony, annexing Cochin China .
 An imperial adventure in Mexico, which was in the midst of a civil war, ended in fiasco . An imperial venture in Mexico ended in a fiasco .
 Emperor believed that Mexico could become a profitable market for French exports of textiles and wine . In 1861 he sent troops to protect French financial interests there .
 Napoleon III proclaimed Austrian Archduke Maximilian to be emperor of Mexico in 1864 . Napoleon III declared his protege to be Emperor of Mexico . Napoleon's protege was the brother of Habsburg emperor Francis Joseph, brother of Francis Joseph .
 The U.S. protested that French intervention represented a violation of the Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine had declared the Western Hemisphere off limits to European powers .
 Three years later, Mexican patriots defeated the French forces, who disembarked, leaving Napoleon Ill’s hapless protege to his own devices . Napoleon Ill was left to be left alone in Mexico .
 Maximilian was executed in June 1867, a blow to the French emperor’s international prestige . The French emperor was executed by the French army in 1867 .
 A year earlier, the French emperor had made an error in foreign policy that would come back to haunt him . A year later, he had made a decision to abandon the French empire .
 As Prussia and Austria drew closer to war in 1866, Napoleon III believed that Habsburg Austria would prevail . Napoleon III thought that Prussia would prevail in the war .
 Bismarck quickly rejected Napoleon Ill’s demand that Prussia compensate France with Rhineland territory . Napoleon Ill demanded Prussia compensated France with French territory . Bismartck rejected Napoleon's demand .
 In June 1868, the French emperor’s authorization of a law permitting freedom o assembly helped mobilize opposition among monarchists, republicans, an< socialists alike .
 Napoleon Ill’s advisers wondered aloud if he had not sowi the seeds of imperial demise by granting liberal reforms . Napoleon Ill's advisers wondered if he hadn’t given liberal reforms to the French Empire .
 The emperor invited opponents to join the government an < to begin drafting a more liberal constitution . Emperor invited opponents of the government to join him to draft a new constitution .
 Napoleon III thei thei reverted to a plebiscite, with a craftily worded statement in May 1870 . Those who wanted more extensive changes were forced to abstain, o to vote ‘yes’ as if they approved of the emperor’s policies .
 The plebiscite, ii which ‘yes’ overwhelmed ‘no,” thus partially concealed the depth of oppo sition to imperial policies . The vote, ii . which “yes” overwhelmed “no, thus . partially concealed . the depth
 Napoleon III manifested a bizarre combination of perceptiv foresight and bad judgment . Napoleon III was Napoleon III of Napoleon III, who died in 1903 .
 Napoleon III threatened war witl Prussia if it did not withdraw the Hohenzollern candidacy, which risked, i successful, leaving France with two sides . Prussia was forced to withdraw the candidacy .
 In July 1870, the French ambassador harangued Prussian King William I in a garden in the spa town of Ems . The French ambassador was angry at the king in July 1870 .
 After learning that the Prussian army was ready to fight, Bismarck embellished the king’s telegram . The Ems Dispatch made the graceless diplomacy of the French seem positively insulting . The French were not impressed by the telegram.
 Bismarck’s expectation that it would “have the effect of a red cloth on the Gallic bull” was justified . The incident increased popular support for war against France, which was declared war on July 19, 1870 .
 Wiirttemberg, Hesse, Baden, and Bavaria joined the Prussian side . Wiirittemberg and Hesse also joined the side .
 The Franco-Prussian War was a French debacle . The Siege of Paris was the result of a French invasion of Germany .
 Prussian armies moved quickly into northeastern France . French troops slowly mobilized as French troops mobilized . Prussian forces moved quickly to northeastern France.
 The speed of the Prussian attack and the competence of its generals more than made up for superior French rifles and machine guns . The speed and competence of Prussian generals made it more than make up for the superior French guns .
 In August, Prussian troops cut off the fortress of Metz from the rest of France . Prussian forces cut off Metz fortress from rest of the country .
 Marshal Marie-Edme de MacMahon moved north in an attempt to relieve Metz, but was cut off by the Prussians . The Prussian army cut him off .
 At the end of August, the main French force foolishly retreated to the fortress town of Sedan not far from the Belgian border . The main French forces retreated to Sedan, near the Belgium border .
 Sedan was soon surrounded by Prussians, who captured the emperor . Sedan became so sick that he could barely sit on his horse . The emperor was so sick he was captured by the Prussian .
 Crowds proclaimed a republic in Paris on September 4, 1870, and a provisional government was formed . In Paris crowds proclaimed the republic, and the provisional government formed .
 The Prussian army besieged Paris, its population swollen with soldiers and national guardsmen . The French capital was occupied by the Prussian Army of the Second World War .
 As hunger invaded the capital, dogs and cats disappeared from the streets, finding their way to some of the finest tables in the capital .
 Zoo animals, too, were eaten, including two elephants admired by generations of Parisian children . Zoo animals were eaten in Parisian restaurants, including elephants .
 An attempt to break through the Prussian lines north of the city at the end of October failed miserably . The Prussian forces were unable to reach the city .
 Louis-Adolphe Thiers wanted Bismarck's help in facilitating the establishment of a very conservative republic at the war’s conclusion, or even a monarchy . In the meantime, Thiers had served as Orleanist prime minister during the 1830s . Bism
 The provisional government negotiated with Bismarck in the hope of obtaining an armistice on favorable terms . The provisional Government negotiated with the provisional government in hope of a peace deal .
 Bismarck and Thiers signed an armistice on January 28, 1871, ten days after the proclamation of the German Empire at Versailles . The two sides signed a peace treaty in 1871 .
 Some French leaders protested, demanding that the French army keep fighting . The French army is still fighting in Afghanistan .
 In February 1871, French voters elected a monarchist-dominated National Assembly . The assembly was charged with making peace with Prussia and with establishing a new government .
 The newly elected National Assembly officially elected Thiers to be chief executive of the provisional government . Thiers will be the first French president to take office in the country .
 By signing the Treaty of Frankfurt, France lost Alsace and some of Lorraine to the new German Empire . France lost some of the Alsatian population to the German Empire in the early 1900s .
 Prussian troops would occupy Paris and retain garrisons in eastern France until a large indemnity had been paid off . The French capital would be occupied by Prussian forces until the indemnity was paid .
 The National Assembly s choice of Versailles, the home of the Bourbon monarchs, as the temporary capital stirred popular anger and suspicion . The choice has stirred anger, suspicion and anger at the National Assembly .
 Parisians, who had held out against the Prussians for four months, resented the ease with which the provinces seemed to capitulate . Parisians resented that the provinces had capitulated .
 Wealthy Parisians who had left Paris at the beginning of the siege returned from the safety of the countryside . Wealthy people who had fled the city had returned to the country .
 Landlords insist that back rents be paid immediately, angering renters . Many were unemployed workers who had managed to hang on during the siege . Landlords insisted that renters should be paid back immediately .
 Early in the morning on March 18, 1871, Thiers sent a small detachment of troops to the butte of Montmartre in Paris to seize cannon that had belonged to the National Guard, many of whose members were socialists, during the siege .
 Women at the market alerted the neighborhood; a crowd surrounded the detachment and put two generals up against the wall and shot them . The men were killed by a crowd of soldiers in the town .
 Jacobins, socialists, and republicans wanted Paris to become again the capital of an anticlerical republic . The French capital was once a capital of a socialist republic .
 Communards had been democratic-socialist activists during the Second Republic . Some Communards were followers of the revolutionary Auguste Blanqui .
 There were also many anarchists, who hoped that independent Paris would serve as a model for a society of producers existing without the tyranny of the state .
 Communards organized Paris’s defense and enacted a number of significant social reforms . The Communards were the first French communists to organize Paris's defense and enact significant reforms .
 A cartoon dedicated to the National Guard during the Paris Commune during the Commune . The Commune established nurseries for working mothers and established a Labor Exchange .
 The role of women in the Commune exceeded that of any previous revolutionary movement in France . The Commune recognized women’s unions .
 Given the severity of the circumstances, with cannon shelling the city, it is remarkable how much the Communards accomplished in such a short time . The Communards were able to capture the city from cannon shelling .
 Uprisings occurred in Lyon, Marseille, and several other towns . Much smaller uprisings also occurred in Marseille and Lyon .
 These movements reflected a combination of middle-class dissatisfaction with Bonapartist centralization, republican enthusiasm, and socialist mobilization .
 The provinces provided no help to the Paris Commune, but rather, conservative regions sent volunteers to fight for the Versailles forces .
 On May 21, 1871, troops of Thiers’s Versailles government poured into Paris through the western gates . The western gates were left open for them by monarchist sympathizers .
 Thiers’s army, aided by boulevards, overwhelmed neighborhood after neighborhood, blasting through barricades . During the ‘bloody week’ that followed, Thiers's army overwhelmed neighborhoods after neighborhood .
 Communards executed some hostages, including the archbishop of Paris . Communards retaliated by executing some hostages . Archbishop of Paris was executed by the Communards .
 Parisians were summarily executed or dispatched after hurried military trials . About 15,000 to 25,000 Parisians died or were executed . The French capital was ruled by the French Revolution .
 To conservatives, the Commune offered a frightening glimpse of plebeian insurrection, affirming their resolve to oppose movements for social and political change with force with force .
 The National Assembly elected in February 1871 had a monarchist majority . The French National Assembly was elected in 1871 . It was the first National Assembly to be elected in republican France .
 The republic had to overcome dramatic challenges from the far right, which rejected parliamentary rule . Alsace-Lorraine was ruled by the French Republic in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Count of Chambord was a lazy man of mediocre intelligence who lived in an Austrian castle . He amused himself by playing cards and telling dirty jokes and anti-Semitic stories to his cronies .
 Chambord seemed to hold the upper hand, for his was the old Bourbon royal line . Yet Chambard seemed to seem to hold an upper hand .
 A compromise, by which Chambord would become king with the count of Paris as his heir, fell through . The former refused to be king under the tricolor flag, which he identified with the French Revolution . A compromise fell through when he refused to become king .
 Republicans opposed the political domination of the “notables,” the wealthiest men in France . Republicans opposed political domination by the ‘notables’ of the wealthiest people in France.
 The republic found a groundswell of support from those Gambetta called “the new social strata” The shopkeepers, cafe owners, prosperous peasants, craftsmen, and schoolteachers supported the republic . The republic was formed from a group of shopkeepers and cafe owners
 The charismatic Gambetta’s whistlestop tours of the provinces reflected the rise of mass politics in France . Gambetta toured the provinces of France in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Thier resigned under monarchist pressure as provisional head of state in 1873 . Thiers resigned as provisional president of France under royalist pressure .
 Prussian troops marched out of France that year after the French government finished paying off the war indemnity, raised by loans and a public subscription . The French government paid off the indemnity by loans, public subscription, raising by loans .
 The monarchists, seeing their majority in the National Assembly eroding with each by-election, elected Marshal MacMahon . He was a hero of the Crimean War and the Italian War of 1859, who favored a monarchist restoration .
 The new government of “Moral Order,” closely tied to the Church, undertook a massive purge of republican mayors, censored newspapers, closed hundreds of cafes, and banned public celebration of the French Revolution on July 14 .
 The government of France was a republic with monarchist political institutions . For the moment, the government was in fact a monarchist state . The French government was monarchist .
 The Wallon Amendment was passed by the National Assembly by one vote in January 1874 . In 1874, the president of the Republic would be elected by the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies .
 The lower house drafted a republican constitution in 1875, but one that seemed so vague that the state could easily have been converted into a monarchy . The constitution was drafted by the lower house of the House of Representatives .
 Universal male suffrage determined the composition of the Chamber of Deputies . The chamber was elected by a single chamber of deputies in 1903 .
 Local notables would be the most likely beneficiaries from last-minute political negotiations before the second ballot in each election . This gave monarchists an advantage, as local notables were most likely to benefit from last minute political negotiations .
 The Senate would be elected indirectly through a system that would be radically tilted to over-represent conservative rural interests . The system would be heavily tilted to represent rural interests, according to the proposal .
 More than twice as many republicans were elected as monarchists to the Chamber of Deputies in 1876 . Despite heavy-handed governmental and ecclesiastical pressure on voters, republicans elected twice as monarchs .
 MacMahon was forced to select a moderate republican, Jules Simon, as premier . Simon was the first republican premier of the country to be elected .
 The republican majority in the National Assembly sought to limit the power of the president who was, after all, a monarchist . The majority in France's National Assembly voted against the move .
 MacMahon initiated a political crisis in 1877 by forcing Simon’s resignation and naming a monarchist in his place . In 1877, Simon was forced to resign and replaced by the new monarchist .
 He embarked, with the help of the Church, on a bitter campaign to defeat Gambetta . Gambetta and the republicans were defeated by the Church .
 France’s voters returned republicans again, although with a smaller majority . However, France's voters voted for the first time in four years . France's most recent presidential election was in 1998 .
 republicans feared that some Napoleonic character might try to impose his rule . Henceforth, the role of the executive authority would be weak . The role was weak because republics feared that such a threat lay ahead .
 The Chamber of Deputies would dominate the political life of the French Third Republic . With the constitutional privilege of dismissing government cabinets that had lost the confidence of the majority of its members, the chamber of deputies would dominate political life . The chamber would have the power to dismiss cabinets that lost the
 In 1881, the Chamber of Deputies passed a bill granting full amnesty to exiled Communards . The Communards were granted full amnesty in 1881 . The bill was passed by the Chamber Deputies of the Deputies .
 The governments of the new republic reflected the center of the political spectrum, that of the “Opportunists” Many of them accepted a very conservative republic while preferring something more to the center . The Third Republic .
 The Opportunists retained the support of peasants by implementing high agricultural tariffs . Resolved to hold the center against the monarchists and the Church on the right, and the anticlerical Radicals .
 Meline Tariff, supported by industrialists and farmers, went into effect in 1892 . Tariff supported industrialists, farmers and industrialists supported by farmers .
 The president served as something of a chairman of the board to the Chamber of Deputies . The president of the chamber was also a member of the Senate .
 "He shook hands with everybody, intrigued pleasantly, and helped form coalitions," he said . He shook hands and intrigued pleasantly .
 Governments came and went, giving an exaggerated image of parliamentary instability and impotence . Governments come and go, giving the image of political instability, according to the BBC .
 The educational reforms of the 1880s had the goal of making France more literate and more republican . Because the republic had only gradually taken root in the 1870s, the reforms were strongly contested by conservatives .
 Jules Ferry sponsored laws that made primary education free and obligatory . Ferry was a pioneer of education in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Some priests and nuns stayed on to teach in what were technically lay schools . The laicization of public schools ensured the animosity of many prelates against the ‘godless” republic .
 During the 1880s the parliamentary center began to melt under pressure from right and left . General Boulanger and Captain Dreyfus were both assassinated by the Nazis .
 Bonapartists emerged from obscurity to tout Napoleon Ill’s cousin, Prince Napoleon Bonaparte, as a potential savior . Napoleon's cousin was Prince Napoleon Napoleon Napoleon . Napoleon was Napoleon's son .
 Some nationalists began to think that the republic was too weak to ever recapture Alsace and much of Lorraine from Germany . Some nationalists thought that the Republic of France would never be able to recapture them .
 This concern with ‘revenge’ against Germany reflected the passing of nationalism from the liberal left to the right wing in France, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . France's concern with 'revenge' against Germany reflects a passing of nationalistic nationalism from left to right .
 The Boulanger Affair was in some ways the birth certificate of the new right in France, the Dreyfus Affair its baptism . The Boudier Affair is in some way the birth of the French right in the country's first major scandal .
 French rightists placed their hopes of overthrowing the republic on the dashing figure of General Georges Boulanger . Rightists hoped to overthrow the French republic in 1887 . The French general had risen rapidly through the ranks to become minister of war .
 His bellicose noises about recapturing Alsace-Lorraine pleased nationalists while irritating Bismarck . He made the noises while trying to recapture the region of Alsacke .
 Conservatives convinced they had found the man who could overthrow the republic, restore the monarchy, or establish a dictatorship . Conservatives now believe they have found a man who is capable of overthrowing the republic .
 Boulanger allowed his name to be put forward as a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies . The French politician is a former French President of France .
 The political movement on behalf of Boulanger was arguably the first mass political campaign in France . The movement is arguably the most mass political movement in French history .
 Funds provided by a wealthy royalist widow helped inundate the country with electoral posters and busts of the dashing general .
 His supporters battled their political enemies in the streets, bringing unprecedented violence into an electoral campaign . Only about 80,000 Jews in a population of 40 million in France .
 Parisian shopkeepers, frustrated by the economic depression, fearful of workers’ consumer cooperatives, and losing clients to department stores, swung their support to right-wing nationalist parties . Rightwing polemicists said ‘Jewish capitalists’ were responsible for their plight .
 Boulanger was elected in by-elections in several districts, but because he was in the army, he was ineligible to serve in the Chamber of Deputies . He served in the French Army .
 At this point, no one was sure what exactly Boulanger represented . No one probably less than the general himself . General himself .
 If his campaign money came from the right, many of his votes at first came from a left . Many of those votes came to the left, and many of them were from the left . The president's first election was in 2008 .
 Opportunist government sent Boulanger to central France to remove him from the political limelight of the capital .
 A prostitute revealed that the Legion of Honor medal was being peddled to the highest bidder . The prostitute revealed it was being sold for $1,000 .
 Daniel Wilson was the ruthless son-in-law of President Jules Grevy, who resigned . Wilson was one of the most successful salesmen in the U.S.
 Some observers believe that the Third Republic is already at the end of its rope .
 He was freed to run for the Chamber of Deputies, and he was elected deputy from Paris . But this now left him free to run again .
 To his right-wing followers, it seemed that a perfect occasion for a coup d’etat had arrived . The president's supporters believe that the coup d'etat has arrived in Syria .
 Government officials convinced the naive general that they held evidence that could lead to his conviction on charges of state treason . Two years later, government officials convinced him that he could be convicted on treason charges .
 Boulanger caught a train to Belgium and, on the grave of his late mistress, took out his army pistol and blew out his brains . On the grave, he took out the pistol and killed himself .
 The Catholic Church's "rallying" to the republic began with an archbishop’s toast in 1891 in Tunisia . Having survived Boulanger, the republic then received an unexpected boost from its old enemy .
 Moderate republicans could draw on political support from the Catholic right against the socialist parties . Henceforth, the moderate republicans would draw on support from Catholic right .
 Another scandal gave the anti-parliamentary right a new focus for opposition . The anti-government movement has been in the spotlight for months .
 In 1881, a French company had begun to dig the Panama Canal under the direction of Ferdinand de Lesseps, who had overseen the construction of the Suez Canal . The Panama Canal was completed in 1881 .
 This canal proved to be even more challenging to build because of difficult terrain and malarial conditions . The canal was built in a bid to escape malaria, which led to difficult terrain conditions .
 Company officials bribed government officials in the hope of gathering sufficient support to get the Chamber of Deputies to approve a loan that would be financed by a national lottery . Company officials say they hope to gather sufficient support for the loan to be approved by the government .
 The Chamber of Deputies obligingly approved the plan, but the financial campaign fell short . The plan was approved by the chamber of deputies .
 When the company went broke in 1889, more than half a million investors lost their money . The company went bankrupt in 1889 .
 Edouard Drumont s right-wing newspaper La Libre Parole published a series of revelations about the scandal in 1892 .
 Drumont claimed Jewish financiers were conspiring to dominate France . Drumont had earlier published a book in which he claimed that Jews had conspired to dominate the country .
 League of Patriots was founded in 1892, a nationalist and anti-Semitic organization of the extreme right . Some of the directors of the defunct company had been Jewish . Now, some of them are Jewish .
 The next year an indulgent court acquitted all but one of those implicated in the scandal . The case was the subject of a series of scandals in the 1980s .
 It pitted right against left; the army, Church, and monarchists against republicans and, in time, socialists; and family against family. The army, . Church, . monarchists . against republics and, . time, and, from time to time, the family against
 In 1894, evidence surfaced from a wastepaper basket in the office of a German military attache . Someone in the French army had been passing secret information to the Germans about French military operations .
 Circumstantial evidence pointed to Captain Dreyfus’s handwriting . The writing on a list of documents that had been prepared to be handed over to a German contact resembled the handwriting of the Captain . The handwriting on the documents was that of the captain's handwriting .
 Dreyfus refused the arrest officer’s offer of a loaded pistol with which he could kill himself . Maintaining his innocence, the officer offered him a loaded gun .
 A hurriedly convened and secret court-martial found him guilty of treason . He was convicted of treason by a secret military court martial . A secret court martial was held in secret .
 Dreyfus was stripped of his rank and sent to Devil’s Island off the coast of South America . He was sent there to Devil's Island, where he was sent to die .
 Confidential documents continue to disappear from French army offices . However, confidential documents continued to disappear .
 Major Walsin Esterhazy, Major Dreyfus, wrote the original list of documents . Two years later, a new chief of army intelligence, Lieutenant Colonel Georges Picquart, determined to his own satisfaction that the original documents had not been penned by DreyF
 Picquart was an unlikely hero in this case because he made no secret of his anti-Semitism . Picquart presented his evidence in the trial of the Holocaust .
 High-ranking officers believed that it was better to have an innocent Jew languishing in increasing depression on Devil's Island than to compromise the army’s public image . But high-ranking . officers believed it . was better than having an innocent . Jew languished in . increasing depression
 The army packed Picquart off to a post in Tunisia . Esterhazy was acquitted despite overwhelming evidence of guilt . Picquart is now serving in a Tunisian post .
 Edouard Drumonts anti-Semitic newspaper La Libre Parole (The Free Word) was published in 1893 . Drumont's anti-semitic newspaper was The Free Word, published by Drumont in 1893.
 The political right and the Church hierarchy jumped in on the side of the ‘anti-Dreyfusards,” seeing the Dreyfuses Affair as a conspiracy of Jews and Freemasons to destroy France by undermining the prestige of its army .
 Catholic newspaper demanded that all Jews be deprived of their citizenship . Catholic newspaper called for Jews to be stripped of citizenship . A Catholic newspaper said Jews should not be allowed to be citizens .
 Action Fran^aise, a right-wing nationalist and monarchist organization, jumped into the fray against Dreyfus . Charles Maurras, an anti-Semitic novelist, led the group .
 Some new documents have been added to the Dreyfus file . Another officer soon discovered that some new documents had been added .
 Lieutenant Colonel Hubert Henry hoped to lead to a new conviction of Dreyfus . Henry hoped the forged documents would lead to the conviction of the former spy . They were quite badly forged by Lieutenant Colonel Henry, who hoped they would be used to help convict him .
 Confronted with the evidence, Henry committed suicide in a military prison . Henry was forced to commit suicide in prison .
 President of France gave Dreyfus a presidential pardon that year, which allowed him to return to his family . However, he was not fully exonerated until 1906, when his military rank was restored . The president of France also pardoned him in 1906 .
 The Dreyfus Affair helped forge a working alliance between the Radicals and socialists . Radicals were anticlerical moderate republicans, and socialists, which moved the republic to the left .
 In the Radical government formed in 1899, Alexandre Millerand became minister of commerce, despite the bitter opposition of many socialists who objected to a socialist serving in a ‘‘bourgeois” government .
 In France the dominant religion had—at least until 1891— stood against the regime . In contrast to Britain, the Anglican Church had stood behind the government .
 The Radicals moved to separate church and state against conservative opposition . Radicals had been in opposition to separation of state and church .
 In 1902, the Chamber of Deputies, with socialist support, passed legislation exiling religious orders from France . The legislation was passed with support from the Socialist Party .
 During the next two years, the state took possession of all ecclesiastical property and assumed responsibility for paying the salaries of priests . The state took control of the property and took over the salary of priests for two years .
 Despite papal condemnation and the resistance of some clergy and parishioners, the modus vivendi evolved with parish councils leasing churches from the state . The Vatican's decision to sell churches to the state was rejected by some clergy .
 Georges Clemenceau embodied aggressive French nationalism . The Radical Premier was the Radical Premier of France . He was the French leader of the 1930s French Republic .
 ‘The Tiger’ was born into a modest noble title . He was born in a modest family of modest noble titles .
 In 1907, he sent troops to crush a determined strike by small property owners and vineyard laborers in the south . The French president crushed the strike in 1907 . He also crushed a strike in 1908 .
 In 1911, Radical Premier Joseph Caillaux sought accommodation with Germany . Unlike Clemenceau, he sought accommodation from Germany .
 Antimilitarism remained popular among workers because of the role of troops in the repression of strikes . Antimillarism was popular because of troops' role in repression of strike .
 The Second Moroccan Crisis between Germany and France that same year gave rise to another wave of nationalism . But the Second Moroccan crisis was not the end of a decade .
 Caillaux’s government fell the following year . Besieged by the press for his pacific stand, his government fell .
 Raymond Poincare , an outspoken nationalist, became premier in 1912 and then president a year later . Raymond Poinare was prime minister and president of France in 1912 .
 He eagerly anticipated the chance to win back Alsace and Lorraine, and firmed up French support of a Russian role in the Balkans . He also firmed-up French support for the Russian role .
 The second half of the nineteenth century brought about significant political change to the three European powers that had been the strongest at mid-century . Conclusion: Political change was significant for European powers .
 In Britain, the second Reform Bill of 1867 expanded the electoral franchise, and another law' in 1884 followed suit . The Reform Bill was passed in Britain in 1867 .
 After the collapse of the Second Empire in 1870 and the Paris Commune the following year, France emerged as a republic . The French Republic was formed in 1870 after the fall of the Empire .
 Tsar Alexander IPs emancipation of the serfs in 1861 did not change the fundamental institutions of autocracy in Russia . In Russia, the emancipation of serfs was not a major change in the rule of law .
 The Russian Revolution of 1905 challenged the foundations of autocracy . Yet some reforms did follow, even as critics of the tsarist state grew more vocal .
 In the meantime, Britain’s economic strength and great navy left it in a position to dominate international affairs . In the 1980s, the British economy was the strongest in the world .
 Prussia emerged as the leader of a unified and powerful Germany, dominant in Central Europe . Having defeated Austria and then France, Prussia became dominant in Europe .
 At the same time, the Second Industrial Revolution brought remarkable technological advances, increased mass production, and ever larger cities now bathed in electric light .
 Her father earned his living by tilling the fields and as a barrel maker, an occupation closely tied to wine production . Her father worked in the fields, tilling and barrel making .
 Disease began to destroy vineyards of the Rhone River Valley in 1876 . The Rhone Valley vineyards were devastated by disease .
 Jeanne’s family was forced to sell its land and possessions and travel to find work, pushed along by poverty and unemployment . Jeanne's family sold its land, sold its possessions and traveled to find a job .
 From age eleven to 14, Jeanne worked thirteen hours a day in a silk mill . Jeanne worked for 13 hours every day in the silk mill in New York City .
 Jeanne’s mother took her to Paris, where the first job she found lasted only a week . Four other jobs in various towns and villages in her region followed . Jeanne's mother took Jeanne to Paris where she found four other jobs .
 Like so many other single, female migrants to city life, she then worked as a domestic servant . She then moved to the city and became a single mother .
 When that trade collapsed because of changes in style and the economic depression, she became a skilled dressmaker in a Parisian workshop . She then developed her own clientele .
 When she returned home to her native village, Jeanne spoke French, not the patois in which her old friends conversed with her . When she was in her native France, she spoke French instead of French .
 In 1900, Charles Peguy expressed the opinion that Europe had changed more in the previous thirty years than it had since the time of Jesus Christ . The French Catholic writer expressed the view that Europe has changed more since Jesus Christ than in the last thirty years .
 The period 1870-1914 was indeed one of rapid economic and social change in much of Europe . It was a period of rapid social and economic change .
 Rail networks extended their reach into the countryside, carrying manufactured goods and returning with meat, vegetables, fresh milk, and fruit for burgeoning cities . Rail networks returned to the countryside in the 1930s and 1940s, returning to cities .
 The speed and capacity of steamships brought American cereal grains, cattle, and meat to Western European ports, reducing their prices . Steamships reduced the prices of American cereals, cattle and meat .
 New manufacturing processes spurred the emergence of the chemical, electrical, and the steel industries . Chemical, electrical and electrical industries emerged in the 1930s .
 Technological advances and mechanized factory production transformed the way millions of people worked and lived in the 1930s and '60s .
 A permanent working class that had broken its ties with the countryside developed. The working class became a permanent working-class that had become independent .
 Rural areas also changing as agricultural productivity increased . Rural areas are changing as more agricultural productivity increases . Agricultural productivity has also increased in rural areas .
 Large, productive farms whose lands were enriched by chemical fertilizers and cultivated with mechanized equipment encouraged more efficient regional agricultural specialization . Large productive farms are enriched by fertilizers .
 Improvements in agriculture were less apparent in the Russian Empire, Eastern Europe, and the Balkans . In Hungary, the use of agricultural machinery, the rotation of crops, and product specialization also brought greater yields .
 Longer life expectancy followed better nutrition, better sanitation and purer water supplies . Better nutrition is a more varied diet with greater caloric consumption, as well as improved sanitation .
 An expansion in white-collar jobs offered peasants and workers chances for social mobility, particularly in Western Europe . White-collar positions included clerks, tram ticket collectors, schoolteachers, among others .
 Bicycles, sports, and, early in the new century, movies became part of the lives of millions .
 In many regions, poverty remained common, and mobility into the middle class remained exceptional at the turn of the century . In many parts of southern Italy, Spain, Portugal, Russia, and the Balkans, poverty still common .
 Emigration to other countries emerged as one of the most significant social phenomena of the age . During the depression that lasted from 1873 to the mid-1890s, emigrants emigrated to other nations .
 Peasants and laborers left Europe in hope of economic opportunity in the U.S., Canada, and Latin America . Peasant and laborers, in particular, left Europe for economic opportunity .
 Great Britain, Germany, and Ireland had provided most of the earlier waves of emigrants . The Irish potato famine and the Great Depression of the 1930s saw many emigrants emigrate .
 Italians, in particular, headed overseas in great numbers, along with Scandinavians . Scandinavians are also heading overseas, as are Italians, Scandinavians.
 The last years of the nineteenth century, the fin de siecle, would be remembered after World War I as the “Belle Epoque”—the “good old days” The ‘good old’ days were a period of material progress and
 New inventions like the telephone and automobile promised an even better life ahead . New inventions promised to give people a better life .
 Steel led the Second Industrial Revolution . Steel led to the creation of the steel industry . Steel was the first industrial revolution .
 Electricity accelerated European economic growth, providing, in the century’s last two decades, power for industry . Then electricity accelerated Europe's economic growth .
 The Second Industrial Revolution brought a variety of technological innovations that ultimately improved the everyday lives of most Europeans . The Industrial Revolution was the birth of the industrial revolution .
 In large cities, subways and, increasingly, automobiles made people more mobile . Subways and subways also made people mobile in large cities . People were more mobile in cities such as New York and Washington .
 New discoveries in the physical sciences led to advances that improved agriculture, public health, making possible longer lives .
 The Second Industrial Revolution seemed impervious to the economic depression that began in 1873 and lasted until the mid-1890s . The depression was the result of the industrial revolution .
 It was marked by falling prices and punctuated by financial panics, but not by prolonged unemployment or economic stagnation . The world's economic boom was punctuated with falling prices, but was not prolonged unemployment, or stagnation .
 Following a fever of speculation, Vienna banks fail in Vienna . Vienna banks failed in the wake of speculation surrounding the collapse .
 The speed with which the crisis spread to other financial capitals reflected the extent of improvements in transportation and communication had extended the links of an increasingly global economy .
 British foreign investment doubled between 1900 and 1914 . Within Europe the volume of trade increased by twenty-five times between 1820 and 1913 .
 Price of grain and other essential commodities became more constant with the development of a global market for foodstuffs . Increasingly, the price of grain has become more constant, the government says .
 In industrialized countries, tariffs became the focus of impassioned political debate . Even in Britain, economic liberalism remained the prevailing credo. In industrialized nations, tariffs are the focus .
 In 1856, Henry Bessemer developed a new method for forging steel from pig iron by forcing air through the molten metal to reduce its carbon content . The method was developed in 1856 .
 Other related discoveries over the next twenty years permitted the production of steel of a more consistent quality, lowering its price by two-thirds . The price of steel was lowered by about a third of the price .
 Steel’s strength, durability, and flexibility gave it a marked advantage over iron . Steel was first developed in the 1800s, and iron was first made of steel .
 Steel improved the size, quality, standardization, and precision of machinery . Steel was used to improve the size and quality of machinery in the 1930s .
 Three years after Bessemer’s discovery, the first British ship constructed of steel slid into the sea . Just three years after the discovery of the first steel ship, the ship was built of steel .
 Steel ships transformed naval warfare . Steel ships were larger, sturdier, and faster than their predecessors . They were built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Medical advances enhanced the already soaring prestige of science and the professional stature of its practitioners . Medical advances have already boosted the prestige of the profession .
 In much of Europe, a trip to the doctor was no longer seen as the first stop on the way to the undertaker . Instead, a visit to a doctor is no longer considered as a first stop for the undertakers .
 Anesthesia, which had already been discovered in the U.S. in the 1840s, made surgery less painful . Anesthesia was discovered in 18th century .
 Louis Pasteur discovered that just as various types of fermentation were caused by different kinds of germs, so were many diseases . The French scientist discovered that many diseases are caused by various kinds of fermentation .
 Pasteur’s studies of specific bacteria and viruses led to the immunization of animals and helped end a silkworm blight . Pasteur's studies led to immunizations of animals .
 The tuberculosis bacillus was isolated by Robert Koch, a German who isolated it . Koch isolated it from a German bacterium . Koch was the first person to discover the bacillia . Koch discovered the tuberculosis bacteria . Koch also isolated tuberculosis from the bacteria .
 The development of bacteriology infused the hygienic movement with the certitude of science . It helped create preventative medicine, which reduced mortality by encouraging sewage works .
 Sewer systems ensured a cleaner water supply, reducing some contagious diseases . Sewer water supply reduced some infectious diseases, reducing contagious disease .
 Electricity made possible the invention of the electromagnetic telegraph, the undersea cable, and the telephone . The Electric and Chemical Revolutions are a look at the history of electricity .
 Electricity remained little more than a scientific curiosity until relatively late in the century . Yet electricity was little more of a science curiosity until recently late in century .
 Werner von Siemens invented the first self-excited electromagnetic generator in 1867, which made possible the production of electrical energy, and three years later the first generator of direct current followed .
 Thomas Edison invented the incandescent lamp in 1879 . The American inventor invented the light bulb . Edison was the inventor of the first light bulb bulb .
 The first electric power stations began operation in England in 1881 . Two years later, electricity gradually entered European homes . During the following decades electricity slowly entered Europe's homes .
 Electric alternators and transformers and improvements in cable and insulation provided means by which electric power could be generated and diffused . Electric alternator and transformer transformers were used to generate and diffuse power .
 Electricity still remained a luxury in many parts of Europe well into the twentieth century . Electricity was still a luxury for many of Europe's countries .
 For all their efficiency, water power, coal, and gas had placed limits on the location of factories . Water power and coal power, including coal and water, placed limits .
 Electric power, however, could be transported with relative ease, which ultimately enabled countries not well endowed with natural resources to industrialize partially . Electric power could also be transported by relative ease in countries such as Brazil .
 The steel, textile, shoemaking, and construction industries, among others, came to depend upon Louis Pasteur in his laboratory . The steel and textile industries came to rely on Pasteur .
 The burgeoning German electrical manufacturing industry helped Germany to challenge Britain for European manufacturing primacy .
 The sewing machine was developed by the American Isaac Singer in 1811-1875 . It was developed in the 1850s, well before the use of electricity became common .
 The mechanization of the production of ready-made garments rapidly extended consumer markets, setting styles and reducing the price of clothing . Ready-made clothing has been hugely popular in recent years .
 The impact of the sewing machine also demonstrated continuities in industrial work . But the impact of sewing machines also demonstrated continued to be an important part of industrial history .
 Machines that could do band stitching, make buttonholes, or embroider led to further specialization of labor . Machines could also be used to make buttonholts, band stitching and band stitching .
 Singer marketed his machine as a device that would liberate women from tedious work . Singer marketed himself as a tool for women to liberate themselves from tedious tasks . Singer's machine was designed to make women's jobs easier .
 The sewing machine also bound many women to the hectic pace of piecework, and to payments for the machine itself . The machine is usually purchased on time-payment plans .
 By 1900, other electrically powered household appliances were generally available to those families that could afford to have their houses wired for electricity and could pay for the appliances .
 In Germany, university chemical research and teaching developed precociously . In Germany it has been the focus of chemical research for decades .
 German companies benefited from synthetic organic chemistry, manufacturing dyes, soaps, and pharmaceuticals, further improving sanitation and public health .
 Fritz Haber discovered the nitrogen-fixing process, by which atmospheric nitrogen could be converted into compounds . Haber found the nitrogen fixing process in 1925 .
 By 1913, he and his colleagues were able to transform ammonia into nitric acid by oxidation . The process made possible the industrial production of fertilizers and explosives .
 Advances in chemistry helped transform agriculture, the textile industry, and engineering . Advances also transformed agriculture, textile industry and engineering.
 The development of economic cartels dealt a blow to the liberal era of free trade . Economic cartels have been a major problem for free trade since the 1970s .
 Cartels are formal agreements by which competitors within the same industry protect profits by sharing markets, regulating output, fixing prices, and taking other measures to limit competition . Cartels prevent competition by regulating output and fixing prices in certain areas of industry .
 Cartels permitted a few large companies to dominate production and distribution . Heavy industries protected themselves during periods of falling prices and high unemployment by controlling production and setting prices . Cartels allowed heavy industries to protect themselves from falling prices during times of unemployment .
 In Germany, mining cartels set production goals and kept prices artificially high . Mining cartels in Germany set up production goals to keep prices high .
 In France and Great Britain, informal agreements among industrialists achieved virtually the same results as formalized cartels . In Britain and France, informal deals with industrialists achieve the same result as formal cartels .
 Even where there were no cartels, the concentration of business in larger companies continued . In industries such as metallurgy and chemicals, expensive machinery made “start-up’s costs prohibitive for smaller firms .
 The industrial boom of the Second Industrial Revolution was perhaps most dramatic in Germany . It was perhaps the most dramatic industrial boom in the country .
 By 1890, both Germany and the United States had surged ahead of Britain in metallurgical production .
 By the turn of the century, German factories turned out more steel than Britain and France combined . Germany’s chemical industry was the most modern in the world .
 In 1900, Britain produced twice as much sulphuric acid as Germany; in 1913, the proportion had been reversed . In 1913 the proportion of sulphur acid production was reversed .
 Germany’s national product more than tripled between unification in 1871 and 1914 . The country's national product increased by more than three percent between unification and unification .
 Germany enjoyed the advantage of starting to industrialize after its rivals, thereby being able to employ the most modern equipment in factories specially built to accommodate technological advances . Germany's factories were built specially to accommodate technology advances .
 Some British factories, most of which had been built early in the century, seemed to be crumbling . By contrast, some British factories were crumbling, according to the BBC .
 Large investment banks acquired large blocks of industrial shares, particularly in heavy industries like coal mining, electricity, and railways . While providing investment capital, large investment banks .
 Banks earned big profits and paid high dividends to those who had invested in them . Having entered industry to assure proper business management of companies to which they loaned money, banks earn big profits .
 German industry favored cartels, which controlled production and prices . This also favored the trend of German industry toward cartel cartels .
 German universities were more numerous and of better quality than any others in Europe at the same time . Despite their authoritarian structure and their acquiescence in discrimination against Jews, Catholics, and socialists, they were not discriminating against Jews .
 They emerged as centers of scientific research, particularly in chemistry, in the 1960s . They were important centers of research, especially in chemistry .
 English employers tend to look down their noses at academic training as a poor substitute for work experience . English employers were relatively slow to adopt a more practical curriculum . Universities in Britain have been relatively slow .
 British manufactured goods stacked up at the docks as demand declined abroad and prices fell . Great Britain remained the world’s greatest economic power, but its manufacturing exports fell .
 By the mid-1880s, some of the countries that had purchased British goods were able to meet consumer demand at home with their own production . The countries that bought British goods had been able to produce their own .
 In the century’s last decades, shiploads of foreign-made goods began to undercut British production, which was unprotected by tariffs .
 German, Italian, and French merchants took advantage of the Suez Canal, opened in 1869, to send their own ships to Asia to make purchases and sell goods .
 In the Russian Empire, the economy remained overwhelmingly agricultural . The Russian Empire was dominated by agriculture .
 The famine of 1890—1891, to which Tolstoy helped focus international concern, killed millions of peasants . Despite the development of Ukraine as a major producer of wheat, the famine killed millions . The famine was a major international concern .
 Absentee ownership of large estates, peasant plots that continued to be farmed at subsistence level as they had been for centuries, and village communal lands hindered agricultural development .
 Russian agriculture gradually increased its productivity, doing so without the capital-intensive farming that characterized much of Western Europe . Yet Russian agriculture has remained relatively stable in recent years .
 Russian increases in harvest yields were comparable to those of France and Germany by 1900, making possible the increased export of grain and other foodstuffs . The increase in Russian harvest yields made possible to increase the export of food and grain .
 The Peasant Land Bank was created in the 1880s, helped thousands of peasants purchase land . A thriving cooperative movement beginning at the turn of the century brought prosperity .
 Russian industries still confronted the serious physical impediment of sheer distance between resources, manufacturers, and markets . Russian industries are still confronted by the physical impediments between resources and markets.
 Orthodox Church viewed investment as usurious and therefore dishonest . Weak banking structures limited the accumulation of investment capital, the Orthodox Church said .
 Russian Industrialization, 1870-1914 . Areas of industrial concentration, including kinds of industry and resources . Russia's industrialization began in 1870s .
 Foreign investment in Russia, above all from France, more than doubled during the 1890s .
 Textiles still represented the largest branch of Russian industry . Heavy industries, such as metallurgy, boomed in Russia .
 The growth of light industry and the expansion of the market contributed considerably to the country’s economic growth, permitting exports to Asian neighbors . Light industry is a key part of the country's economy .
 Russia's rail lines increased by three times between 1881 and 1905 . The length of Russia’s rail lines was three times the length of its rail lines . Russia's banks developed in size and scale .
 By the turn of the century, railroads at last linked Russia's major cities and facilitated the shipping of grain to the empire’s northern ports . By the end of the 1930s, the railroads were able to connect Russia's cities and ports .
 Many Russian industrial workers still labored part-time in agriculture . Yet many Russian industrial jobs still laborate part time in agriculture.
 In 1900, peasants made up two-thirds of the population of Saint Petersburg, a city of more than 1.1 million people . In 2000, peasants were made up 2.3% of the city's population .
 They retained strong ties to their villages, which remained their legal residences . Their villages were also known as their villages .
 The rural commune still carried out functions of local authority, including many fiscal obligations, policing and policing . The rural community was still carrying out functions such as policing, policing .
 In France, the production of high-quality handicrafts, centered in Paris, continued to dominate industry . In France it continued to be dominated by Parisians .
 Traditional small-scale manufacturing also persisted alongside heavy industries in Spain (Catalonia and the Basque region), Austria-Hungary, and Italy . Little large-scale industry could be found south of the triangle formed by Milan, Turin, and the port of Genoa .
 As in Russia, most of the investment in Spanish industry came from abroad . Agriculture generated inadequate surpluses for significant industrial investment . Most of Spain's industrial investment came from agriculture .
 In the Balkans, major rail lines were not in place until the late 1880s . Poor roads and the daunting mountains limited the emergence of vibrant regional market economies .
 Value of industrial production multiplied by three times just between 1904 and 1911 . The railway network increased rapidly after 1880 . The value of railway networks increased rapidly in Bulgaria .
 Electric power led to the construction of modern public transportation systems, first trams and then subways . Electric power helped to build the first subway lines in New York City .
 The London underground railway had already opened without electricity in 1863, making it possible for employees and workers to live much farther from their jobs . The London Underground railway opened in 1863 without electricity .
 In 1900, the first Paris subway—the metro --began operation on the right bank of the Seine River . Other lines soon followed . The first Paris metro was built on the banks of the river Seine .
 Carl Benz built upon the invention of the internal combustion engine . In 1885, Carl Benz invented the first car, the Benz-powered engine . Benz was a German engineer and inventor of the car .
 The first automobiles were very expensive, the tires alone cost more than an average workers annual wages . The tires alone were more than the average worker's annual wage .
 In 1897, Rudolf Diesel produced the first successful engine fueled by kerosene, which could power larger vehicles . Diesel was a German inventor and inventor of the first engine powered by gasoline . Diesel's engine was the first powered engine to produce a larger engine .
 Automobile manufacturing quickly became a major catalyst for industrial growth and the implementation of new production methods, stimulating the production of steel, aluminum, rubber, and tools . Automobile production is now a major factor in industrial growth .
 Automobile manufacturers shifted from the limited production of elite cars, above all, the British Rolls Royce .
 Henry Ford began his company in Detroit in 1903 . He produced more than 15 million “Model T” Fords, which even some of his own workers could afford .
 French car manufacturer Louis Renault looked for ways to cut production costs . Louis Renault was worried by American competition, looking to cut costs .
 Assembly-line production made it possible to construct cars in segments . Assembly line production made cars easier to build in parts .
 Workers mounted components on stationary chassis frames lined up along the factory floor . The factory floor is filled with workers from all over the world .
 They used hand files to shape engine parts for expensive cars since interchangeable parts were not yet available . Hand files were used to shape parts of expensive cars .
 Elegant horses and fancy carriages owned by people of means no longer monopolized travel . People of means were able to travel with horses and carriages .
 Until it was repealed in 1896, the British ‘Red Flag Act’ restricted the speed of motor vehicles to two miles per hour . The act required three people carrying red warning flags to accompany each vehicle .
 Early drivers required not only thick goggles to protect themselves against dust but also whips to keep away startled dogs . Drivers required thick goggles and whips for safety .
 Government authorities ordered the paving of roads, and gas stations began to dot the landscape . Gradually, government authorities began to order the paving .
 Michelin published its first guide for travelers in 1900, listing garages, hotels, and restaurants . Michelin was one of the first to shift from producing bicycle tires to automobile tires .
 Michelin lobbied for signs along roads indicating distances . Michelin successfully lobbied for signage along roads to show distances .
 Motorized taxis and then motorized fire engines raced by their horse-drawn predecessors . Motorized taxi and fire engines were first driven by horses in 18th century .
 The cult of speed next took to the air, after centuries of dreams had brought only balloon ascents and short glider flights . The cult's first speed flight was the first of its kind in the 1930s .
 Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin built the lumbering dirigible airship that still bears his name . In 1900, a retired German general built the airship in Germany . The airship still bears the name of the original name .
 Orville and Wilbur Wright, two American bicycle manufacturers, launched the first successful flight in 1903 . After years of experimentation with propellers and small engines, the Wright brothers made the first flight of 1903 .
 The crown prince of Prussia began to consider the military uses of the airplane . They then took their air show to England, France, and Germany, where they began to perform .
 Health spas and resorts, which had developed since the mid-1800s, became even more popular in Western Europe . The health spa industry has been in decline for decades .
 Spas claimed that their thermal waters offered healing and sustaining properties that facilitated the circulation of blood, attacked gout and attacked people who were too well-fed .
 Mediterranean, North Sea, and English Channel resorts offered casinos and beachfront promenades . Mediterranean, English Channel and North Sea resorts also offered casinos, beachfront casinos .
 English coastal towns like Brighton and Blackpool attracted visitors oblivious to the rain . Blackpool and Brighton were hit by the torrential rain .
 English nobles, who could afford to flee the British winter, “discovered” Nice . English nobles who could . afford to . flee the . British winter .
 Italians began to frequent their own Riviera, Belgians the port of Ostend, and Germans the Baltic resorts . Upper-class Italians began frequent their Riviera .
 Vacationers from many countries discovered the Alps and sent the first postcards back to envious friends .
 The telegraph had already increased the availability of news from around the world with the help of press agencies like Havas, the Associated Press, and Reuters .
 The telephone was invented by Alexander Graham Bell (18471922) in 1876, reaching private homes . The telephone, invented by Bell, reached private homes in the early 1900s .
 Guglielmo Marconi pioneered the first wireless voice communication in the 1890s . By 1913 weekly concerts could be heard on the radio in Brussels .
 Silent motion pictures, first shown in 1895, became an immediate hit . Silent motion films were first shown on silent sets, sometimes accompanied by a piano . Silent films first shown by silent pianists in 1895 .
 Early viewers watched brief scenes of modern life, such as a train beginning to move . Early viewers were shown a train starting to move and a train moving .
 The AustroHungarian army began to experiment with motion pictures . They used cameras to study the flight of artillery shells .
 The creation in 1883 of a worldwide system for patenting reflected a veritable torrent of new inventions . The creation of the worldwide patent system reflected a flood of inventions .
 This knowledge led scientists to understand more about the principles of heredity . It led to the discovery of the origin of the species .
 At the same time, new discoveries revealing nature’s complexity began to temper the infectious optimism of the age .
 Fin-de-siecle scientists realized that the more they understood about the world, the more there was left to know about matter, light, and energy . Scientists realized that there was more to learn about matter and light .
 Mathematicians and especially physicists began to rethink fundamental assumptions about the universe . The discovery of the universe led to the discovery of new discoveries .
 Marie Curie isolated radium, a radioactive element, in 1910 . She and her husband, Pierre Curie, worked on the discovery of radium . The Polish-born chemist isolated the radioactive element .
 Marie Curie was refused entry to the French Academy of Science because of her gender . Curie won two Nobel Prizes for her work on the atom atom atomism .
 Ernest Rutherford discovered two kinds of radiation, which he called the alpha and beta rays . Her rival, Ernest Rutherford, discovered two types of radiation . Ernest Rutherford was a New Zealander from New Zealand .
 He posited the disintegration of radioactive atoms, which is the phenomenon of radioactivity . He also posited that radioactive atoms could disintegrate .
 Ernest Rutherford used apparatus to break up the nucleus of the nitrogen atom . Ernest Rutherford broke up the atom of nitrogen atom in order to discover the atom's nucleus . Rutherford used the apparatus that he used to break down the nucleus .
 They demonstrated the complexity of motion, light, and matter, which appeared to consist of electrically charged particles . They appeared to be part of the complex world of particles .
 Since the time of Isaac Newton in the seventeenth century, scientists had believed that any two objects, whether the sun and the earth, or a coffee cup and a bowl of sugar, acted on each other through gravitational force .
 There seemed no mechanism for transmitting action but rather only empty space between the two . There seemed to be no mechanism to transmit action but only empty spaces .
 James Maxwell solved the ‘action at a distance’ problem for the case of electromagnetic forces . James Maxwell was a British scientist who solved the problem .
 His theory of electromagnetic fields postulated that one object creates an electrical field around particles, which in turn exerts forces on electrically charged objects . Light itself consists of electromagnetic waves, he said .
 The German scientist Max Planck discovered that radiant energy emitted discontinuously in discrete units, or quanta, in order to emit radiant energy .
 Planck’s quantum theory, not finalized until 1925, challenged the fundamental scientific understanding of energy that had survived almost intact since Newton’�s day . Planck's quantum theory challenges the fundamental understanding of how to make energy work .
 It seemed to add an element of chance to the story of the universe, suggesting that its operations were not absolutely predictable . More than this, it seemed to suggest that the universe was not as predictable as usual .
 Scientists now realize that they knew considerably less about the nature of matter and about the universe than they had long assumed . Scientists now say they know considerably less than they thought .
 Albert Einstein explaining his theories to a stunned audience in Switzerland . Albert Einstein was born in Switzerland and died in 1915 at birth of Albert Einstein .
 In 1905, Einstein postulated a special theory of relativity, arguing that the velocity of light was both constant and independent of the velocities of the source and observer of light . Einstein's theory says light velocity was constant, independent of velocity of the observer and source .
 In the mid-twentieth century, this formula would provide the key for the controlled release of energy from the atom . The formula would be used to control the release of controlled energy from atoms .
 Einstein’s search for an exact description of the laws of gravitation led him in 1915 from his relatively simple special theory of relativity to his general principle of relativity . Einstein postulated that laws of nature operated in exactly the same way for all observers .
 His theory supplanted traditional theories of gravitation, which saw gravity as a property of objects interacting with each other . His theories supplanted theories of gravity as an object interacting with another .
 Einstein and other scientists remained ill at ease with the element of chance suggested by Planck’s quantum theory . Yet Einstein and others remained ill-at ease with Planck's quantum theory.
 Planck’s theory, by suggesting a role for chance, left open as many questions for the future as they resolved, not the least of which would later be terrifying new applications of the German scientist's famous formula to the hydrogen and atom bombs . Einstein's staggering achievements themselves left
 By the end of the nineteenth century, one of every four people in the world was a European . One of the world's largest cities is in France .
 Population growth in major U.S. states between 1871 and 1911 . German Empire 41.7% increase in population growth .
 Industrial cities were characterized by greater social segregation within their limits . Increased factory production altered the physical structure of industrial cities, which was characterized by social segregation .
 Overseas emigration rose rapidly and did not slow down even with the end of the economic depression in the mid-1890s . Emigration, particularly to the Americas, rose rapidly in the early 1900s .
 Europe’s population grew rapidly because the continent passed from the traditional pattern of high birthrates and high death rates to low rates of both births and deaths . Europe passed from high birthrate to low birthrate rates of low birthrates to low death rates .
 Mortality rates fell during the second half of the nineteenth century, particularly among children . Mortality rate rates fell among children, especially among them .
 Births outnumbered deaths, despite the fact that fertility rates fell beginning in the 1860s, or even before . Births outpaced deaths in the 1800s, with births outnumbering deaths .
 Infant mortality declined, particularly in Western and Central Europe, because of greater medical understanding of chest and stomach infections, as well as a general improvement in the standard of living . Infant deaths declined, especially in Western Europe .
 Many poor people now lived in warmer, drier accommodations, although improvements still lagged behind in large, dirty, industrial cities .
 Poor families often had more children than upper-class couples, who limited themselves to two or three offspring . Poor families wanted to devote more resources to the education and inheritance of each child . Queen Victoria had nine children, Queen Victoria .
 In France, officials and nationalists worried about their country’s unique plunging birthrate . The birthrate is the lowest in the world, and the birth rate is now a record low in France .
 The French population grew by only about 15 percent from mid-century until 1914 . The population of France grew by 15 percent between 1914 and 1914 . France's population grew only 15 percent during that period .
 Contraception became more widespread, although the methods were very traditional ones . Contraceptions were more widespread in the 1930s .
 Rudimentary condoms made of animal intestines were superseded in the 1880s by rubber condoms . Rubber condoms were used primarily for protection against disease rather than for birth control .
 As families sought to limit the number of children and single women encountered unplanned pregnancies, abortion became more common . In part because contraception methods remained very hit or miss .
 A quarter of pregnancies probably ended in abortion, even though abortions were both illegal and extremely dangerous . The abortion was illegal and dangerous, but it was also illegal .
 Women seeking to terminate a pregnancy took all sorts of concoctions rumored to be effective, or put themselves at the mercy of quacks . Quacks are quacks who say they can help women terminate pregnancies .
 In some places, births to unmarried couples or to single mothers increased rapidly . In some areas, however, births increased rapidly to unmarried people .
 Young female migrants to the city were vulnerable to the advances of men promising marriage or promising nothing at all . Young women are vulnerable to men promising to marry or not .
 A sizable percentage of the population of most countries never married or entered into permanent or long-term relationships . About 10 to 15 percent of people in the U.S. never had a permanent or permanent relationship .
 Unmarried women were especially common in Scotland, Ireland, and in Brittany in France . More males than females migrated to urban, industrial regions, from where they were born .
 Living standards improved for ordinary people in every industrialized country . Improving Standards of Living is a key part of the world's economic prosperity .
 Standards of living are far higher in northern Europe than in southern and eastern Europe . Standards are greater in Britain than in France and France, with Germany closing the gap .
 In Britain, real wages (taking inflation into account), which had increased by a third between 1850 and 1875, again rose by almost half during the last three decades of the century . Real wages (including inflation) rose by nearly half during those same period .
 Workers enjoyed higher levels of consumption because the price of food fell as agricultural production increased and transportation improved . Food prices fell because of increased agricultural production, transportation improved and increased production of food .
 Working-class families still spent half their budget on food, but this was less than during previous centuries . Families still spend half of their budget spending on food but this is less than in previous centuries.
 This left more money to spend on clothes, with something occasionally left over . The money was left over to buy more clothes .
 Small-town shops were better supplied than ever before, and ready-made clothes were sold on market day alongside manufactured household utensils .
 More grain and meat, arriving in refrigerated ships, reached Europe from Australia, Canada, the U.S. and Argentina .
 Germans consumed on average three times more sugar at the end of the century than thirty years earlier . Germans consumed three times as much sugar as they did thirty years ago .
 People who lived a good distance inland found fish reached them before the ice keeping the fish fresh had melted . People who were of some means found that fish reached those who lived in the region .
 The poor, too, now enjoyed a more varied diet, consisting of more vegetables, fruit, and cheese . The poor also enjoyed more vegetables and fruit, according to the report .
 As the diet of ordinary people improved, people gradually became taller . People gradually become taller .
 Workers almost everywhere remained chronically undernourished and vulnerable to childhood diseases . Still, workers in the U.S. remain chronically under-nourish .
 Migration and Emigration was part of a worldwide movement of men and women in what was becoming a global labor force . European migration is part of the worldwide labor force.
 Migration—both permanent and seasonal, within Europe continued to be significant . Migration continues to be a significant factor in Europe's economy .
 In France, many rural regions of marginal agriculture lost population to cities and towns . Rural regions of France have also lost population .
 Seasonal work took hundreds of thousands of laborers across borders for part of the year as construction and harvest workers . Seasonal labor took place in the U.S. during the summer .
 Some Italian laborers known as “swallows” spent four weeks a year traveling to and from Argentina to work the harvests . Some Italian workers known as "swallows" traveled to Argentina for four weeks each year .
 Permanent migration to the city did not end the contact between the migrants and their rural origins . Permanent migration was not an end to contact between rural migrants and rural people .
 Many industrial workers still went back to their villages to help with the harvest, and many miners were also part-time farmers . Many of the workers were part-timers and farmers, but still went home to help harvest .
 Migration was a two-way street, at least when patterns of movement involved relatively short distances . Thus, migration was not only a two way street, but also a way of migration .
 When migrants returned home, they brought with them stories about what they had experienced in the cities and towns where they now lived . Different ways of speaking, knowledge of birth control, the habit of reading, a taste for sports, and greater political awareness and interest .
 Between 1850 and 1880, about 8 million Europeans emigrated, most to the U.S. Most emigrated to the United States, most of them from Europe .
 Russia and Eastern Europe sent an increasing number of impoverished people abroad . Russia, Eastern Europe sending an increasing amount of impoverished citizens abroad .
 Between 1890 and 1914, about 350,000 Greeks—one-seventh of the population of Greece—left their country . Most for good, most for good . Between 1890-1914, about 300,000 people left Greece .
 Steamships carried millions of people to a new life across the oceans . Emigration from Europe was itself facilitated by the transportation revolution .
 With improving economic times in the late 1890s, emigration slowed down from Germany, while remaining high from Ireland and increasing dramatically from Italy . Emigration increased from Germany to Ireland and increased from Italy in the same period .
 During the first decade of the twentieth century, emigration from Europe rose to between 1 and 1.1 million people each year . Emigration from the continent rose to 1.5 million people in the early 20th century .
 In 1907, Italian emigrants sent back enough money to cover half the commercial deficit of their native country . In 1907 the Italians sent back $1.5 billion to their native Italy . The emigrants were able to send back half of the country's commercial deficit .
 Swedes, Norwegians and Finns began to emigrate to the northern United States in 1862 . U.S. Homestead Act of 1862 virtually guaranteed land in the American West .
 By the 1930s, 3 million Swedes had changed countries, leaving a population of about 6 million at home . By the 1950s, the population of Sweden was at least 6 million .
 Hundreds of thousands of Portuguese left for Brazil in search of jobs as laborers . The abolition of slavery in that country in 1888 led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands .
 Between 1871 and 1914, more than 1. million Jews left Russia and Polish Russia for the U.S. More than 1 million Jews fled poverty and anti-Semitic violence in Russia .
 Many left their homes with little more than a few cherished items and great hopes . Many of the families were left with little to spare .
 Reimers, Ethnic Americans : A History of Immigration and Assimilation, 11.5-11.1 . Leonard Dinnerstein and David M
 Tens of thousands of Jews moved westward to European capitals, such as London, where they lived in the East End .
 Jews retained cultural traditions and religion and spoke Yiddish as their first language . Most Jews retained their cultural traditions, religion and religion .
 The Zionist movement for the establishment of the Jewish homeland in Palestine emerged partially in response to the rising tide of anti-Semitism in Europe . The movement emerged partially as a response to rising anti-Semitic sentiment .
 Herzl was Theodor Herzl, a gifted journalist and German-speaking Jew from Budapest . Herzl is the movement’s founder . The movement was founded in Vienna in 1903 .
 Many married men went alone, hoping either to send for their families when they could afford to do so, or to return after saving some money . Although many families left together for overseas destinations, many went alone .
 In new homes, migrants forged new collective identities, a process shaped by their own ethnic backgrounds and solidarities . Conditions in their new homelands also contributed to their collective identities .
 Migrants to the United States from southern Italy were the most likely to return permanently . Almost two-thirds eventually went back to Italy, according to the study .
 By 1900, more than half of all industrial workers in Britain, Germany, and Belgium were employed in firms with more than twenty workers . The Changing World of Work by 1900 .
 Artisans, skilled workers, and unskilled workers often found themselves in the same factory . Artisans and skilled workers were often found to work together in the factory .
 Most industrial workers came from proletarian families and grew up with few or no illusions about finding a more secure way of earning a living . Most of the industrial workers in Britain came from a proletarian family .
 Workplace differences in skill, remuneration, and quality of life continued to exist among workers . Yet enormous differences in skills and life continue to exist, experts say .
 Skilled glassworkers were no longer needed when the Siemens furnace, which permitted continuous production, was adapted to the production of bottles in the 1880s .
 Porcelain painters lost their jobs to unskilled female laborers when factory owners started using decals that could be applied to plates and then baked on . The decals were used to apply to plates, then be baked on, leaving painters out of work .
 Engineers, capable of designing, overseeing, and repairing machinery, became fixtures in factories . Engineers were able to design, oversee, and repair machinery . Engineers are now a fixture in factories across the world .
 In the 1880s, some engineers still had received training as apprentices, but by the first decades of the twentieth century, many had received university training in their chosen profession . By the first decade of the 20th century, engineers had had university training .
 By the end of the century, servants accounted for more than half of female workers in Britain . Servants accounted for over half of all female workers .
 Most female industrial workers were still employed in small workshops or at home . More women became factory workers in the 1930s .
 Even in the Habsburg Empire, about 900,000 women worked in factories, largely in unskilled jobs . Even in Germany or Britain, they were much less industrialized than Germany .
 Most men earn only about half the wages of their male counterparts for, some cases, the same jobs . Most of the men in the U.S. earn about half what they do for their jobs .
 Some women saw factory work as an improvement in wages and conditions over agricultural labor, cottage industry, or domestic service . Despite harsh working conditions and relatively low wages, some women said factory work was better than agricultural labor .
 Industrialization and the Working-Class Family Moralists bemoaned the effects of industrial work . Moralists argue that the uprooting of families from villages put them at risk .
 Moralists believed that only education, marriage, the habit of saving money, and a return to the old ways could save family life could save them . Moralists believe only education and marriage could save a family life .
 Women, they claimed, were being taken away from their reproductive function, and from family life itself . Women's rights campaigners say women's rights have been taken away by government .
 Working-class families in cities were much less likely to live with extended families than were country people . People in cities live with parents, grandparents, grandparents and in-laws .
 More families tended to be broken up early when children left villages in search of work in the cities, leaving aging parents to fend for themselves .
 Derbyshire pit boys were forced to work long hours in the factory for their parents and children .
 Moralists blamed increasingly homogeneous working-class neighborhoods, where drinking and domestic violence seemed rampant . Moralists blame homogeneous neighborhoods where drinking, domestic violence was rampant .
 Many women of child-bearing age who could afford to do so, or who had no other choice, tended children full time . Many women were able to afford to care for their children full-time .
 Once their offspring were old enough to care for themselves, many working-class mothers returned to factory work . But once their offspring was old enough, they returned to factories .
 Others worked at home, doing piecework and caring for their children at the same time . Others worked in part-time jobs, caring for children at home .
 Many women alternated between industrial wage labor and child rearing . Many women were forced to work in the factories and factories .
 As ever in the European experience, many women still were forced by economic circumstances into prostitution, in large cities, towns of modest size, and even villages .
 Some of the tens of thousands of prostitutes in Paris, London, Berlin, and Vienna worked in elegant brothels under the direction of a “madam’s” who allowed them only a couple days off per year .
 Others waited for customers in bars, doorways, windows, and parks . Others worked on their own, waiting for customers .
 Most prostitutes were working-class women who couldn't find industrial work . Some were married, some were unable to find work . Most prostitutes are women who can't find work at work .
 Many had had to leave school early to support younger siblings . Many were young, having had to come home early from school .
 Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec’s In the Salon at the Rue des Moulins depicts French prostitutes . Lautrec's work was first published in 18th Century France .
 Socialist parties expressed little interest in prostitution as an issue of reform . They blamed capitalism for the low wages or unemployment that forced many women into prostitution . Socialist parties said they were not interested in prostitution .
 In 1864, the British Parliament had passed the Contagious Diseases Act, which required medical examination of prostitutes . The Act was passed by Parliament in 1864 .
 The goal was to stop the spread of venereal disease, particularly syphilis, by hospitalizing prostitutes found to be infected . Prostitutes were hospitalized to prevent spread of disease .
 Contagious Diseases Act had the ironic effect of transforming prostitution from a temporary profession for many struggling working-class women to a dead-end, permanent job .
 Josephine Butler led a well-organized, determined campaign in Britain and then on the continent against the Contagious Diseases Act . Butler was the wife of a clergyman and president of an association encouraging higher education .
 Some opponents of the act objected that the law only called only for the inspection of prostitutes, not their clients . Others opposed extensive police regulatory authority .
 Parliament repealed the Contagious Diseases Act in 1886, and passed a law that banned brothels . Prostitutes were forced to operate in tolerated ‘red-light’ districts, where they were often subject to violence .
 Almost all of the victims of the still unidentified London killer “Jack the Ripper’s” were prostitutes . Almost all the victims were prostitutes.
 In France, laws placed prostitutes under greater regulatory control . Prostitutes are under greater regulation in France .
 The belief that morality could be legislated ebbed in Europe has ebbed . Gradually, the belief that . morality could . legislate in Europe ebbs in Europe .
 Charitable institutions more willingly provided assistance to unwed mothers and their offspring . They increasingly considered their sad situations as a social, not a moral, problem .
 Britain and Germany led the way, but France, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Sweden, and even Spain and Serbia also had high rates of urban growth .
 Classic ‘factory towns’ such as Manchester, Saint-Etienne, and Essen grew rapidly in size . So did so did the population of other towns, swollen by service workers and state and commercial employees .
 Rural industry, which provided spinning, weaving, and finishing work for hundreds of thousands of people, gradually disappeared during the last half of the century . Rural industry provided spinning and weaving work for tens of thousands .
 Mechanized agriculture and falling agricultural prices reduced demand for farm laborers . Migrants to towns in search of work in the booming service sector or industry .
 The population of Istanbul doubled in forty years, reaching 850,000 by 1886 . The city was swollen by the influx of Muslim refugees from Russia and the Balkans .
 Warsaw's population grew by more than four times from about 160,000 in 1850 to almost 800,000 people in 1911 . Two-thirds of the Polish city’s buildings had been built in the nineteenth century . Poland's population in 1911 grew by over four times .
 In Prague and Tallinn, Czechs and Estonians arrived in greater numbers from the countryside, changing the ethnic composition of these places . Czechs, Estonians and Czechs are among those who have arrived in the cities of Prague .
 Although some working-class families now lived in marginally more spacious lodgings, many . Many densely packed urban neighborhoods became ghastly slums . Although some . working . class families now . lived in some . more spacious . lodgations .
 London had its infamous "back to back" row houses, with little or no space between the houses and little more between the rows than outdoor toilets, if that, and garbage heaps .
 For most British workers, a parlor , a sign of ‘respectability,” remained only a dream . The parlor is still a dream in the UK .
 In Glasgow, Scotland, a third of the city’s families lived in one room, as more and more highlanders crowded into tall tenement dwellings . In the 1930s, the city's population was at the peak of its peak .
 Emperor Napoleon III had undertaken a massive rebuilding project in Paris during the 1850s and 1860s . Napoleon III built the city during his reign in France during the reign of Napoleon III .
 Together they planned the most extensive project of urban renewal since the rebuilding of London following the great fire in the seventeenth century and that of Edo in Japan at about the same time following the fire of 1657 .
 Napoleon III and Haussmann wanted to facilitate the expansion of commerce and industry through the creation of long, wide boulevards . The boulevard would be lined by symmetrical apartment buildings .
 It seemed an appropriate image to accompany the further consolidation of state power, it seemed . It seemed to be appropriate image .
 Glittering department stores and fancy cafes stood along the elegant boulevards, showcases to imperial monumentalism and modern life .
 Large iron structures provided space for Les Halles, the refurbished market of central Paris . The market was refurbished in 1950s .
 Some of the broad boulevards replaced narrow, winding streets, cutting through unhealthy neighborhoods . Some of these streets are no longer safe and dangerous enough to pass .
 Four hundred miles of underground sewers (which emptied into the Seine River northwest of Paris) improved health conditions in a city that had been recently ravaged by cholera .
 The cost of all these projects was enormous and far exceeded original estimates . It is not the first time that the cost of these projects has been estimated at $1 billion .
 Speculators tipped off as to where the next demolitions would take place . Speculation made a fortune, tipped off by where the future demolitions took place .
 London dwarfed them all, growing from 1. million to 4. million in 1891 . London's population grew from 1 million in 1840s to 4 million in 1890s .
 Between onefifth and one-sixth of the population of Britain lived in London . London was larger than the next seven largest English cities and Edinburgh combined combined .
 The sprawling imperial city seemed almost ungovernable, an imposing labyrinth of different jurisdictions with 10,000 people exercising varying degrees of authority . The sprawling Imperial city was also known as a maze of legal jurisdictions .
 London only had an effective local government after the establishment of the London City Council in 1889 . Unlike Paris, which was for the most part administered by the centralized French state, London had a local government .
 London is the largest port in the world and the administrative nerve center of the British Empire . London also remained a center of international banking, finance, and commerce .
 The influence of ‘the City’—London’s banking and finance district—extended around the world, channeling investment capital to innumerable countries within and beyond the empire . “The City” is London's banking and financial district .
 London was also a center of small-scale production and finishing in shops usually employing only a few skilled and semiskilled workers each . Small-scale shops such as in clothing industry, furniture making, engineering, and printing .
 The bustling East End docks employed a vast force of ‘casual labor’ - semiskilled and unskilled laborers who worked when work could be found . The East End was known as the East End's bustling docks .
 Homeless slept in empty or half-collapsed buildings, under bridges and railroad viaducts . Homeless slept where they could, in empty buildings and under bridges . The homeless slept in places they could fit in, such as empty buildings .
 Residents of these districts spoke a cockney dialect that was difficult for outsiders to understand, or with a thick Irish brogue, or in Yiddish . Residents of the districts spoke cockney or Irish brogues, or a thick English brogue .
 Budapest reveals social and ethnic complexity of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . Social segregation characteristic of the modern city is characteristic of modern city .
 This city on the Danube River grew from 120,000 inhabitants in 1848 to almost 900,000 people in 1914 . The city grew from about 120,00 inhabitants to 280,000 in 1867 and nearly 900,00 in 1914.
 Hungarian had been spoken by a minority of the population of the capital at mid-century . By then, Hungarian had become the language spoken by the vast majority of people in Hungary .
 Social differences were such that five forms of salutation were current, depending upon whom one was addressing . The complexity of social differences was such that .
 Urban growth in some places seems to have significantly increased only crimes against property . But, in fact, crime against property has only increased in urban areas . Urban growth has also increased in some areas .
 Crime rates in Glasgow fell during the last half of the century, despite the petty extortion carried out by youth gangs like the Penny Mob, the Redskins, and the Kelly Boys .
 Many contemporary observers inveighed against cities as promoting an anonymous, alienated mass of people . Many critics say cities promote an anonymous and alienated people .
 Relatives and friends who had the same dialect or accent or religion encouraged others to move to the city . They also served as conduits for information about jobs and lodgings . Relatives who shared the same accent or religious background encouraged people to move .
 ‘Chain migration’ created ‘urban villages’ that mitigated against uprooting and lawlessness . The resulting ‘chain’ migration created “urban villages,” which mitigated lawlessness and uprooting . “Chain” migration creates ‘
 Elevators carried wealthy occupants of apartment buildings to refurbished dwellings in the upper stories, where poorer people had once lived .
 Families of means lived along Vienna’s Ringstrasse and near the parks of west London . Families of . means lived in Vienna and west London, but not Vienna .
 As more suburbs developed around the edge of Europe’s larger cities, some, particularly outside London, catered to middle-class people who could commute into the city . Small houses offered more room and fresh air .
 These suburbs reflected some degree of planning and improved water and gas supply, among other municipal services . These suburbs, unlike most center cities, reflected some planning and better services .
 More and more workers commuted daily into town to work . Some still on foot, others by tram, subway, train, and later bus . The city's population grew in the 1970s .
 Modest suburbs even developed around Estonian capital Tallinn in the Russian Baltic provinces, where peasant workers settled on the edge of town .
 Municipal governments built historical monuments, constructed new hospitals and town halls, sponsored bands, and created beautiful parks complete with ornate bandstands . Municipal governments also built new hospitals, town halls and sponsored bands .
 They prided themselves on an increasingly diverse municipal cultural life, including occasional music festivals and perhaps even a museum . The city prided itself on a diverse cultural life .
 The proliferation of voluntary associations, such as clubs and choral societies, also came to be taken as symbols of urbanity as cities and towns continued to grow, transforming millions of Europeans .
 Same-sex acts had first been decriminalized in France in 1791, but gays and lesbians largely remained in the shadows . Hotel, restaurants, bars, parks and gardens provided places for them to meet .
 If the prostitution of women was very much out in the open, that of men was always less obvious . Men's prostitution was less obvious in the 1930s, but it was always out of the open . Men were always more likely to be involved in prostitution than women .
 Jeremy Bentham penned many pages defending same-sex relations, but never dared publish them . This was reflected by the fact that Bentham never published them . Bentham's defence of gay rights was never published in the UK, but he never published it .
 The Scientific-Humanitarian Committee was established in Berlin in 1897 . It was the first organization founded to support homosexual rights .
 The middle classes swelled during the Second Industrial Revolution, taking their places in Europe’s burgeoning cities . Social Mobility is a form of social mobility in the United States .
 Architects required draftsmen; companies needed accountants and bookkeepers . The London underground and Paris subway had to have agents . Architects needed draftsmen .
 The number of schoolteachers increased dramatically between the 1870s and 1914 . Five times more in Italy, 13 times in England, five times more than Italy .
 In Britain, the proportion of the population classified as lower middle class grew from 7 percent in 1850 to 20 percent in 1900 . In 1900, the population of the lower middle-class grew from about 7 percent to about 20 percent .
 They viewed such employment as a first step to one day owning their own store . With the optimism of the age, they viewed such . employment as an opportunity to become a store owner .
 They did not wear work clothes and did not do manual labor and they made a little more money than workers . They made more than workers, but also made more money, the author says .
 In European cities, women found jobs as department store clerks, stenographers, and secretaries . Women found jobs in European cities as department clerks and stenographers .
 There were twelve times as many secretaries in 1901 as there had been two decades earlier . Women held only 8 percent of post office and government clerical positions in 1861 . Women accounted for more than half in 1911, according to census figures .
 They now use metal pens that replaced the ageold quill and then the typewriter . The typewriter was invented in the 1880s .
 Gains made by workers seemed paltry when compared to the fortunes being made by industrialists, and even the salaries earned by management personnel . Gains for workers were compared to those of industrialists and even management personnel, according to reports .
 Workers walked to and from work while horse-drawn cabs raced by, carrying well-heeled occupants . These gnawing disparities aided unions and socialist parties in their quest for the allegiance of workers .
 During the mid-1890s, real wages, which had risen for several decades, entered a period of decline . Real wages, however, began to fall in the mid-'90s .
 Dizzying ‘rags to riches” tales (especially popular in the U.S. and Russia) suggested that hard work could lead to better conditions of life .
 Emigrants to the U.S. arrived with fantastically high expectations of what life would be like . Emigrants arrived with expectations of life in the United States .
 Inflated expectations often brought disappointment, as social mobility was extremely limited, particularly for first-generation immigrants . Social mobility was very limited, especially for first generation immigrants .
 During the last decades of the century, 95 percent of American industrialists came from upperor middle-class families . Not more than 3 percent were the sons of poor immigrants or farmers .
 Among immigrants and native-born workers in the United States, the most common form of social advancement was within the working class, not into a higher social group . In the U.S. immigrants and natives, social advancement is within a working class .
 There were fewer possibilities of movement by workers into the middle class during the hard years of the 1880s than there had been during the middle decades of the century . Despite movement in Western European countries into clerical and other lower-middle-class jobs, however, there were fewer opportunities of
 Craftsmen and skilled workers had a far better chance for social ascension than did unskilled workers . Craftsman and skilled worker had a better chance of social success than unskilled people .
 Those who did move up to middle-class employment were the exceptions . As in the United States, those who did not move up were the exception .
 The vast majority of marriages in Europe took place between partners considered social equals . The majority of Europe's marriages were between social equals, according to the statistics .
 Working-class women were more likely than their brothers to achieve some social mobility . They married for example, by marrying a clerk or railroad station employee . Women were also more likely to marry their brothers .
 In every country, states took enormous strides to bring education to more people . Education and religion are key issues in the United States .
 The state’s increased role in education in Western Europe contributed to a growing secularization of public life . The increased role of the state in education has contributed to the secularization in public life, the author says .
 At the same time, the established churches lost the allegiance of many ordinary Europeans . The established churches have also lost their allegiance to ordinary Europeans, according to reports .
 Education Literacy rose rapidly during the last decades of the century in Europe as more governments enacted educational reforms . Literacy in Europe rose rapidly in the 1990s and 2000s as governments enacted reforms .
 Literacy rates were higher in northwestern Europe than in southern and eastern Europe . Progress was notable in Russia around the turn of the century . Literacy was higher in Russia and Russia .
 In 1880, Parliament passed a law requiring that all children between five and ten years of age attend primary school, up to age twelve beginning in 1899 . In 1891 primary education became free in 1891 .
 Truancy officers in workingclass neighborhoods encountered resistance from parents who preferred the supplementary income from their children’s work to their schooling .
 State inspectors maintained educational standards, requiring villages to provide better facilities for their schools and accommodations for teachers . State inspectors maintain educational standards .
 In France, primary schools were made free, obligatory, and secular for all children from age three to 13 . The Ferry Laws were passed in France in 1879-1881, named after Minister of Education Jules Ferry .
 Bretons, Proveniumaux, Gascons, Basques, Catalans, and people speaking regional patois learned French . French became spoken by most people, although bilingualism remained common .
 In Italy, Italian ceased to be a language spoken only by the upper class . Italian is now a national language spoken in Italy by the majority of the population .
 The percentage of people able to read and write still varied considerably from country to country . Percentage of people who were able to write and read still varies considerably between countries .
 More men could read and write than women, more urban residents than rural people . More urban residents were more likely to read or write than rural residents in the United States .
 In France, 40 percent of military conscripts had not been able to read or write at mid-century . The percentage had fallen at the turn of the century to only 6 percent . In France it was 40 percent not able to write or read or read .
 In 1860, 75 percent of Italian men and almost 90 percent of women could neither read nor write . Public letter writers were used to write what correspondence they required .
 In southern Italy and Sicily, more than half of the children in many places still did not attend school regularly or at all . In many places, children still do not attend schools regularly or all .
 By the turn of the century less than 1 percent of the population remained illiterate in Germany . In Germany, by the mid-century, the illiterate population was at the lowest level .
 In Russia, illiteracy fell from about 90 percent of the population in the 1860s to about 75 percent by 1910 . Literacy in Russia fell from 90 percent in 1860 to 75 percent in 1910 .
 The older generation of Russians mistrusted education, fearing it would erode village religious culture . Younger peasants ridiculed their superstitious parents and welcomed self-improvement through education .
 During the 1870s and 1880s, the issue of female education surged to the forefront in Western Europe . The issue of women's education was the focus of Western Europe during the period .
 Only women whose families were able and willing to pay the required fees received secondary education . Only women who were able to pay for secondary education were allowed to go to school .
 Both lay teachers and nuns instructed girls in the domestic mission of women, stressing gender differences and promoting deference to their future husbands .
 Schooling for boys and girls alike emphasized patriotic, secular, and politically conservative themes . Schooling was based on patriotic themes and themes .
 Female teachers of girls were to be considered morally irreproachable and thoroughly secular mother figures within their communities . Female teachers were considered to be moral and non-judgmental mother figures .
 In Western Europe, more young people attended secondary schools . The number tripling in Germany and quadrupling in France between 1875 and 1912 .
 Many families viewed education as a way of improving the employment and marriage possibilities for their daughters . Many families view education as an opportunity to improve the employment, marriage possibilities .
 Secondary education in general remained possible only for families of some means . Yet secondary education was still possible in general for some means.
 Existing educational systems reinforced social distinctions of class, counseling ‘patient resignation’ to one's economic and social condition, says author .
 Secondary schools taught skills that led to good jobs, but they drew very few children from the lower classes . Secondary schools teach skills that can lead to a good job .
 In the 1860s and 1870s, boarding schools in England catered to middle-class students . The sons of “gentlemen” attended the nine old elite “public” schools .
 Although the number of university students tripled in Europe during this period, university education remained limited to a tiny proportion of the population drawn from the upper classes . The number of European university students doubled in this period .
 In all of Britain, there were only 13,000 university students in 1913 in a total population of 36 million people . The percentage of university students drawn from the middle classes had greatly increased . Technical colleges began to attract more students .
 Only 1 in 1,000 university students in Prussia had parents who were workers . In Prussia, for example, only 1 in 2,000 students had parents working for the government .
 The Russian tsars reversed the European trend during the course of the century . They made it more difficult for non-nobles to attend secondary school and university . The tsars made it harder for the non-Nobles to go to university .
 Overall, overall, the number of universities increased . In Hungary, three new ones opened their doors .
 In the 1870s, there were already women’s colleges in England and women began university study in Denmark and Sweden . In the 1870s, women's colleges were already established in England .
 Women did not attend university until the late 1890s . In Germany, professors constituted the ‘intellectual bodyguard’ of the Hohenzollern dynasty .
 Heinrich von Treitschke stopped speaking after seeing a woman in his lecture course . The historian stopped speaking when he saw a woman .
 Only in 1909 did women obtain the right to study in any German university . Women were allowed to study at all German universities for the first time .
 Women could not receive degrees or have full privileges as students at Oxford until 1920 and at Cambridge until 1948 . Women were not allowed to receive degrees at Oxford or Cambridge until 1920 .
 Many clergy viewed the period of rapid social change at the turn of the century with anxiety . In a century of vigorous state secularization, particularly in Western Europe, clergy viewed social change with anxiety.
 Institutional influence of churches on states has declined dramatically in most of Europe . The institutional influence of the churches on state has also declined dramatically .
 More than this, in some places, the influence of organized religion on society continued to wane .
 Secular education espousing the cult of the nation accelerated this trend, even though many people in Catholic countries still attended Church schools . Secular schooling accelerated the trend of secular education in many countries .
 A survey at the turn of the century revealed that less than 20 percent of the population regularly attended services, a marked decline . In London, a survey found that fewer than 20 per cent of people regularly attend services .
 In Spain, Galicia, the Basque provinces, and much of Castile remained devout, while much of southern Spain did not . Galicia and the Basques provinces of Spain remained devout .
 The first Catholic sociologists of religion found a sharp rise in “dechristianized” regions . Rates of couples not having church marriages or being slow to have their children baptized, or the decline in religious vocations .
 By the 1890s, the Church considered some Catholic faithful at the Grotto of Lourdes regions in France, and most working-class districts of large European cities, to be “missionary” areas . This way defined like China or the Congo .
 The loss of the Church’s hold on ordinary people was reflected in the decline in the birthrate . The decline is explicable in part by increased use of birth control, according to experts .
 The decline of religious practice in Europe was not linear, nor did it occur everywhere . Yet it was neither linear nor was everywhere .
 A revival of popular religious enthusiasm occurred in some places between 1830 and 1880, particularly among the upper classes . The revival of religious enthusiasm began in 1830s and 1880s .
 In Sweden the ‘Great Awakening’ brought the revival of popular religion . In Sweden, the 'Great Awakening' was the first major revival of Christianity .
 In Catholic countries, lithography and printing presses helped rekindle devotion, spreading the news of religious shrines . The printing presses were used to spread news of shrines across Europe .
 The cult of the Virgin Mary also contributed to the feminization of religion in Catholic countries, perhaps encouraging more young women to enter convents . The cult has contributed to a feminization in the Catholic church .
 Growing cult of miracles was part of a revival of popular religion, particularly in France, Italy, and Spain .
 Bernadette, a peasant girl later canonized by the Church, announced in 1858 that the Virgin Mary had appeared to her near Lourdes in the central Pyrenees in France .
 Religious pilgrimages by train to sites of miracles became big business in the 1980s . Religious pilgrims by train became a big business .
 In the first decade of the new century, more than a million people came to Lourdes each year . Many hoped to be cured of illness and disease . In the last decade, over a million came to the church hoping to cure themselves .
 The popularity of pilgrimages reflected the resiliency of the Catholic Church, even in a time of growing doubt . The Catholic Church is seen as a major source of strength in the world .
 During the last decades of the nineteenth century, consumerism developed in the countries of Europe, again with considerable country-to-country variation . The Consumer Explosion was a major event in the 19th century .
 The new leisure activities of the Belle Epoque themselves reflected the Second Industrial Revolution . The Belle Eposque's leisure activities reflected the new industrial revolution .
 Sports such as soccer and rugby, bicycle and automobile races, and track and field, attracted participants and spectators . Sports also encouraged formation of clubs .
 Department stores reflected and helped shape the burgeoning consumer culture . Department stores reflect and help shape the world's consumer culture. Department stores helped shape consumer culture in the 1960s .
 First in London, Paris, and Berlin, department stores transformed the way many families shopped . First in Paris, London, Berlin, and Paris department stores .
 They attracted prosperous clients in search of quality ready-made clothes that were less expensive than those stitched by tailors . Clients were looking for quality ready made clothes .
 The stores were monuments to the dynamism of bourgeois culture . They displayed in their windows products that reflected material progress . The stores showed in their window windows that reflect material progress.
 Department stores also stocked more inexpensive clothing, while adding umbrellas, toothbrushes, stationery, and much more . Department stores are also stocking more inexpensive clothes .
 All of this required the organization into departments overseen by trained managers, which typified the Second Industrial Revolution . The organization was organized under trained managers .
 The expanding clientele of department stores included the families of shopkeepers, civil servants, and clerks of more modest means, and gradually workers as well .
 On an average day in the 1890s, 15,000 to 18,000 people entered the ‘Bon Marche’—still a Parisian landmark . The Bon Marche is still a Paris landmark .
 Glossy catalogues in color, advancing advertising techniques, permitted shoppers to make purchases in the comfort of their homes . Glossy advertisements in color allowed shoppers to purchase from their own home .
 Advertisers began to direct their appeals at the ‘new woman,” the housewife of taste, who had the time to create the model home and had some money to spend . The new woman of taste was the housewives of taste .
 The owners of department stores wanted shopping to become an experience in itself, like a visit to a world’s fair . One could now buy some of the displayed wonders of human innovation .
 The great department stores were enormous, stately structures topped with cupolas, with iron columns and an expanse of glass giving shoppers a sense of space and light . The stores were stately stately buildings topped by cupolas and iron columns .
 Department stores became tourist sights, with dazzled visitors themselves becoming part of the spectacle . Department stores are now a tourist destination .
 During the Belle Epoque, there was more to do than ever before for those with time for leisure and money to spend . Leisure in the Queen's Palace of Versailles was more than ever .
 Dance halls, cafes, and cafeconcerts lined the grands boulevards attracting throngs of Parisians and tourists alike . The performances of musicians, singers, poets, comedians, jugglers, acrobats, acrobatics, female wrestlers, and snake charmers
 Hundreds of thousands of Londoners and Parisians attended the theater at least once a week . The theater was open at the end of the 1930s and '90s .
 The tango and the turkey trot, imported from the Americas, were banned in some establishments . Some establishments banned the tango or turkey trottes .
 German Emperor William II forbade officers from dancing these steps while in uniform . Officers were banned from doing the steps in uniform by William II .
 The talented and beautiful actress Sarah Bernhardt embodied images of fin-de-siecle Europe . Bernhardt died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 She became famous for her dramatic expressiveness and ability to communicate tears to an audience through her supremely evocative voice . The daughter of a Dutch immigrant, she is the daughter of an immigrant .
 Bernhardt learned her trade from the traditions of the popular boulevard theater . Bernhardt was born in New York City, New York .
 Barnum offered her a fortune if she would allow him to take it on the road and exhibit it with his famous circus . Barnum, upon hearing that she risked the amputation of a leg, offered her $10,000 for it .
 Sports emerged as a prominent feature of mass society during the last decades of the century . Sports in Mass Society is linked to modern transportation and to a general increase in leisure time .
 The actress Sarah Bernhardt dramatically laid out in the Art Nouveau style in a coffin . Some of the cars were powered by electricity, others by electricity . The actress Bernhardt was laid out as a coffin in the 1930s .
 Competition between two cycling clubs led to the first Tour de France race in 1903 . Riders covered almost 1,500 miles in nineteen days in the first race in France .
 Many people rode bicycles themselves, both for leisure and as a source of transportation . Not only did people watch bicycle races, many rode bicycles for leisure .
 The bicycle reflects the technological innovation and mass production of the Second Industrial Revolution . A simple mechanism, the bicycle nonetheless reflected technological innovation . The bicycle was the first to be made from scratch .
 By the late 1880s, bicycles were lighter, more affordable, and more easily repaired or replaced . Bicycles were lighter and more affordable in the 1880s .
 Their manufacture became a major industry, with 375,000 produced in France by 1898 and 3. million in 1914 . Their manufacture also became an important industry in France .
 Some men complained that the clothes women wore while riding bicycles were unfeminine . But some men complained it was unfashionable to wear while riding bikes .
 Moralists were concerned that rough paths and roads might interfere with childbearing or lead to debauchery by generating physical pleasure .
 The bicycle may have changed what some people considered the feminine ideal from plumpness to a more svelte line . The bicycle also changed what people considered a feminine ideal .
 Team sports quickly developed as a leisure activity during the second half of the nineteenth century . Team sports also developed as team sports as leisure activities in the late 19th century .
 The two most popular team sports in Europe, football and rugby, both began in England . Football and rugby are the two most successful teams in Europe .
 Rugby developed at Cambridge and Oxford Universities in the 1860s . Rugby was an upper-class sport at the time .
 Football had much earlier origins, perhaps going back to when Vikings and Russians used to “kick the Dane’s head around”—literally. Football had earlier origins .
 Professional football began in England in 1863 . Eight years later, there were fifteen clubs playing for the championship . Professional football was first professional football .
 Baron Pierre de Coubertin organized the first modern Olympic Games held in Athens in 1896 in homage to the Greek creators of the Olympiad . Baron feared that the young men of his country were becoming soft, organized the Games .
 He revered the contemporary image of hard-riding, athletic upper-class Englishmen playing sports at Eton and Cambridge . An Anglophile, he revered the modern image of working hard at home and expanding Britain .
 There was more to the rise of sports and the cult of physical vigor than simply games and fun . There was also more to sport than simply simply games, fun, fun .
 The development of sports culture also reflected the mood of aggressive nationalism . Sports culture also reflects the mood for aggressive nationalism in the country .
 The development of feminism in Western Europe may have contributed to what has been called a “crisis of masculinity,” by which many men saw the strengthening of the “weaker sex” as the weakening of men .
 Growing interest in sports competition was an affirmation of masculinity, according to some . By this view, growing interest in sport competition was a form of masculinity . Growing interest was also seen as a sign of masculinity in the world .
 The emerging interest in the times it took to run distances may have reflected fascination with scientific management . Furthermore, the emerging interest may also reflect fascination with managing .
 In Germany, “wandering youth” clubs became popular, sending young boys out to camp under the stars . In Great Britain, Robert Baden-Powell founded the Boy Scouts. In Germany it became popular .
 Interest in sports touched all classes and reflected class differences . Interest in sport was reflected in class differences in the world, says historian .
 People of great means were no longer the only people able to enjoy sports . Sports is no longer just a matter of fun for the rich and famous .
 Working-class cycling and gymnastic clubs also began to spring up in the 1880s in Western Europe . The upper classes had their own sporting associations, which retained a preference for horse racing .
 The Second Industrial Revolution transformed the way many Europeans lived . Conclusion: It was a revolution that transformed the lives of many Europeans .
 Most Europeans could now read and write, but they were less likely to go to church regularly than earlier generations . In Western Europe, church attendance was less likely than in earlier generations of Europeans .
 Economic and social inequalities generated union organization, the growth of mass political parties . At the same time, economic and social inequality generated unions, political parties and waves of social protest .
 Nationalism became a political force in many countries during the last three decades of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century . Nationalism engulfed monarchies and republics of western and southern Europe but also the empires of central and eastern Europe .
 The rapid pace of material progress and scientific and technological advances generated innovative, complex cultural responses during the remarkable years that brought the nineteenth century to a close and saw the dawning of the modern world .
 Government officials, social reformers, and politicians had to confront the difficult conditions of many workers and their families . It was called “the problem of problems,” as it was called in Britain .
 Some states began to enact social reforms to improve the quality of life for workers and other poor people . Some states enacted social reforms for workers .
 Large socialist parties that wanted to capture control of the state was one of the salient signs of the advent of mass political life . At the same time, the growth of large socialist parties was also a sign of the rise of mass politics .
 Marxist socialists believed that inevitably a working-class revolution would bring down capitalism . Marxist socialists thought that inevitably, inevitably, a working class revolution would end capitalism . The revolution did not end in the West .
 Reform socialists believed that electoral victories could lead to a socialist state . Reforms believed that along the way to ultimate victory socialists could exert pressure on states to improve conditions of life for ordinary people . Reform socialists, however, believed that .
 Anarchists launched a campaign of terrorism at the turn of the century, carrying out political assassinations . Believed that violent acts would provide a spark that would unleash a social revolution .
 In parts of Europe, trade unionists known as syndicalists believed that trade unions would provide a blueprint of how society would be organized after a successful revolution . Trade unions provide a means by which workers could take control of the state .
 Early-nineteenthand early-twentieth-century Europe had cultural pessimism and artistic rebellion . Modernist critique of the idea of progress itself .
 Karl Marx's gloomy prediction that workers’ wages and overall conditions of life would continue to decline had not been borne out in late-nineteenth-century Europe . Karl Marx’s gloomy prediction was not borne out . State Social Reform is the latest chapter of a series of stories
 Economic uncertainty and grinding poverty seemed to have engendered a social crisis of unmatched proportions . Yet economic uncertainty and . grinding poverty engendered an unmatched . proportions. Yet .
 Descriptions of the dreary slums of blackened manufacturing towns reached many readers through novels and surveys of working-class life . Descriptions were often made of the slums in black factories .
 States began to intervene to assist the poor in 1870s as a result of the impact of large-scale industrialization . State intervention began in response to industrialization's visible impact .
 States and charitable organizations increasingly came to consider poverty a social and not a moral problem . States considered poverty as a social problem, but it was considered a moral issue .
 The political left in Western European states demanded measures of social reform . Social reform is a key part of the political process in Europe .
 In France and Italy, programs of subsidies for unwed mothers overcame the opposition of the Catholic Church . In Italy and France, the programs overcame opposition from the Catholic church .
 Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Sweden then implemented short paid maternity leaves for women who had insurance .
 Organized assitance for the elderly lagged behind in part because of the traditional assumption that families were responsible for their care . Families are responsible for the care of the elderly, but not the elderly .
 Some Western European employers have sought to maintain worker loyalty through paternalistic policies . The rise of militancy in the workplace has led to increased militancy among workers .
 Workers encouraged to form savings associations by matching small sums they could put aside for the future . Working-class families could put together small sums of money to save for future .
 Yet such paternalistic policies, largely confined to Western Europe, were far from being generalized . Yet, they are still not being generalized.
 Some social reformers, many politicians, and most workers demanded state intervention to protect workers from some of the uncertainties and hardships of their labor . Social reformers and many politicians have demanded that state intervention .
 Imperial Germany first provided workers some protection against personal and family disaster stemming from work-related accidents . Imperial Germany, not republican France or parliamentary Britain, provided protection .
 Bismarck carried out domestic policies based upon compromise and conciliation between middleclass political interests and working-class demands . He was determined to preserve his own power and the autocratic structure of the empire .
 The German chancellor placed socialists in the delicate position of either opposing bills that would benefit workers or appearing to compromise their ideologically based refusal to collaborate with the imperial government .
 Sickness Insurance Law of 1883 covered all workers for up to thirteen weeks if their income fell below a certain level . Sickness insurance law covered workers in up to 13 weeks if income was below that level .
 A year later Bismarck announced a staterun insurance program that would incorporate existing voluntary plans . The program was incorporated into a voluntary program .
 It would compensate workers for injury and illness, as well as provide retirement funds . It would also provide some retirement funds for injured workers .
 Other laws required that all workers be insured against accidents and disability, with half of the funds paid by employers . Other laws provided pensions for workers who lived until seventy years of age .
 Many German workers received medical care, small payments when they were ill or injured, and, if worse came to worse, a decent burial . By the turn of the century, many German workers were given medical care and payments .
 In comparison to Germany, Britain’s social policies were out of an earlier era . Germany's social policies are similar to those of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Workhouses, created by the Poor Law of 1834, still carried a social stigma . Workhouses were still stigmatised even though conditions had improved by the end of the century . The Poor Law was passed in 1834 and the Poor Act was introduced in 1841 .
 The vast majority of the inmates of the workhouses were children, the infirm, single mothers, the aged, or the insane . Children, infirm and infirm were among those who were not able-bodied unemployed .
 The Poor Law, slightly reformed, remained on the books until 1929 . Public opinion had already turned against workhouses, but the law was still popular .
 Victorian social reforms had been largely limited to establishing minimum health standards . The first Victorian social reform was to establish minimum standards for health .
 Factory Act then reduced the workweek in large factories to fifty-six hours . The Factory Act was then reduced in size of factories across the world . Factory Act also cut the work week in factories to 50 hours .
 The Artisans’ Dwelling Act, passed the same year, defined unsanitary housing and gave the state the right to order the demolition of slum buildings that fell below a minimum standard .
 The Workmen’s Compensation Law made employers responsible for bearing the cost of industrial accidents . Another act extended the same protection to agricultural workers .
 Age Pension Act provided some income for workers over seventy years of age whose incomes fell below a paltry sum per week . Age pension Act was set up to provide income for those over seventy-years-old whose incomes were less than £1,000 a week .
 The 'deserving' poor in Britain could receive small old-age pensions in 1908 . In 1908 the ‘deserving’s poor were able to receive small pension payments .
 As a result of the National Insurance Bill, workers’ friendly societies administered insurance payments based on voluntary (and thus unlike the German case) employee wage deductions .
 The law’s most salutary effect was to provide more workers and their families with direct medical treatment . The law was passed by Congress in 2010 .
 A third of the British poor still received no assistance of any kind . Yet a third of them still receive no assistance from the UK government .
 Government assistance to unemployed workers in Britain was less well organized and less generous than that in France . Government assistance in Britain is less well-organized than in France and France .
 In France, the Chamber of Deputies between 1890 and 1904 passed laws that eliminated obligatory special identity papers, or internal passports, for workers . They also established a minimum age for industrial workers, and mandated an obligatory weekly day of rest for women and children .
 It also affirmed the right of the state to monitor conditions of work and hygiene in factories . The state also passed a workmen’s compensation law with modest pension benefits and limited medical care for working-class families .
 With the exception of Belgium, Sweden, and a smattering of other countries, in most of Europe workers could only dream of such reforms . In most of the European countries, workers are unlikely to be able to dream of similar reforms .
 The goals of unions were to raise wages and improve conditions, while increasing the number of members, union leaders say . The goals were to increase the number and wages of members .
 By 1914, 3 million workers had joined unions in Britain, 1. million in Germany, and 1 million in Italy . 3 million people joined unions across Europe .
 White-collar unions also increased, such as those organizing schoolteachers and postal clerks . The number of white-collar union members also increased .
 In 1913, there were more than 400,000 union members in Austria, a country of only 6 million inhabitants . Austria was home to more than 300,000 unions .
 In 1895, French unions formed the General Confederation of Labor . The goal of unifying the trade union movement was to unify the movement .
 The C.G.T., to which about a third of French unions belonged, renounced participation in politics and espoused revolutionary principles . It was the first time a French union had renounced its membership in politics .
 May Day demonstrations and festivals, with red flags flying, vigorous political debates, consumer cooperatives, and informal networks provided by factory work and cafes, also helped maintain solidarity .
 Most European workers did not belong to unions, although many supported strikes and union goals . However, most European workers believed in union goals and supported strikes . Most of Europe's workers were not union members .
 The 1875 Trade Union Act ended many limitations on unions in Britain . By the turn of the century only about 25 percent of British workers were organized, 10 percent were in France, and even less in Italy .
 Considerable gaps remained between the work experience, salary, organizations, and expectations of skilled and unskilled workers . The gap remained between work experience and salary expectations .
 Many workers moved from place to place, following employment opportunities . Many of the workers moved to places to find employment opportunities.
 Those with urban roots are far more easily organized than recently arrived migrants from smaller towns or villages . Urban roots are more easily organised than recent arrivals from small towns and villages .
 Irish and English workers in London, German and Czech workers in Prague, or Belgian and French workers in northern France . Differences and tensions between workers of different national groups .
 The union organization of female workers lagged far behind that of men . Women's union organization lags far behind those of men.
 Women made up 30 percent of the British labor force, but only about 7 percent of union members . Women make up about 7 per cent of the union members in the UK .
 Almost all female workers were relegated to relatively unskilled and low-paying jobs . They confronted chronic vulnerability to being dismissed . Almost all women faced being dismissed in the workplace .
 Women also had to take responsibility for their children, something male union members often failed to recognize . Women's union members were often not recognized by the union .
 Women workers also struck in the face of tougher working conditions, low wages, and, occasionally, sexual harassment . Yet women workers also strike in face of tough working conditions and low wages .
 Workers hoped to force government officials to pressure employers to bargain with them . Workers hoped that they could force them to force employers to take action .
 They struck when employers seemed most vulnerable, when they had recently received relatively large orders for products . The victims were targeted when employers were most vulnerable .
 The vast majority of strikes were undertaken by skilled, organized workers in largescale sectors such as textiles, mining, and metallurgy, whose unions had resources .
 Strike movements reflect a more generalized sense of class consciousness among many, but hardly all, workers . Strike movements reflected a more general sense of Class consciousness among workers, the author says .
 Strikes reflected growth in union membership but also changes in organization of industrial work . Strikes reflected changes in industrial work, union membership and organization of work, unions say .
 In addition to low wages and the length of their workday, workers also resented factory foremen . Workers resented foremen for long hours and low wages .
 Foremen sought to impose industrial discipline on workers, some of whom had worked on farms or in domestic industry . Some of the foremen had more or less controlled their own time . The foremen sought industrial discipline .
 They were forbidden to enter and leave the factory as they wished when they wished, or when they had nothing to do, or even to talk on the job . Now they are forbidden from entering and leaving the factory when they wish .
 Techniques of scientific management of assembly-line production included careful counting of the units assembled by each worker in an hour . “Taylorism’s” after Frederick W Taylor .
 Such industrial discipline placed factory workers more directly under the control of factory managers by measuring worker performance, tying pay scales to the number of units produced, which put more pressure on workers .
 A British visitor asked repeatedly where the older workers were in a Philadelphia factory . Almost all the factory workers employed by a Philadelphia manufacturer were young, he said .
 The Socialist First International Workingmen’s Association was founded in 1864 in London . It was founded by the First International Workers' Association .
 Members represented a bewildering variety of experiences and ideologies . Members were represented by a variety of ideologies .
 He was convinced that the final struggle between the bourgeoisie and the working class was relatively close at hand . The final struggle was between the working and the bourgeoisie, he said .
 Marx’s inflexible beliefs ran counter to the views of the majority of French members, some of whom were anarchists, and to the moderate, reformist inclinations of the more prosperous British workers, as well as their German colleagues . Marx was also opposed to the ideas of
 The First International was dissolved in 1876 amid internal division . It was weakened by repression in many countries, having been weakened .
 socialism emerged as a major political force in every major European nation . Nonetheless, socialism has been a major force in many European countries .
 At its congresses, socialists discussed strategies for pushing governments toward reform and for coordinating international action . The socialists debated differences over doctrine and strategy .
 Mass socialist parties developed in France, Germany, Italy, Italy and Belgium . During the last two decades of the nineteenth century, mass socialist parties were developed .
 Every Western European state had working-class representatives in their national assemblies . By the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, every Western European nation had working class representatives in national assemblies.
 Workers believed a revolution would put the working class in power . Contending that workers in different nations shared common interests, they believed that a revolution was necessary .
 For Marxist adherents of his ‘scientific socialism,’ emancipation of the workers from capitalism could only be achieved by the conquest of the state through revolution and the subsequent establishment of a socialist society . For Marxist followers of his 'scientific socialism' the state must be overthrown .
 Reform socialists believed that political participation could win concrete reforms that would improve conditions of life for workers until socialists could take power . Reform socialists thought political participation was the best way to win reforms .
 Reformists participated in the political process, even at the cost of being accused by revolutionary socialists of propping up ‘bourgeois’ regimes by doing so . Reformists were accused of being ‘propping up’s “bourgeoise” regimes by
 Legislation in many countries had brought improvement in conditions of work, however unevenly felt . Legislation in some countries brought improvements in conditions, however .
 The extension of the franchise also offered hope that progress might come without a revolution . Given the strength of states, it seemed to seem to be increasingly unlikely .
 The debates and divisions that obsessed European socialists revolved around common questions . Yet, they were common questions about common questions, such as the question of the future .
 Czech socialists challenged the domination of the Austrian Social Democrats by German speakers who seemed oblivious to Czech demands . Czech socialists with national aspirations for their people .
 In the event of an outbreak of a European war, socialists were divided on what response they should take in the event . Finally, amid rising aggressive nationalism, they were divided over what they should do .
 Russia's industrial workers counted on Russia’s industrial workers to launch a revolution, but only after Russia had undergone a bourgeois revolution anticipated to bring the middle class to power . The revolution was expected to bring Russia to power, but it was not expected to happen until after the bourgeois revolution
 In the 1880s, socialists formed reading groups in the imperial capital of Saint Petersburg . The reading groups were made up of intellectuals, students and workers .
 Exiles began to publish socialist newspapers abroad, smuggling them into Russia . Exiles published newspapers abroad and smuggled them into the country .
 Great Britain's handful of socialists were virtually all intellectuals and reformists . Great Britain’s handful of socialist leaders were largely intellectuals and reformsists .
 In 1884, a group of intellectuals formed the Fabian Society, which took its name from the Roman dictator Fabius . Fabius was known for his delaying tactics . The society was formed in 1884 .
 Fabians took the tortoise as their emblem . The Fabians were committed to gradualism .
 The author of the best-selling Progress and Poverty, George, argued that the great gulf in Britain between rich and poor could be lessened by the imposition of a ‘single tax’ on land .
 The single taxers believed that socialism could be gradually implemented through reform . The ‘single taxers’ believed that . socialism could . be gradually . implemented through . reform, they said .
 Most German socialists did not accept Marx’s contention that the working class could only take power through revolution . Most of the German socialists rejected Marx's claim that revolution was possible .
 In 1863, Ferdinand Lassalle formed the first independent workers’ party in any of the German states . In 1863 he formed the son of a Prussian merchant and formed the party .
 Lassalle only lived a year more—killed in a duel at age thirty-nine by the fiance of the woman he loved . He was killed in the death of his fiance .
 Despite official proscription in 1878, it slowly grew into a mass political party . It slowly grew to a mass party in the 1880s .
 Eduard Bernstein, son of a Berlin plumber who became a railway engineer, helped the reformists carry the day by rejecting the Marxists’ insistence that capitalist society was on the verge of collapse .
 He became a leading socialist ‘revisionist’ who believed that the party should continue to push for reforms, not revolution . He became the party's leading socialist "revisionists"
 The SPD’s popular vote in the elections for the Reichstag rose from less than 10 percent in 1884 to almost 35 percent in 1912 . In 1914, the SPD was the largest German political party in 1914 .
 SPD had more than a million members in 1914 . Women could join the party following the passage of a national law on associations in 1908 . Women were not permitted to vote .
 SPD worked to build cradle-to-grave social institutions that would give members a sense that they belonged to a special culture . The SPD established consumer cooperatives, choral societies, and cycling clubs . SPD members of the SPD were born in Germany .
 Unlike French socialists, the SPD developed a close alliance with the trade union movement . SPD helped found some unions in France .
 The SPD became the largest and best-organized socialist party in Europe . SPD published more than a hundred newspapers and magazines .
 The party’s organization and reformism influenced the evolution of similar parties in Belgium, Austria, and Switzerland .
 SPD was caught in the paradox of struggling for social and political reform in a society that remained undemocratic . The SPD remained in the midst of a society, that of imperial Germany, that remained in many ways undemocratically .
 In France, that country’s revolutionary tradition and, above all, the memory of the Paris Commune of 1871, encouraged some French socialists to believe that revolution would bring them to power . Some French socialists believed that revolution was the only way to get into power .
 The Parisian socialist Jules Guesde was known as “the Red Pope” He espoused Marxist socialism . He was rigid, humorless, and doctrinaire .
 Guesde viewed electoral campaigns as an opportunity to propagate Marxian socialism, although his followers joined the battle for an eight-hour workday and other reforms .
 During elections, revolutionary and reform socialists often put differences behind them, winning control over the municipal governments of several industrial cities . During elections they often put their differences behind their differences .
 The results in France of ‘municipal socialism,’ while subsidizing some services for ordinary people, were limited by the strongly centralized state . But the results in ‘maintained socialism’ in France were limited to the strong state .
 Alexandre Millerand accepted a cabinet post in 1899 . The split between revolutionary and reform socialists again lay bare .
 The socialists became the second largest party in France in 1914 . They held a fifth of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies . The socialists were the party's second largest in France .
 In Italy, socialists had to overcome the entrenched power of local elites, repression, and the strong attraction of anarchism, particularly in southern Italy . In Italy they faced an entrenched power .
 In Spain, real power still lay in the hands of powerful local government officials and landowners . The Cortes, backed by the Catholic Church and the army, still wields real power .
 In contrast to Germany, France, and Italy, the first Spanish socialists were not elected to Parliament until 1909 . The first Spanish socialist party was elected to the Spanish Parliament in 1909 .
 In Catholic countries, the Church still provided an alternative allegiance to the nation-state . Christian Socialism in the 1930s was a form of state socialism .
 The secularization of state and social institutions, along with nationalism itself, reduced the Church’s influence in some Catholic countries . However, the secularization and nationalism itself also reduced the influence of the Church .
 Papal pronouncements seemed to stand steadfastly against social and political change, especially against the emergence of the nation-state and parliamentary forms of government . The Papal Catholic Church has been in decline for centuries .
 In 1870, the Church proclaimed the doctrine of papal infallibility, which stated that in matters of faith and morals the pope’s pronouncements would have to be taken as absolute truth . The pope's pronouncements were deemed infallible by the Church .
 The Church backed monarchical regimes in Spain and Portugal and opposed the newly unified state in Italy . At the beginning of the French Third Republic, the Church lent tacit support to monarchist movements in France .
 One of the unintended effects of Rerum Novarum was the development of ‘Christian Socialist’ movements in France, Germany, Belgium, and Italy in the 1890s . The Church itself generally repudiated them .
 Christian Socialists hoped to bring employers and workers back to the Church . Christian Socialist hopes to bring workers and employers back into the church .
 Some clergy and laymen and -women organized clubs, vacation colonies, sporting clubs, and charities . They helped workers rent gardens so they could grow vegetables and fruit .
 Catholic unions tried to counter socialist influence by bringing together workers, employers, and honorary members drawn from local elites . Catholic unions fought socialist influence in the 1930s .
 These “mixed, or “yellow” unions drew the unrestrained opposition of most trade unions . These ‘mixed’ or ‘yellow’ unions drew most trade union opposition . Most trade unions opposed the unions' "mixed or yellow" unions
 The Anarchists wanted to destroy the state . While socialists wanted to take over the state, anarchists wanted it to destroy it .
 The dramatic increase in the reach of European states in the nineteenth century encouraged the development of anarchism, a philosophy with few roots in earlier periods . Yet the dramatic increase of the reach in the 19th century encouraged anarchism .
 Anarchism was the antithesis of a philosophy of political organization . Anarchism associated politics itself with a tacit recognition of the state’s existence . Anarchists associated politics with the state's existence .
 While many anarchists believed in the violent overthrow of the state, others believed voluntary mutualism would eventually make the state superfluous .
 Peter Kropotkin was a geographer and the son of a Russian prince . He held a vision of a gentle society of equals living in harmony without strictures of the state .
 Kropotkin’s desire for anarchist communism was rooted in his firsthand views of the misery of the Russian masses . He lived in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland and France in the 1860s, where watchmakers and peasants coexist in relative prosperity .
 Kropotkin, like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, espoused the primitive as a natural end in itself . The primitive is the result of primitiveism, he says .
 Each person was born a tabula rasa - an idea theorized by John Locke - and then corrupted by society and, above all, by the state .
 Anarchism gained some adherents in France, the most centralized state in Europe, but above all in Italy and Spain, two countries in which the nationstate appeared to many people as a foreign intruder .
 Improvements in transportation and increased immigration brought anarchists to new countries . London served as a particular place of refuge for continental anarchists .
 Anarchists were among recent immigrants in the U.S. during the last decades of the century . Four of them were hung after the Haymarket riots in Chicago in 1886 .
 Anarchism found very few followers in Germany, Germany and Great Britain . In contrast, anarchists respected the state in Germany .
 The International Working-Class Alliance maintained contacts among anarchists in France, Spain, Italy, and the U.S. It was known as the "Black International" because of the color of the anarchist flag .
 Anarchists formed small groups or struck out on their own . But, for the most part, anarchists struck out in their own way .
 Peter Kropotkins’s publication The Spirit of Revolt is based in the southern Spanish province of Andalusia . An anarchist took on a millenarian character stripped of the trappings of religion .
 Andalusian anarchists told the story of one of their own who, as he lay dying, whispered to one of his religious relatives to summon a priest and a lawyer .
 Relieved that the anarchist seemed at the last moment to be accepting the conventions of religion by accepting the last rites of the Church and drawing up a will, relatives sent for both . Relatives were relieved that he seemed accepting the convention of religion .
 When they arrived, the anarchist beckoned them to stand on either side of his deathbed . The anarchists beckoned the men to stand either way on his death bed .
 In the 1880s and 1890s, a wave of anarchist assassinations and bombings shook Europe . Anarchist bombings and assassinations shook Europe in the late 1800s .
 To violent anarchists, the goal of ‘propaganda by the deed’ was to spark a revolution . The goal of the goal was to create a revolution, anarchists said . To violent anarchist anarchists, “propaganda’s by deed” is to spark revolution .
 Bakunin believed a single violent act might shock people into a chain-reaction revolution . Bakunin had believed that a single . violent act may shock people to a chain . revolution .
 King Umberto I of Italy was killed in 1900, and President William McKinley of the U.S. was gunned down the following year . Other victims of assassination were King William U. McKinley and King U.M. U.E. of Italy, who was killed
 Francois Claudius Ravachol, an impoverished worker, threw one of the bombs . The impoverished worker threw the bomb at the scene of the attack .
 In March 1893, an unemployed worker unable to feed his family threw a small bomb into the Chamber of Deputies . Several members were injured in the blast .
 French President Sadi Carnot turned down an appeal for mercy for the perpetrator . French President turned down a plea for leniency for the perpetrators .
 Emile Henry, a young intellectual, tossed a bomb into a cafe near the Saint-Lazare railroad station . Henry killed one man and injured about twenty other people . Henry is a French intellectual who is known for his work in France .
 The wave of anarchist attacks subsided in France, but continued in Spain, where the government tortured and executed militant anarchists . In Spain, anarchists were tortured, executed by the government .
 In France, Italy, and Spain, harsh government repression itself brought a reaction against such policies, and soon the state gave anarchists fewer martyrs to avenge .
 Anarchism faded further into the fringes of popular protest, except in Italy and Spain . With the rise of mass socialist parties and unions, anarchism faded further . Anarchism was a major source of protest in Spain and Italy .
 At the turn of the century, syndicalism emerged as an ideology that held that union organization could provide a means for workers to seize control of their industries . Syndicalism was a belief that unions could provide workers with a means of seizing control .
 Free associations of producers would eventually replace the state . Reflecting some anarchist influence, free associations would replace the government .
 Syndicalists rejected participation in political life . Like revolutionary socialists and anarchists, syndicalists reject participation in politics .
 Syndicalism was centered in France, Spain, Italy, and Italy . It was sometimes called anarcho-syndicalism because of its opposition to the existence of the state .
 Georges Sorel seemed an unlikely candidate to plan any revolution . A retired engineer who proudly wore the prestigious legion of honor awarded by the French state, he was unlikely candidate for revolution .
 Sorel’s Reflections on Violence encouraged direct syndicalist action against capitalism and the state . A ‘general strike’ by workers would bring both to their knees, he says . But Sorell says, “a general strike” would bring capitalism
 By the general strike, Sorel meant a series of simultaneous walkouts that would shut down factories and lead to revolution . By the end of the war, the French general strike led to a revolution in France . The general strike was the first general strike of its kind .
 The period 1895-1907 is sometimes referred to as ‘the heroic age of syndicalism’ in France because so many strikes spread through so many industries there, as elsewhere in Europe, as well as Europe .
 During the “revolt of the south” in 1907, vineyard owners and vine-tenders aggressively protested the state tax on drink . In 1907, French vineyards protested the tax on drinks .
 Violent disturbances during “Red Week” shook the Italian Adriatic town of Ancona in June 1914 . Police shot two people to death while trying to prevent a crowd leaving an anti-militarist demonstration .
 Even the normally peaceful Swedish capital of Stockholm was stirred by a general strike in 1909 . The normally peaceful capital was stirred up by the general strike of the same year .
 Anarcho-syndicalists dominated the labor movement in Barcelona, particularly among dockworkers . The dockworkers confronted brutal police repression orchestrated from Madrid .
 Revolutionary rhetoric gave way to the pursuit of concrete economic gains, particularly in Italy and France . But gradually, revolutionary rhetoric began to be replaced with economic gains .
 Everywhere in Europe, women remained subordinate to men in legal rights . The Quest for Womens Rights everywhere in Europe was the quest for women's equal rights .
 Women were excluded from most universities, could not vote and had limited or no control over family financial resources . Several U.S. states gave women the vote before 1914, and several states did before 1914 .
 Some men feared the advent of the ‘new woman,’ who demanded the same access to education and opportunity as men . Women made very little progress entering the professions because some men feared it .
 The term “new woman” came from the title of a lecture given by the Italian feminist Maria Montessori . The term came from a lecture by the doctor and originator of innovative schools that stress the encouragement of creativity .
 The claims of such bad science bolstered opposition to the women’s movement . The claims were made by the women's movement .
 Moderate republicans claimed that women could not understand political issues . Moderate republics said women would not be able to understand issues such as women's rights .
 Socialists in Catholic countries feared that if women had the right to vote, they would support clerical candidates . But socialist parties and unions threw their support to women workers laboring for better wages and conditions .
 Some women contended social reforms would be inadequate as long as women were without the right to enter universities or vote . However, some women contended that social reforms were inadequate .
 The feminist movement only gradually took hold in Europe and the United States . The name "feminist" developed very slowly in Europe, the U.S. and Europe .
 The first women’s political organizations were created in the 1860s . Women gained the right to vote in municipal elections in 1864 and for county and parish councils six years later .
 Women gained the right to enter university and property rights for married women, child custody, and child custody . Women also gained the rights to initiate divorce .
 Concern among feminists with condition of indigenous women in the empire, particularly in India, helped shape British feminism . British women had more occasion to meet their counterparts and viewed them as backward victims .
 In 1889, the first International Congresses on Women’s Rights and Feminine Institutions took place in Paris . Women's rights and women's rights were first held in France .
 Emily Davison throws herself before the king’s horse at the Derby at Epsom Downs and is killed . Near the end of the nineteenth century, British women's groups presented to Parliament a peti .
 As more occupations opened up to women, the campaign for women’s suffrage widened . Women's suffrage became more popular in the 1930s .
 The International Women’s Suffrage Alliance encouraged organizations in a number of countries . The Alliance encourages organizations in several countries .
 A more militant group of feminists undertook a campaign of direct action . The campaign was led by a group of feminist activists .
 Emmeline Pankhurst founded the Women’s Social and Political Union in 1903 . She founded the WSPU in 1903, and the union was founded in 1903.
 Other “suffragettes, as they were called, went on hunger strikes upon being arrested . Other ‘suffragette’s’ went on a hunger strike after being arrested.
 A suffragette carrying a banner proclaiming “Votes for Women” hurled herself in front of a horse owned by King George V at the 1913 Derby at Epsom Downs and was killed . The most dramatic incident was the death of a woman who was killed by the horse .
 Europeans had many reasons to be optimistic at the turn of the century . Europeans were optimistic in the early 1900s . Europeans had a long history of optimism .
 Literacy had risen rapidly, particularly in western and northern Europe . Literacy was rising rapidly, especially in western Europe .
 Nation-states, increasingly secular in character, commanded the loyalty of their populations . Nation-state-controlled nation-states command loyalty to their people . Nation states were secularized in the 1930s and 'modernized'
 Advances in science and technology were transforming the way people lived . Advances were changing the way they lived, says the author .
 The standard of living had generally risen, and, at least in most of Europe, whitecollar jobs provided hope of better things for more people . Whitecollar jobs were seen as a source of hope for better things .
 Short working hours for employees, including many workers, left more time for leisure activities . Shorter working hours leaves more time to spend with family and friends . Shortening working hours also leaves less time for employees to enjoy activities .
 During the 1850s and 1860s, scientific progress and social change was reflected in the emergence of realism as the dominant cultural style for artists and writers . Realism was the dominant culture of art and literature in the late 1800s and 1850s .
 In the last decade of the nineteenth century, technological advances and the emergence of a more urban world brought both a cultural crisis of previously unparalleled dimensions and remarkable achievements in the arts . Then, beginning in the 19th century, more technological advances brought an unprecedented cultural crisis .
 More scientific discoveries and new theories about the functioning of the universe continued to tear away some of the old certainties .
 Social scientists try to find explanations for the working of society and the inner world of the individual . Social scientists tried to find explanation for society's working and inner world .
 Some writers and artists began to turn away from rationalism, materialism, and positivism . At the same time, some turned away from realism and materialism .
 Bergson popularized the idea that each individual and each nation had a creative ‘dynamic energy,” or vital force , waiting for release . Bergson's work challenged materialism and positivism .
 The notion of an avantgarde, a term taken from military tactics, implies a small group of people who see themselves in the forefront of artistic expression and achievement . The term is taken from the term "military tactics"
 Intellectuals and artists began to insist on the irrational basis of human nature . Their work reflects both uncertainty and cultural rebellion .
 Some writers had in the middle decades of the century broken with literary traditions . Influenced by the widening interest in science and the quickening pace of social change, some writers had broken with .
 Realism had emerged as the dominant European cultural style during the 1850s and 1860s . Realism was the dominant cultural style in Europe during the mid-century .
 Baudelaire was best known for his volume of poems Les Fleurs du Mai . He believed that art had to be the product of an exchange between artist and society .
 The artist's own experience and self-discovery became critical in the emergence of modern literature . The artist’s own experience . became critical .
 Les Fleurs du Mai became even more popular as his decadence and overt eroticism angered officials and critics alike . He died of syphilis in 1867 from the disease .
 Baudelaire was the consummate dandy and “flaneur” the observer of modern urban life . He was a dandy, dandy who was a modern observer of urban life.
 The flaneur strolled through Paris, finding beauty in its modern boulevards but also gazing at its hideous, even frightening aspects with objective detachment . He was both reacting to and reflecting modern urban life .
 Baudelaire rebelled against bourgeois culture and conventional assumptions about artistic subjects and style . His work was published in 18th century .
 Baudelaire was a crucial figure in the emergence of modern culture in the middle of the century . Rejects the notion that absolute aesthetic values exist, he rejected the notion of absolute aesthetic value .
 In the 1850s, the Barbizon painters painted peasants, harvests, animals, and other symbols of village life . Barbizon was a French village of that name southeast of Paris .
 In doing so, they broke sharply with many of the longaccepted styles of painting, including romanticism . The paintings were the first to be published in modern art .
 Charles Baudelaire, “the poet of modern may have contributed to the interlife,” in a photograph by Felix Nadar . The development of photography during the 1840s during the . 1840s .
 JeanFrancois Millet painted peasants at work in such pieces as The Gleaners and The Angelas . Many middle-class viewers thought peasants unworthy of being painted .
 Artistic style evolved far more rapidly than did official views of what constituted good art . Artistic styles evolved rapidly, as did official standards of what was good art. Artistic views of art evolved rapidly .
 Gustave Courbet abandoned idealization that still characterized painting . Courbet's painting was a departure from the idealization of idealism .
 He startled viewers by choosing ordinary workers as his subjects . The painter took as a compliment the assessment that he was “a democratic painter”
 Burial at Ornans portrays a family of some means looking rather unattractive, bored, or even indifferent as the body of a relative is lowered into a grave in Courbet’s hometown .
 Nudity did not bother many viewers—it was, after all, a staple of classical painting . It was, for example, a nude portrait of a nude woman in the nude .
 Courbet portrayed an ordinary-looking woman holding herself up very awkwardly . Viewers were upset by the fact that Courbet depicted her holding herself awkwardly . Courbet was upset that he portrayed her awkwardly .
 The artist seemed to be mocking the kind of classical scene painters had been expected to treat with reverence .
 Napoleon III struck the canvas with a riding-crop when he saw the painting . Napoleon III saw the exhibited painting, he struck it with a horse-drawn crop .
 Courbet, a political radical, believed that art should have a social purpose . Courbet was a social radical who believed art should be social .
 He exacted some revenge in a later painting by depicting the emperor as a shabby poacher .
 French police hauled the novelist into court, charging him with obscenity . Gustave Flaubert was accused of obscenitalism . The novelist was arrested by the French police in 1953 .
 His novel evokes with flawless attention to detail the affair of a bored bourgeois housewife living in a small, dreary Norman town .
 Like most writers and artists at the time, he also depended upon middle-class patronage for his work . But like most of them at the . time, his work was largely ignored by the middle class .
 The escapist science fiction fantasies of the French author Jules Verne reflected contemporary fascination with developing sciences like geography, science, astronomy, and physics, as well as improvements in transportation and communication .
 Verne’s Around the World in Eighty Days , first published in 1873, became a best seller . Verne's book was a best-selling novel .
 In Britain, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s character of Sherlock Holmes emerged in the late 1880s as the first truly scientific detective . The character of the detective emerged as fiction's first truly scientific detective .
 Henrik Ibsen drew admiration and protest alike with works of unrelenting realism and concern with women’s lives . The Norwegian playwright's works include works of unflinching realism and care for women .
 His forceful dramas, such as A Dolls House and Hedda Gabler, offer realistic descriptions of the psychology and interaction of complex characters .
 Ibsen privileged themes of guilt and hypocrisy as he presented families in small-town life . Considered in some ways the father of modern drama, he presented the themes of hypocrisy and guilt .
 French novelist Emile Zola shocked critics with his evocation of working-class life . His work challenged traditional assumptions about literary worthiness . His unabashed realism in depicting ordinary people as he saw them .
 Artists and writers who espoused the new realism confronted censorship in France . The new realism was created in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Napoleon III prohibited the historian Joseph Ernest Renan from lecturing . Napoleon III banned Renan's lectures from lectures .
 Renan considered himself a proponent of ‘progressive ideas’—above all, a faith in science . Renan: “I'm a believer in science. I believe in science,” Renan said .
 His Life of Jesus offended the Catholic Church by presenting Christ as a historical figure . He offended the church by presenting Jesus as historical figures . His Life Of Jesus offended .
 Gustave Courbet s The Bather in which the subject strikes an awkward pose . Courbet's work was inspired by the artist's work of the same style of painting .
 Renan argued that the Scriptures had to be studied like any other historical document . More than this, Renan said that the Bible should be studied as any other document .
 During the French Second Empire, a group of artists developed impressionism . Impressionism was a remarkable artistic movement that lasted until the end of the century .
 Impressionist painters rejected traditional religious and historical subjects and formal presentation . Realists of the Barbizon school rejected formal presentation and religious subjects .
 They depicted rural and urban landscapes, offering scenes from everyday existence . However, they integrated individual figures into landscapes .
 The impressionists preferred direct observation and the study of nature’s effects to studio composition and imitation of classic styles . Embracing subjectivity, the impressionists embraced subjectivity .
 Artists put lighter and brighter colors on large canvases . They applied many small dabs of paint to convey an impression of spontaneity, energy, and movement .
 The impressionists did not begin to exhibit their paintings with the self-consciousness of an artistic group until 1874 . Their movement was shaped by official rejection .
 Salon was a state-sponsored exhibition upon which artists depended in order to attract purchasers . The Salon was an art exhibition for the state of France .
 In 1863, the jury for the official Salon turned down several canvases by Manet . Manet's paintings were rejected by the jury .
 Emperor allowed some of the paintings to be shown in other rooms . After certain complaints reached the emperor, he allowed them to be displayed elsewhere .
 The ‘Salon of the Refused’ included works by Manet, Renoir, and Paul Cezanne . The “Salon’s” included works from Manet and Renoir .
 Some critics raged against what they saw, but at least the public could now make up its own mind . Some critics have raged against the film, but now the public can now decide .
 Napoleon III attacked a Courbet canvas with a riding-crop . Napoleon III struck Manet’s painting with her fan . This study of a nude shocked public opinion .
 Manet’s Dejeuner sur Vherbe drew scathing commentary because it showed a nude female sharing a picnic with two fully dressed, upper-class males .
 Manet challenged the hierarchy of subjects imposed by classicism . Here, Manet, even more than the realists, challenged the status of classicism.
 Manet chose provocatively contemporary subjects, including ordinary people, clients, and cafe waitresses enjoying themselves .
 Claude Monet painted the Gare Saint-Lazare, the point of entry each day for thousands of commuters, vacationers, and other visitors . Monet and his younger friend painted the Parisian airport in the 1920s .
 Berthe Morisot placed her subjects, most of whom were women, in private gardens, in the Bois de Boulogne, boating on the Seine, and at the resorts of the Norman coast .
 The rebuilding of Paris has opened up new possibilities for the understanding of modernity . The reconstruction of Paris is a new chapter in the history of the city .
 Impressionists found the great boulevards fitting subjects for their portrayal of modern life . The boulevard was a popular subject for many of their paintings .
 The early impressionists were influenced by the growing commercialization of leisure in Paris . The impressionist was influenced by growing commercialisation of leisure .
 Edgar Degas followed wealthy Parisians to theaters, racetracks, cafes, cafes and cafe-concerts . Degas was fascinated by vaudeville acts, poetry readings, comedians, and singers renowned for bawdy lyrics .
 Degas frequently chose female entertainers, most of whom were drawn from the popular classes, as his subjects . Degas often chose women from popular classes as subjects .
 In the shadows of his ballet paintings lurk Napoleon III, like Napoleon III himself, who occupy the loges closest to the stage at the opera or stand in the shadows .
 The increasing anonymity of the burgeoning city was also a frequent impressionist theme in the film .
 Such encounters with strangers seem to be intrinsic part of modern life, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Monet also manifested an uneasy ambivalence toward large-scale industry . Monet's work was inspired by his interest in large scale art .
 In the 1870s, he lived in the industrializing Paris suburb of Argenteuil . He lived in an industrialized suburb of Paris .
 Monet eventually tired of the hustle and bustle of urban life and moved down the Seine to the village of Giverny . Monet’s work includes a portrait of the French painter who lived in the village .
 There his garden and its pond and lily pads provided an ideal rural setting for his work . His garden and his pond provided the perfect rural setting .
 Scientific advances contributed to the diffusion of the belief that human progress was inevitable . Social Theorists'Analyses of Industrial Society .
 Comte concluded that what he called ‘the science of society’ could do the same . He believed that scientific discovery had passed through three stages of development .
 Society itself, like nature, could be studied in a scientific manner and charted, he reasoned . Society itself like nature could study society itself and chart its development charted .
 Comte’s positivism called for the accumulation of useful knowledge that would help students of society to understand the laws of social development . Comte's positivism was based on the idea that useful knowledge could help students understand social development, he said .
 Positivists challenged some of the central tenets of the established churches, particularly those of the Catholic Church . The Catholic Church held a view of humanity as essentially unchanging .
 Darwinism denied the literal biblical description of God creating the world in seven days . Darwinism (see Chapter 18) denied the Bible's description of creation of the world .
 Clergy of many denominations, and many other people as well, were aghast at the idea that humanity could have descended from apes .
 intellectuals attempted to understand the structure of the society they saw changing around them . Now, in the face of rapid social change, intellectuals are trying to understand how society is changing .
 The study was done by adopting the model of natural science and undertaking an objective systematic analysis of observable social data . They did so by adopting a model of . natural science .
 Edgar Degas’s LAhsinthe shows a woman and her companion with a glass of absinthe . How do societies hold together when confronted by economic and social forces that tend to tend to social forces?
 Note how the lack of a table support helps draw the viewer’s attention to the glass of absinthe . Note how a table is not supported .
 The question itself expressed the cultural crisis of the fin de siecle . "The question itself expresses a cultural crisis," the author says .
 Ferdinand Tonnies published Community and Society (Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft) in 1887 . The work sought to synthesize and apply historical experience to understand the development of modern Western civilization .
 Max Weber was one of the fathers of modern social thought and sociology . Weber sought to create an objective and thus “value-free” science of society that he thought held the key to guiding the future .
 Weber became interested in the relationship between religion and society . Weber was a professor of law in Heidelberg, Germany . He was also interested in religion and the role of society .
 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism defined the “spirit of capitalism” to be the assumption that whoever works hard in the pursuit of gain fulfills a moral obligation . The Spirit of capitalism is assumed to be a belief that anyone who works hard for gain has a moral
 He identified the origins of capitalism with Calvinist entrepreneurship in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries . He identified Calvinist entrepreneurs in the seventeenth century .
 Weber observed the trend toward larger structures of government and the bureaucratization of state, business, and political structures . Weber believed this marked the victory of Enlightenment rationalism, as well as increased social stratification . Weber also observed the rise of state and business structures as a result of the
 He worried that in the advancing impersonal age of bureaucracy, state officials would ignore political and social ideals . But he also said he worried that the impersonal era of bureaucracy would ignore ideals .
 Theorist of a nervous age, Weber had a nervous breakdown before the turn of the century . Weber was a famous playwright and playwright . He had a breakdown in the 1930s .
 Doctors diagnosed more cases of hypochondria, “melancholy,” and hysteria, paralyzing nervous disorders that many blamed on the complexities of modern life . Modern life seemed to be overwhelming the nervous system .
 In particular, neurasthenia seemed to be a sign of the times, with symptoms of extreme sensitivity to light and noise . The symptoms include fatigue, worry, and digestive disorders .
 In England, the “habitual soaking” of workers in beer worried reformers . In England workers were soaked in beer . In Germany, workers soaked their bodies in beer to make sure they had enough .
 A contemporary investigator claimed that it was not uncommon for some workers to spend a quarter of their earnings on drink . Some workers spent some of their money on drink, investigators claimed .
 The dramatic increase in the production of wine in France (with the exception of the 1880s and 1890s, when the phylloxera disease ravaged vineyards), Italy, Spain, and Portugal flooded markets, greatly reducing its price .
 In parts of France, the average person consumed well more than sixty gallons of wine a year, in addition to beer, brandies, and absinthe, a licorice-tasting drink made from wormwood that is addictive .
 French temperance movements swept aside like tiny dikes by the torrent of drink . Temperance movements were swept aside in favour of drinkers .
 Nationalists, worried about the plunging birthrate, joined some doctors and reformers in claiming that France faced “racial degenera’s” France .
 Some doctors blamed women for not doing their part to increase the French population . Attacks complementing surging resistance to the rise of feminism .
 Some women began to put forward their role as republican mothers to bolster demands for more rights . For their part, some women began putting forward their roles as mothers .
 Nationalists insisted that only by rallying around patriotic values could France avoid total collapse . Nationalists insist that only France can avoid collapse with patriotic values .
 In Britain, the temperance movement began earlier and was far stronger than in France . Temperance movement in Britain began earlier than France .
 Temperance societies in Sweden had almost half a million members in 1909 . It was also more closely tied to churches, as was the movement in Sweden . In 1909 temperance societies had almost 500,000 members .
 The use of opium and its derivatives became common among the artistic avant-garde well before most people were aware of their devastating effects . Opium, heroin, cocaine and hashish were common among avantgarde artists .
 These drugs arrived from Turkey, Persia, and India, with coca brought from Peru and Bolivia . Coca was brought from Bolivia and Peru and Peru .
 Pablo Picasso was for a period a hashish user, which may have influenced his dreamy rose-colored paintings of 1905-1908 .
 Only in the latter years did the French government ban such drugs, in the wake of a number of drug-related suicides . The French government banned such drugs in the past few years .
 Exoticism, mysticism, spiritism and a fascination with the occult became more popular than ever before . Less dangerous, exoticism and spiritism was less dangerous, but more popular .
 Modern life seemed to provide evidence that industrialization and urban growth had uprooted traditional values . Modern life seems to be evidence that urban growth and industrialization have uprooted values, the author says .
 Emile Durkheim believed that the rapid growth of large cities had destroyed moral ties that had sustained the individual in traditional society . Emile Durkheim believed that the rapid, seemingly uncontrollable growth had destroyed the moral ties of the individual . The French social theorist
 Durkheim believed that the waning of religious practice had undermined authority and therefore social cohesiveness . The waning religious practice undermined authority, therefore social cohesion .
 Durkheim’s quantitative study of suicide led him to conclude that the stresses and strains of increasingly urban, industrial life were becoming more debilitating . He concluded that the stress of urban life was becoming more and more debilitating.
 He optimistically believed that social problems could be solved by studying them in a systematic, scientific manner .
 Durkheim was hardly alone in thinking that urban growth, spurred on by the arrival of rural migrants, generated social pathology of which criminality was but one manifestation .
 Riots and strikes, he warned, are becoming part of the political process . Riots, strikes and strikes are becoming a political process, he said .
 He described crowds as lurching erratically, and sometimes dangerously, like drunks . Crowds were described as 'erratic' at a time of a growing awareness of the ravages of alcoholism .
 Some nationalists now worried that their peoples were being undermined by “racial degeneration’s” Some nationalists are now worried their peoples are being undermined . It might compromise the natural process of evolution by hereditary debasement, they say .
 Certain scientists claimed that significant racial differences could be identified within specific peoples, and that they accounted for soaring rates of crime, alcoholism, insanity, syphilis, and even popular political action . Some scientists claimed to have found significant racial . differences could account for crime, insanity and insanity .
 An Italian anthropologist believed criminals showed inferior physical and mental development . He contended that they could be identified by measuring their skulls . An anthropologist said criminals show inferior development .
 Friedrich Nietzsche emerged in this period as the most strident philosophical critic of Enlightenment rationalism . Nietzsches Embrace of the Irrational was published in the 1920s .
 Nietzsche was the son of a strict Protestant German minister who died when he was young . He was raised by his domineering mother . Nietzsche was born in Berlin, Germany, in 1926 .
 The tormented Nietzsche, forced by illness to leave the university, moved to the Swiss Alps . He thereafter lived by his pen, but with little success . Nietzsche was forced to leave university and moved to Swiss Alps to live by pen .
 Friedrich Nietzsche hated all religions equally, believing that they had Friedrich Nietzsche, the philosopher of the irrational . Nietzsche hated religions equally .
 He claimed religion was incapable of providing ethical guidance . No single morality could be appropriate to all people, he said .
 Nietzsche's thought marked a total rejection of all previous philosophy . Although indirectly influenced by the contentions of Hegel and Darwin that mankind could continue to develop to a higher stage, Nietzsche’s thought was rejected by all previous philosophers .
 His ‘vital force’ would be morally ambivalent, idealizing power and struggle, he said . His “vital” force, which he believed could be found only in new philosophers like himself, would be moral ambivalent .
 For all of his talk about “master races” and “slave races, he castigated the herd-like instincts of German nationalists and anti-Semites . Yet for all of the talk about "master races" and "slave races" in a period marked by a
 Sigmund Freud stressed the power of the irrational, which he placed in the human unconscious . Freud and the Study of the Irrational . The Viennese doctor studied the study of the unconscious .
 Freud was born in the small Moravian town of Freiberg in the Habsburg monarchy . He was the son of a struggling Jewish wool merchant and his much younger wife . Freud was a prominent critic of the Nazis and the Nazis .
 When Sigmund was three, his father’s business affairs went from bad to worse, forcing the family to leave their tranquil, small-town existence for Vienna . The family moved to Vienna, Austria, when his father's business affairs got worse .
 Freud never felt comfortable in the imposing imperial capital . The younger Freud felt uncomfortable in Washington, DC .
 Austrian Jews received full civil rights only in 1867 . But he benefited from the period of liberal ascendancy in Austria, where Jews had received civil rights . Jews had been given full rights in Austria by the late 1800s .
 Viennese middle class had helped make their city a cultural capital of Europe . Vienna is a cultural hub of Europe and has helped make it cultural capital .
 Karl Lueger, an anti-Semite, was elected mayor of Vienna in 1895 . The stockmarket crash in 1873 began a period of economic depression and culminated in the election of anti-Semitic Luegers as mayor .
 Freud moved to the study of the irrational, or the ‘unconscious, convinced that it could be studied with the same systematic rigor as human anatomy . From his scientific laboratory, Freud studied the irrational and the irrational .
 In the spring of 1886, he opened a small office in Vienna, Vienna, treating patients with nervous disorders . He opened the office in 1886, and it was the first time he had opened an office .
 It was based on the premises that the mind is orderly and that dreams offer codes that can unlock the unconscious . Dreams offer codes to unlock the subconscious, says the author .
 To Freud, a dream represented ‘the fulfillment of a wish’; it was the expression of an unconscious conflict . Freud said a dream was a manifestation of unconscious conflict; a dream represents the fulfillment of that .
 Sexuality, specifically the repression of sexual urges, formed the basis of Freud’s theory of the unconscious . Freud's theory of unconscious was the basis for his theory of repression .
 Psychoanalysis became both an investigative tool and a form of therapy . The patient could obtain self-awareness and control over his or her symptoms, such as hysteria . Psychoanalysis was used as a therapy tool and investigative tool .
 Freud’s theories of human development established the irrational as an intrinsic and sometimes even determining part of the human psyche . Freud's theories establish irrational behavior as intrinsic and determined part of our human psyche.
 Psychoanalytic theory emerged along with Darwin's evolutionary theory and Marx’s writings on capitalist development and revolution, as one of the foundations of twentieth-century thought .
 Avant-Garde Artists and Writers and the Rapid Pace of Modern Life . Progress seemed to have a price. Progress seems to have been a price .
 In The Wind in the Willows y published in 1908 by Kenneth Grahame, the motor car threatens stability . In 1908, the car was a symbol of stability in the world .
 The airplane, rapidly rising and then swooping dangerously, seemed not only a soaring symbol of scientific advances but also of the uncertainty that unsettled some fin-desiecle Europeans . The airplane was a symbol of uncertainty in some of the world .
 Camille Pissarro is perhaps the preeminent painter of the countryside . He took up urban subjects, painting bridges, riverbanks, and boulevards .
 Other painters also presented urban scenes in a harsh, jarring light that suggested chaos .
 Popular culture seemed to be eroding the ability of high culture to survive the assault of mass manufacturing and teeming cities . Popular culture has been eroding its ability to survive mass manufacturing .
 Sharp reactions against the seeming uniformity of the machine age permeated the arts. Sharp reactions to the seeming . uniformity . of the . machine age . permeated .
 William Morris believed mass production was in the process of eliminating the aesthetic control craftsmen had maintained over production . William Morris was the English craftsman and designer William Morris . Morris believed that mass production had eliminated the aesthetic .
 Morris argued that the machine had become master of both workers and design, instead of the other way around . Describing capitalism as a “defilement” and Victorian England as the “age of shoddy”
 Morris spearheaded the ‘arts and crafts movement’ in Britain . Morris espoused craft production that would create useful but artistic objects for the general public . Morris: Craft production elevates taste to a new level. Morris: Artistry is a form of art .
 Symbolism began as a literary movement in the early 1870s but had origins a decade earlier . Symbolism reflected the discontent of writers with the materialism of the industrial age . The symbolists revered Baudelaire as a founding father .
 Symbolists sought to discover and depict aesthetically the reality of human consciousness and identity . Symbolists seek to discover the reality and identity of the human consciousness .
 They believed analogies existed between the human mind and the external world, and thus between the spiritual and natural worlds . They believed that analogies exist between the two worlds .
 Symbolists sought to bring emotions to the surface through dreamlike states of consciousness . Some continuity existed between symbolism and the romanticism of the early nineteenth century . Symbolism and romanticism existed between the two .
 Russian aristocrat Sergey Diaghilev's ballet The Rite of Spring opened in Paris in May 1913 .
 Diaghilev organized major art expositions and outraged conventional society by flaunting male lovers . Art and life went hand in hand—they imitated each other. Art and art and life were both imitating each other, he says .
 Hitherto, ballet had retained absolute loyalty to classical subjects and presentation, immune to avant-garde challenge . But ballet had remained immune to the challenge of the modern age .
 Aesthetes in the audience hissed at the men and women of Parisian high society filing into the theater wearing tails and evening gowns . The audience was hissed by the men, women of high society .
 When the curtain went up, the dancers were jumping up and down, toeing inward in defiance of conventional ballet . The ballet is a modern take on the theme of a modern ballet .
 The majority of the audience reacted with catcalls, hisses, and then screams of anger . The audience reacted to the incident with a series of catcallows .
 An elderly countess scoffed that it was the first time that anyone had ever made fun of her . She said it was a first time anyone had mocked her .
 Russian composer Igor Stravinsky dispensed with the sentimental music that had invariably accompanied ballet . The audience was shocked by the jarring, primitive music of the Russian composer .
 The avant-garde rejected the idea that rationalism should underlie the arts and that objective standards could exist by which to assess literature and music .
 They believed that these threatened to render the individual insignificant and powerless . They believed these threats to render them insignificant and powerful .
 Scene from Sergey Diaghilev’s The Rite of Spring from 1913 . Mass-circulation newspapers were used in the Russian film .
 Avant-garde artists accepted nothing as absolute as absolute, certainly not the traditional forms of cultural expression or morality . Artworks accepted no absolute limits, even if they accepted no form of morality .
 Showing Nietzsche’s influence, some sought to transcend the limits of reason and moral purpose . Showing the influence of the philosopher, some tried to transcend reason and morality .
 The turn of the century avant-garde artists broke with the past . Far more than impressionist painters, they broke with their past .
 This was, to an extent, a revolt of the young— because of the rise in population, a larger percentage of the population was indeed young—and self-consciously so . This was the rise of the number of people in the U.S.
 They paid less attention to their subjects than the response their work would elicit in their audiences . They paid more attention to the response they would receive in their audience .
 French playwright Alfred Jarry staged the play King Ubu , a mockery of an authority figure . The playwright staged the mockery of authority figures in Paris .
 The story of an avaricious oaf in desperate search of a crown ran one tumultuous night in December 1896 . The farce began with one of the characters pretending to hurl human waste at the outraged audience .
 In Paris, a group of artists and writers called themselves ‘Bohemians’—gypsy wanderers . In Paris they were known as ‘Gypsy Wanderers’ - a gypsy-wandering nomad .
 These avant-garde young men gloried in the condition of being outsiders, rebels against the dominant culture in the way that romanticism had been a revolt against the classical tastes of court and chateau, even rebels against their own middle-class social origins .
 'They sought to surprise with their spontaneity and creativity, and even to offend by creating a scandal' They sought to shock with their creativity and creativity .
 The proponents of cultural modernism may have mocked bourgeois ‘respectability’ and popular culture by sporting long hair, wearing strange clothes, and behaving erratically . However, they nonetheless sought public acceptance and patronage of their work .
 Many, including a number who were homosexual, celebrated their individuality and tried to keep themselves in the public eye . Many of them celebrated individuality and kept themselves out of public eye.
 New musical composition also reflected the contemporary discovery of the unconscious, as avant-garde composers moved defiantly away from traditional forms .
 Many abandoned the ordered hierarchical scale, which certain tones held precedence . Many people abandoned the order of tones in order to get to the highest level .
 Gustav Mahler sought to release in his audience dreams and fantasies, which he believed could not be distinguished from real life . The composer sought to elicit them from the patients on his office couch, just as Freud sought them .
 Both Satie and Debussy set out to free music from all constraints . Satie's work was inspired by his countryman Claude Debussy . Debussy was born in Paris, France .
 Satie's compositions explored new relationships between chords that surprised listeners . Satie’s compositions, with fanciful titles like Three Pieces in the Form of a Pear y explored new relationship between chords and chords .
 The avant-garde believed that art could reveal what is hidden in the unconscious . Art could open up new vistas of experience that could be communicated to viewers .
 Guillaume Apollinaire wrote reviews of books that only existed in his mind . The poet's work defied stylistic convention, writing about books in his own mind .
 Master of ambiguity, he abandoned direct statement and even punctuation and punctuation to encourage readers to find new meanings in his work . He abandoned direct statements and punctuating and conventional word order .
 Postimpressionists painted subjects in ways that even more consciously than impressionism distanced the artist from the subject . Post-impressionism was a form of art that distanced artists from their subjects .
 Georges Seurat claimed that painters could evoke emotions through the visual suggestions of discontinuous lines, colors, and tones . Seurat claims painters can evoke emotions by suggesting discontinuous, lines and colors .
 Symbolist writers were intrigued by Seurat’s paintings because they consisted of thousands of dots of color forming figures and landscapes . Symbolists believed that symbols would stimulate memory through free association .
 “pointillism” left Seurat’s figures appearing strangely mechanical and separate from each other . This bold style, called “Pointillism,” was influenced by the development of photography .
 This may suggest the alienation, social division, and isolation of modern urban life . This may also suggest the isolation and social division of modern life in urban areas .
 Seurat may have sought to portray social cohesion through the social mix of bourgeois and workers enjoying a Sunday afternoon along the Seine River in Paris .
 Expressionist painters used daring distortions, curious juxtaposition, and bold, unfamiliar color schemes to express what lay deep inside them and obtain an emotional response .
 Paul Gauguin abandoned a comfortable living as a stockbroker for the uncertainty of a career as a painter . The French painter abandoned his comfortable living for the uncertain future of his painting career .
 His lengthy stay on the Pacific Ocean island of Tahiti shaped the appearance of his painting .
 Seurat's A Sunday on La Grande Jatte . strated Gauguin’s influence . Edvard Munch was a Norwegian artist who came to Paris in 1893 . Seurat was a French artist who lived in Paris .
 Wassily Kandinsky (18661944) had by 1910 moved expressionism even farther away from surface reality . Kandinsky portrayed the inner being in a simplified form with lines, dots, anc intense colors .
 Art Nouveau, a sinuous decorative style offering a synthesis between tra ditional and modern art, also reflected the anxiety and moodiness of the fin de siecle . The style was a synthesis of modern art and modernism .
 Charcot opened up the unconscious investigation through hypnosis . Charcot, the French neurologist, had opened up an investigation into the case . The investigation was carried out by hypnosis and hypnosis.
 The dreamlike flowing forms and shapes o Art Nouveau, then, complemented the growing awareness of the contour and fluidity of the mind and its dreams and fantasies . The Dreamlike flowing shapes of the Art Nouvau, which was created in the 1930s, were
 Leading cultural figures in France identified Art Nouveau’s style with the republic, seeing in its highly crafted luxury products something that wa very French . Leading cultural . figures in . France identified the style with . the republic .
 The style's rococo origins were rooted in an aristocrats Antonio Gaudi’s Casa Batllo in Barcelona . At the same time, it could be associated with the conservative republic because of the style .
 Gustav Klimt’s Judith II seemed to affirm the traditional role in household decoration at a time when more feminists were stepping forward to demand equal rights for women .
 Vienna was a vital center of avant-garde cultural experimentation at the turn of the century . Vienna became a vital cultural center of experimentation in modern art .
 Painters and writers of the avant-garde faced rejection in a climate of intolerance . They had first enjoyed state sponsorship of their art .
 Some intellectuals and painters then embraced aestheticism, which emphasized form and beauty as a way of surviving in an increasingly irrational world .
 The painter Gustav Klimt retreated into subjectivism, attaching primary value to individual experience . The painter's subjectivism was a form of subjectivism in Vienna .
 In Vienna the aestheticism of the avant-garde was not a reaction against the resilient cultural values of the middle class . Yet in Vienna, it was not an aesthetic reaction to the middle-class's cultural values, says the author .
 He sought to stimulate and shock viewers by using classical images in strange juxtapositions . He presented erotic fantasies and other representations of utopian escape .
 A disparate but supremely talented group of younger modern painters exhibited their work in 1905 . Their work was exhibited in Paris .
 The fauvists remained committed to experimentation with colors and lines on canvas in their quest for the liberation of both subject and painter .
 They painted landscapes, including coastal resorts, with bright colors and open spaces . They also painted landscapes .
 One hostile critic in 1905 described a fauvists brush as having been “dipped in dynamite” affirming the perceived association between artistic and social, and even anarchist, rebellion in some minds .
 Pablo Picasso is widely considered to be the first painter of the modern movement . Picasso was considered the first artist to paint modern art in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Picasso’s work revealed the gloomy obsession with death that had characterized earlier Spanish painters . Influenced by his Spanish homeland, Picasso's work revealed his dark fascination with death .
 His work was rarely shown in Paris, where he spent most of his career, in part because he mistrusted art dealers . He rarely showed his work in Paris because of his distrust of dealers .
 Abstract art abandoned the artist’s system of perspective that had endured since the Renaissance . Above all, abstract art abandoned artist's system of perspectives .
 Picasso’s work finds a fragmentation of perception and dismantling of realistic depiction in favor of products of the imagination . In Picasso's work, one finds a fragmented of perception .
 Critics called the Spanish painter’s style “cubism” because of his preoccupation with basic shapes, particularly the three-dimensional prism . Critics called his style ‘cubistism’
 The influence of Georges Braque on the cubist style contributed to the development of a second, ‘analytical” phase of cubism with an even greater emphasis on geometric shapes, now constructed from inanimate materials .
 The cubists became a more cohesive ‘school’ than the fauvists . Cubists relied more on light and shade than color to represent forms .
 Futurist artists, most of them Italian, were inspired by technological change . Futurists include artists from Italy, Italy, France and Italy .
 Dynamism of a Cyclist by Umberto Boccioni (1882— 1916) depicts the frenetic energy of pedaling without actually showing the cyclist . Dynamism by a cyclist without showing the rider .
 Artists in the early twentieth century suffered from the shrill denunciations of chauvinists . Conclusion: Artists in early twentieth century suffered from shrill chauvinists inventors .
 In France, the nationalist press denounced the cubists for artistic decadence, specifically for importing ‘foreign perversions” with the goal of weakening French morale . The cubists were not French, like Picasso, were not .
 Some Munich artists affronted German nationalists by insisting that art ought to be international in character . They brought French and Russian artists, including Kandinsky, into their circle .
 The turn of the avant-garde toward irrationality came at a time when rational structures that governed domestic life and international relations seemed to be breaking down amid aggressive nationalism and militarism in Paris, Vienna, Berlin, and other European capitals .
 The European imperial powers included Great Britain and France, old rivals for colonies . Germany and Italy also sought to extend what each considered its national interests .
 Imperial rivalries helped solidify international alliances, dividing Europe into two armed camps . Imperial alliances helped solidified international alliances in Europe .
 Leopold organized the Congo Company to explore and develop Central Africa . He was king of Belgium, and organized the company .
 In 1879, Leopold sent British-American journalist Henry Stanley to the Congo .
 Stanley emerged with treaties signed with local rulers establishing Leopold’s personal claim over the Congo . Stanley emerged from the Congo with treaties establishing his personal claim .
 An international conference of representatives of European states held in Berlin in 1884-1885 to discuss claims to African territory declared the Congo to be the “Congo Free State” with Leopold as its head . The Congo became the Congo Free State in 1885 .
 The European powers agreed ground rules governing the race for colonies . The EU powers agreed on ground rules for colonies in the colonies .
 No power could simply declare a region its colony unless it exercised effective control over the territory . Henceforth no power could declare a colony its colony without exercising effective control of territory .
 Leopold’s pledge that each colonial power would ‘undertake to watch over the preservation of the native races, and the amelioration of the moral and material conditions of their existence’ may have been unmatched in the annals of European imperialism . The horrors
 For the indigenous population, the colonial experience was hell on earth . For indigenous people, it was 'hell on earth' for them .
 In six months, they had used 6,000 cartridges, killing or mutilating people . In 6 months, the army has killed or mutilated 6,500 people in Afghanistan .
 The Belgian Parliament has demanded more humane standards . The Belgian parliament is stung by revelations of brutality uncovered by international investigations . International investigations have been launched into the country's treatment of prisoners .
 In 1908, Belgium took the Congo away from Leopold and made it a colony of Belgium . The Congo is now one-eightieth the size of its colony .
 Imperialism is the process by which one state, with superior military strength and more advanced technology, imposes its control over the land, resources, and population of a less developed region . From Colonialism to Imperialism, the process is called Imperialism .
 The repeated extension of Chinese control over the Vietnamese people of Indochina would fit most definitions of the term . China's repeated control of Vietnamese people would fit the definition of a state of state .
 At the same time, Japan emerged as an imperial power itself during the first decades of the twentieth century, as did the United States. At the time, the U.S. emerged as imperial power .
 Imperialism has above all characterized the relations of the European powers with Africa and Asia . Imperialism is a key part of the relationship between European powers and Africa, writes David Cameron .
 From 1880s to 1914, European powers expanded their direct control over much of the globe . From the 1880s until 1914, Europe expanded its direct control of most of the world . From 1914, the European powers took control of the entire world .
 The expansion of European empires during the period of the ‘new imperialism’ generally included the exploitation of African and Asian lands with economic and strategic interests in mind . European empires were generally seen as having economic and political aims .
 Europeans have long visited, influenced, learned from, and conquered distant lands . Europeans had long visited and influenced, but not conquered, conquered distant nations . Europeans were able to learn from, learn from and conquer distant lands. Europeans were not only able to conquer, but also learned from and
 Spain and Portugal began the first sustained European quest for colonies in the fifteenth century with excursions along the West African coast . Portugal and Spain began to search for colonies along the coast of West Africa .
 During the sixteenth century, Spaniards built a vast colonial empire that stretched from what is now the southwestern United States to the southern tip of South America . The empire stretched from the southwestern part of the U.S. to the south tip of the continent .
 The drive for colonies heightened the rivalry between Britain and France in the era of the American Revolution .
 British merchants sought raw materials and sizable markets for manufactured goods in Africa, India, and as far as Southeast Asia, China, and Japan . During the early eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries, British merchants looked for raw materials .
 colonialism entailed economic exploitation and control, informal or formal, over territories . colonialism from the last decade of the sixteenth century through the middle decades of the nineteenth century entailed exploitation . In contrast to imperialism, colonialism was dominated by imperialism .
 The British insisted on free trade, an open market that would allow English merchants to sell goods without tariff restrictions . English merchants would return with luxury products from India, coffee, sugar, rum from the Caribbean, and tobacco from Virginia .
 North America, Australia, New Zealand, and parts of India, as well as some of the lands added to Russia’s great inland empire in Siberia, Central Asia, and Northeast Asia, had become settlement colonies .
 Few Europeans had settled permanently in Africa or Southeast Asia . However, relatively few Europeans had lived permanently in Southeast Asia or Africa .
 In these places the European presence remained generally peripheral, and staking out large chunks of territory as colonies seemed a daunting, expensive, and dangerous challenge . European presence in these places remained largely peripheral .
 European imperial states lacked the resources for complete conquest and control . Despite their relative wealth and power, European imperial powers lacked the . resources to complete conquest .
 Public opinion at home did not yet support massive colonial undertakings . Moreover, public opinion was not yet supporting such undertakings.
 With India as a base, Britain greatly increased its influence in the Persian Gulf, Arabia, and East Africa, after having forced China to open its ports following a quick military victory of 1842 .
 During the early nineteenth century, many of the original colonies of Spain and Portugal became independent . The colonies became independent in the early 19th century .
 The Spanish Empire based on conquest, religious conversion, and the extraction of silver in the New World had largely disappeared by 1850 .
 After Brazil proclaimed its independence in 1822, Portugal was left with only toeholds in Africa, India, and East Asia . After Brazil, many times the size of Portugal, became independent, Portugal had to rely on Brazil's wealth .
 Dutch had established bases on the coast of West Africa (abandoned in 1872) and small island colonies scattered in the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific .
 Dutch traders ended Portuguese control of Java, one of Indonesia’s islands, in 1755 . They extended their own influence over the island in their own control over the Dutch in the 1755 period .
 Britain and France had established bases on the west coast of Africa, despite its lack of natural harbors and estuaries . The west coast was largely uninhabited by the British and French .
 Both powers began to penetrate the giant continent during the nineteenth century . The British from the tip of South Africa, the French from Algeria and the coast of West Africa .
 Only Britain, despite being only about the size of the island of Madagascar, still had a large empire by the middle of the nineteenth century .
 British imperialism rested in part on free trade, with the empire contributing to economic prosperity . A British colonial administrator settled a dispute between two indigenous chiefs on the Gambia River in West Africa .
 Britain’s strength also rested on the pillars of its settlement colonies . The settlement colonies were the colonies of the British Empire .
 More than a million people emigrated from the British Isles in the 1850s alone . Most of them to Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, as well as to the United States .
 Australia had become the world’s largest wool exporter of wool by 1851 . The discovery of gold in New South Wales and Victoria brought another wave of immigrants .
 The Australian colonies and New Zealand received the right to maintain their own governments in the 1850s . Western Australia remained a convict colony until “transportation” to Australia ceased to be a punishment in England in 1865 .
 Canada achieved Dominion status in 1867 with passage of the British North America Act by the British Parliament . Canada became Canada's first nation to become a Dominion in Canada .
 The crown would grant Dominion status to Australia and New Zealand in 1907 . Dominion status was granted to the two countries by the British Crown .
 Map 21 shows the impact of European imperialism on the rest of the world was still relatively slight in the early 1880s . Map 21 is a look at the events leading up to the start of the Scramble for Africa .
 Many leaders still could conclude that the cost of maintaining colonies outweighed the benefits . The cost of keeping colonies outweigh the benefits of maintaining them .
 Distant, underdeveloped lands still seemed remote from urgent European interests . Distant and underdeveloped countries still remained remote from the European continent .
 Shaka, a renowned leader of the Zulus, prophesied before his death in 1828 that his people would be conquered by the “swallows,” white men who build mud houses . Shaka had established one of the two dominant African kingdoms in what is now South
 The Second Industrial Revolution whetted the appetite of the powers for new sources of raw materials and markets for manufactured goods . It was the start of the industrial revolution .
 The enormous resources generated by large-scale industrialization and the rapid spread of a contentious nationalism fueled the new imperialism . The enormous . resources . fueled the . new imperialism.
 During this period they were not involved in wars with each other, allowing them to concentrate their energies and resources on imperial expansion, which new technological advances facilitated . Despite rivalries between the powers, during this period the powers did not engage in wars .
 Imperial powers Britain, France, Germany, and Italy no longer necessarily looked to preserve the balance of power on the continent, but rather to extend what each considered its national interests . Imperial powers looked to extend their national interests rather than preserve their balance .
 Colonies of Britain, France, Russia, the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, and the Ottoman Empire . Colonial Empires until 1880 included British, French, Russian, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese and Ottoman Empires .
 The colonial race extended even to the North Pole, first reached by the American Robert E Peary in 1909 . The North Pole was reached by Robert Peary .
 Africa included about a fourth of the world’s land area and a fifth of its population . Africa is home to about one of the largest economies in the world .
 Explorers plunged almost blindly into the uncharted and unmapped African interior . Explorers were led almost blindly by explorers to Africa's uncharted interior .
 The source of the Nile River, the lifeline of Egypt, had been located in modern-day Uganda in 1862 . Most Western maps still showed blank spots for much of the continent’s interior .
 France's imperial aspirations reveal some of the motives that fueled the new imperialism . France’s imperial aspirations show some of its imperial aspirations . The French imperial aspirations are part of the reason for the new French imperialism .
 France lost Alsace-Lorraine to Prussia during the FrancoPrussian War of 1870-1871 . After its humiliating defeat by Prussia, France was desperate to regain control of the region . France was defeated in the war of 1870 to defeat Prussia in the Franco
 German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck subtly encouraged the French government to pursue an interest in distant colonies . He was hoping it would forget about trying to retake Alsace-Lorraine . The French government was defeated by the German invasion of France .
 French colonialism during the ‘new imperialism’ was closely tied to a nationalist spirit that was linked with the idea of revenge against Germany . Indeed, French colonialism in France during the 'new imperialism' was closely linked to the nationalist spirit .
 At the Congress of Berlin in Berlin in 1878, France agreed to abandon its claims to the island of Cyprus . The British gave up claims to Tunisia, while France gave up their claims to Cyprus .
 In March 1881, the French government claimed that raiders from Tunisia were harassing their troops in Algeria . The French government said the raiders were harassing its troops .
 French troops invaded Tunisia, which became a French protectorate two months later . Tunisia became a protectorate of France in the 1930s .
 French merchants and nationalists dreamed of an empire that would stretch across Africa . French merchants wanted to create an empire across Africa, but it was never realized .
 Railroads had begun to reach across continental Europe in the 1840s and 1850s . Railroads began to reach Europe in 18th and 19th century .
 WALVIS BAY 1878 ATLANTIC OCEAN g SWAZILAND 1907 NATAL 1903 RANGE FREE State 1902 rban BASUTOLAND 1871 Luderitz Bay . Cape Town 1 CAPE COLONY 1814 1000 miles 1000 kilometers Map 21.
 Belgian, British, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish colonies in Africa . dates of European control of African colonies . of conquest .
 Not surprisingly, the railroad captured the imagination of imperialists . The railroad was built in the 1880s .
 Cecil Rhodes, British entrepreneur and colonialist, reasoned that rails went farther and cost less than bullets . Cecil Rhodes reasoned that rail travel was cheaper than bullets and more efficient .
 A French railway network was mapped out to connect Algeria and Senegal by crossing the Sahara Desert . The network was designed to cross the Sahara desert .
 France had little more than a series of forts to show for enormous expense . France's most famous fortresses were built in 17th century France .
 British merchants feared that French gains would lead to the loss of products such as palm oil and potential markets for their own goods in the African interior .
 British and French rivalries in Egypt, a gateway to the markets and products of the Middle East, dated to the revolutionary years of the late 1790s . The Egyptian city was a gateway for the French and British to the Mideast .
 In 1869, Ferdinand de Lesseps completed a canal through the Isthmus of Suez, which connects the Red and Mediterranean Seas . The canal is the first canal to be completed in 1869 .
 The Suez Canal cut the distance of the steamship voyage from London to Bombay in half by avoiding the treacherous Cape of Good Hope at the southern tip of Africa .
 Ismail Pasha was the ruler of Egypt, which was a part of the Ottoman Empire . His financial difficulties in Egypt brought Britain a stroke of good fortune .
 In 1875, Britain bailed out the bankrupt Ismail Pasha by purchasing a considerable portion of shares in the canal . The canal was built in 1875 to help finance the bankrupt Pasha .
 British government traditionally had sought to protect the land and sea routes to India by supporting the Islamic Middle Eastern states . British forces at rest around the Great Sphinx of Giza after defeating an Egyptian army at the Battle of Tel el-Kebir in 1882 .
 In 1882 a British fleet shelled the Mediterranean port city of Alexandria . Social and political chaos in Egypt was threatening the interests of British bondholders .
 The British established a protectorate over Egypt, still nominally part of the Ottoman Empire . The British then established an Egyptian protectorate in Egypt .
 Over the next forty years, the British government repeatedly assured the other powers that its protectorate over Egypt would only be temporary . The British government told other powers it was only a temporary protectorate .
 The French had loaned the khedive as much money as had Britain . The French were particularly aggrieved at the continued British occupation of the country .
 After a trip of fifteen months, he found the missionary in January 1871 on the shores of Lake Tanganyika . He greeted him with that most understated Victorian salutation, “Dr. Dr.”
 Henry Stanley’s long journey up the Congo River in 1879 to gain treaties for Belgian King Leopold II opened up interior Africa to great-power rivalry . Henry Stanley's subsequent long journey opened up great power rivalry .
 In 1880, Savorgnan de Brazza reached Stanley Pool, a large lake Stanley had "discovered" in 1877 . Stanley Pool is now the largest lake in the world, Stanley Pool .
 Brazza returned with a piece of paper signed with an “X” by a king, which he claimed granted France a protectorate over the territory beyond the right bank of the Congo River . Brazza claimed to have given France a . protectorate .
 French nationalists made ratification of Brazza’s ‘treaty’ a major issue . Although the French government first showed little interest, the French had little interest in ratification of the treaty .
 Portugal declared it controlled the mouth of the Congo River . Portugal then declared that it had control of the river mouth .
 Leopold of Belgium voiced opposition to any French moves near his personal Congo territory . The Belgian monarch voiced his opposition to French expansion of his own territory .
 The French Chamber of Deputies eagerly ratified Brazza’s treaty . Amid continued resentment over British control of Egypt, the treaty was ratified by France .
 Between 1880 and 1914, France’s empire increased in size by twelve times, from 350,000 square miles to 4. million square miles . France's empire grew from 350 square miles of land to 4 million square kilometers .
 Germany was the next power to enter the race for colonies . Germany and Italy joined the race to take over the world's largest colonies .
 Bismarck viewed colonization as an expensive sideshow that distracted attention from the essential questions of power politics in European diplomacy . It did so despite the fact that Chancellor Otto von Bismartck at first viewed colonization .
 The chancellor had routinely rejected pleas that Germany intervene in Africa on behalf of merchants, missionaries, and nationalistic adventurers .
 The Colonial League, established in 1882, pressured the government to pursue colonies . The Society for German Colonization, a lobby of businessmen and other nationalists, was formed in 1884 .
 Karl Peters sought an outlet for his financial interests and nationalist fervor through his East Africa Company . The German adventurer sought to find a way to finance his interests in Africa .
 Peters’s chartered company signed commercial agreements, built settlements, and assumed sovereignty over East African territories . Peters's chartered firm assumed sovereignty in East Africa .
 These aggressive moves aroused the ire of British nationalists, exactly what Bismarck had hoped to avoid but, given the sudden intensity of nationalist and colonial fever at home, could not . These aggressive measures aroused the wrath of the British .
 Bismarck gradually came to share the imperialist view that colonies might provide new markets for German products . He also came to see colonies as potential markets for his products .
 He realized that the establishment of colonies would solidify his political support within Germany . But more than this, he realized that it would also help him gain political support .
 New markets could create jobs at home or abroad for unemployed German workers . New markets will create jobs for unemployed Germans .
 Bismarck concluded that colonies could be administered indirectly at a relatively low cost . The colonies were administered indirectly by the German dictator .
 The time also seemed right for the German government to appease its drooling colonial lobby, including merchants . The German government also seemed to be appeasing the colonial lobby of merchants .
 The British Foreign Office was preoccupied with Islamic fundamentalist rebellions in the Sudan .
 France, with a new protectorate over Tunisia, was embroiled in debate over continued colonization in Indochina . France was in a position with a protectorate of Tunisia, which was a French protectorate . In the 1930s, the French government was in control of Tunisia .
 In April 1884, Bismarck wired his consul in Cape Town, South Africa, ordering him to proclaim that the holdings of a German merchant north of the Orange River would henceforth be the protectorate of German Southwest Africa .
 Britain acquiesced in exchange for Bismarck’s acceptance of the British occupation of Egypt . The British occupation was part of a deal with the German government .
 The German chancellor established a protectorate over the Cameroons and Togoland in West Africa . That summer the German chancellor also decided to establish an African protectorate . The protectorate was also established in the same summer .
 Berlin Conference divided up the territory of the Congo basin between the Congo Free State and France (the French Congo) While declaring the Congo River open to all, the Congo river was declared open to everyone .
 French merchants penetrated Dahomey and the Ivory Coast . French troops reached the ancient trading town of Timbuktu in 1894 . The French troops arrived in the ancient town in the 1894.
 In 1885, Bismarck agreed to protect Peters’s commercial enterprises in Tanganyika, which became German East Africa . Peters‘s commercial enterprise’ was protected by the German dictator .
 Germany established several coastal trading stations and the colony of Angra Pequena in German Southwest Africa . The colony was portrayed with unerring inaccuracy as a territory of untapped wealth just waiting to be extracted .
 Germany recognized British interests in Kenya and Uganda and the protectorate status of Zanzibar in 1890 . To placate Britain, Germany recognized Britain's interests in Uganda and Kenya .
 In exchange, Germany received a small but strategically important island naval station in the North Sea . Germany received the island in exchange for a strategically important naval station .
 By 1913, German colonies in Africa, including German East and Southwest Africa, Togoland, and the Cameroons, occupied over 1 million square miles, five times the size of Germany .
 Italy was last of the major European nations to enter the colonial fray . Italy was the last major European nation to enter colonial colonial fray.
 Italy established Assab, a small settlement on the Red Sea, in 1882 . Massawa became Massawa, which in 1889 became the capital of the new Italian colony of Eritrea . In 1882, Assab was established, and three years later it occupied Massawa .
 Italian merchants hoped to force the adjacent African state of Abyssinia to trade through Eritrea . Italian merchant wanted to force Abyssinia's Abyssinia into trade through its borders .
 Abyssinian emperor signed treaty with Italy in 1889 . Italian government took it to mean that Abyssinia was now an Italian protectorate . Abyssinia is now a protectorate of Italy .
 When the French began building a railroad that would link Abyssinia to French Somaliland, Italian troops launched a war in 1894 . The Abyssinians attempted to cancel the treaty, but the French tried to cancel it .
 In 1896, a general without adequate maps marched four badly organized columns of Italian troops into battle . The battle was fought in Italy, Italy's first major battle since the Second World War .
 Abyssinians, some 70,000 strong, with Russian artillery advisers and French rifles, routed the Italian army in the hills near the coast at Adowa . Russian artillery, French rifles and Russian rifles were used in the battle .
 Six thousand Italian soldiers were killed and several thousand captured . Several thousand more were captured .
 The Italians became the first European army to be defeated in the field by Africans . The Italians were defeated by Africans in the battle .
 Under the Treaty of Addis Ababa that same year, Italy was forced to renounce Abyssinia as a protectorate, although it kept the territory of Eritrea on the Red Sea .
 The French government resented the fact that Egypt served as a base for British initiatives in the hot, dry Sudan .
 A former Sudanese slave trader declared himself to be the Mahdi in the early 1880s . The revolt challenged the nominal authority of the khedive of Egypt over Sudan .
 The Mahdi and his followers began a holy war against Egypt and defeated Egyptian armies led by British officers . The British sent an expedition to the Sudanese capital of Khartoum to evacuate the Egyptian population .
 General Charles ‘Chinese’ Gordon commanded troops that assisted the Chinese government in putting down the Taiping Rebellion in the 1860s . He was so called 'Chinese' Gordon because he had commanded troops in China to put down the rebellion .
 Gordon was killed when the Mahdi’s forces stormed the Khartoum garrison two days before a relief expedition from Britain arrived in January 1885 . Gordon died two days after a relief mission arrived from Britain in Khartu .
 Britain lost interest in Sudan until the French colonial lobby sought a strategic foothold on the Nile River . The French lobby was still smarting from Britain’s occupation of Egypt .
 The French government, in turn, announced that it considered Sudan open to all colonial powers . Sudan was ruled by the French government in 1953 .
 In 1898, a British force commanded by Lord Horatio Kitchener set out from Egypt for Sudan with the Upper Nile outpost of Fashoda . The charge of the dervishes at the Battle of Omdurman in the Sudan, 1898 .
 Kitchener and his army took revenge for Gordon’s death, using machine guns to mow down 11,000 Mahdists at the Battle of Omdurman and retaking Khartoum . Kitchener used machine guns in the battle to kill 11,500 Mah
 British troops desecrated the Mahdi’s grave, playing soccer with his skull . British troops played soccer with the skull of the dead .
 At Fashoda, they encountered a French expeditionary force, which intended to establish a French colony on the Upper Nile . The Nile was the site of the first Nile colony .
 Kitchener handed his counterpart a mildly worded note of protest against the French presence . The two commanders clinked drinking glasses, leaving their governments to fight it out diplomatically .
 The Fashoda Affair ended peacefully when France recognized British and Egyptian claims to the Nile Basin . Britain recognized French holdings in West Africa and recognized French claims to West Africa .
 Only Abyssinia and Liberia, which had been settled in the 1820s by freed U.S. slaves, were independent African states . Abyssinia was settled by freed United States slaves, and Liberia was settled in 1821 .
 The British had to overcome resistance to its presence in South Africa . The Boer War was the first British invasion of South Africa in 1900s .
 The British had taken the Cape of Good Hope at the tip of South Africa from the Dutch in 1795 . The Cape was taken by the British at the start of the 1795 campaign .
 British settlers fought nine separate wars against the Bantu people in the 1850s and 1860s . British settlers moved in, fighting nine separate battles against the people . The British settlers were forced to settle in .
 Cape Colony emerged from under the wing of the British Foreign Office in 1872 . It formed its own government, but remained within the British Empire . The Cape Colony was formed under the Foreign Office .
 Known as the Boers, the Dutch settlers in South Africa were a farming people of strict Calvinist belief . The Boers were known as the 'Boers' and the 'Dutch settlers' of South Africa . The Dutch settlers were known for their farming practices .
 The Boers resented the British abolition of slavery and the fact that the British allowed blacks to move about freely and to own property . The British abolished slavery in 1881 .
 Boers established the Natal Republic, a strip along South Africa’s east coast . Overcoming Zulu resistance, Boers fought Zulu to establish the state of Natal .
 When the British intervened in support of the Zulus, the Boers left Natal . Natal became a British colony in 1843 and became a colony of Natal in 1844 .
 Slaughtering Zulus as they went, the Boers founded the Republic of Transvaal and the Orange Free State . The British recognized as independent in 1854, the British recognized them as an independent state .
 The discovery of diamonds in the late 1860s attracted a flow of treasure seekers . At least 10,000 people fought for control of South Africa's diamond fields .
 After annexing the Republic of Transvaal against the wishes of the Boers in 1877, the British gradually extended their colonial frontier northward . The British were convinced that more diamonds and gold would be found beyond the Vaal River .
 The settlement of South Africa by the Boers and English, 1800-1910 . The Boers’ Great Trek and the 1910 boundaries of the Union of South. South Africa .
 Cecil Rhodes orchestrated British expansion in South Africa, leading to conflict with the Boers . The Boers still bitterly resented annexation into the British Empire .
 In 1880, the Boers rose up in revolt, their sharpshooters picked off British troops at Majuba Hill . A year later, the British troops were killed by sharpsheshooters in the same place .
 William Gladstone’s Liberal government recognized the political independence of the South African Republic . Unwilling to risk further trouble, Gladstone's government recognized political independence .
 The British tried to force the Boers to trade through the port of Cape Town by denying them access to the sea . But, at the same time, the British wanted to force them to trade in the sea, reflecting the primacy in the British grand scheme .
 The Boers in Transvaal were given a boost by the discovery in the mid1880s of more gold deposits, which enabled them to buy weapons . The discovery of gold deposits in the 1880s enabled the Boers to buy more weapons .
 The raid discredited Rhodes, but brought the British government directly into the crisis . Emperor William II of Germany sent a congratulatory telegram to Transvaal President Paul Kruger after the raid .
 In 1899, the British goaded the Boers into a three-year war that lasted three years . The Boers fought back against the British in 1899 .
 In order to depopulate the farms that supplied the rebels, the British imprisoned farmers’ wives and children in camps in which thousands died . Thousands died .
 Some in Britain criticized these camps, although there had been few such outcries when the British had killed people of color during the wars against the peoples of India, Burma and elsewhere in Africa .
 The outnumbered Boers evoked great sympathy in France and Germany, leaving the British government isolated diplomatically . The British government had to rely on the Boers for support .
 The war shocked many people in Britain not only by the extensive, costly military campaigns it required . But also because of the hostile reaction the British conduct of the war engendered in other countries .
 Thereafter they were forced to take an oath of loyalty to the king of England . Thereafter, they were made to swear their loyalty to England .
 Britain granted the Republic of Transvaal and the Orange Free State selfgovernment . In 1906 and 1907, Britain granted them self-government .
 In 1910, the Boers joined the British Union of South Africa . British troops in Pretoria, South Africa, were stationed in 1910 .
 Apartheid was the result of the Boer policy of racial domination . Apartheid—the unequal separation of whites and blacks by law—was the result .
 The European powers and the United States divided up much of the entire Pacific region in their quest for raw materials, markets, strategic advantage, and prestige . The U.S. and the European powers in Asia divided up the entire region .
 Britain expanded its interests into and beyond Burma, accentuating a rivalry with Russia for influence in the region . From the populous Indian subcontinent, Britain extended its interests .
 The Dutch extended their authority in Indonesia, while the French turned much of Indochina into their protectorate . In the meantime, the Dutch extended its authority in the country .
 The Russian Empire had expanded well into Central Asia and to the Pacific Ocean . The Empire was expanding well into central Asia and the Pacific .
 By 1900, only Japan, the emerging power in Asia, maintained real independence against European incursion . Japan accepted western modernization following the Meiji Restoration in 1868 .
 Siam (Thailand) stood as a buffer state between British and French colonial interests, and the Western powers dominated China . Europe’s quest for colonies and domination in Asia had begun even earlier than in Africa .
 During the Seven Years’ War, British troops defeated the French in India . During the 7th and 10th years’s war, the French defeated the British .
 The British East India Company, responsible to the British Parliament, administered India . The company was responsible to British Parliament .
 The British recognized their local prerogatives in exchange for their obedience and assistance . The British were able to take advantage of their help .
 British merchants, backed by British naval power, worked to overcome barriers to trade with East Asia . Using India as a base, British merchants used it to work to overcome hurdles to trade .
 British traders had begun to pay for silks, teas, and other Chinese luxury goods with opium grown in India . In the 1830s, British traders began to pay with opium .
 In 1833, the East India Company lost its monopoly on trade with the east, and other English traders appeared in China selling opium . The company was forced to stop selling opium in China .
 India and the Far East before 1914 . Areas controlled by the British, French, Dutch, Portuguese, Germans, and Americans in Asia .
 British residents and European visitors received the rights of extraterritoriality, which meant that they were not subject to Chinese law . During hostilities in 1857, a combined British and French army forced China to open six more ports, including on the Yangtze River .
 The British trade route now ran from British ports to Bombay, Columbo in Ceylon, Rangoon, and Singapore . The Suez Canal was dramatically assisted by the Suez canal beginning in 1869 .
 In 1857, a revolt shook British rule in India, revealing some of the tensions between the colonialists and the colonized . The revolt in 1857 was a revolt against the British rule of India .
 Long-term causes of the mutiny of the Sepoys included anger at the British policy of taking direct control over Indian states whose princes died without heirs .
 The use of animal fat to grease rifle cartridges is a religious affront to both Hindu and Muslim soldiers . The immediate cause was the continued use of . animal fat .
 Sepoy rebels rebelled over a wide area, beginning near Delhi . Confronted with British intransigence, the Sepoys rebelled against the British .
 The rebels promised a return to Mughal power, as the emperor had been a mere figurehead since 1803 . The rebels were promised return to power by the rebels .
 They found some support among local elites, particularly those who saw increased British authority to be a threat to Islam in areas of that religion .
 An extensive military campaign followed, involving almost 200,000 British and Indian soldiers . The campaign was led by the British Empire .
 Following the mutiny, administration of India passed in 1858 from the East India Company to the British crown .
 Queen Victoria became ‘Empress of India’ and British rule became more direct . Queen Victoria was ‘Queen of India' and ruled India for more than a century .
 Indian princes were guaranteed their lands if they signed agreements accepting British rule . Indian princes signed agreements with the British to accept their lands .
 The governor-general of India added the honorific title of ‘viceroy’ as the Britain and France together occupied Canton . The governor of India was added to the title as the British and French occupy Canton.
 Lord and Lady Curzon were monarch’s personal representative, serving under the secretary of state for India . Lord Curzon was the British monarch's personal representative .
 Lord Curzon could trace his aristocratic family line back to the Norman Conquest of 1066 . Curzon was one of the most forceful proponents of British imperialism .
 Curzon was the Viceroy of India before the age of forty . Curzon wanted to solidify British rule in India . He was determined to secure the British rule of India .
 He strengthened the northwestern frontier defenses against Russia, reduced the cost of government . He also took credit for a modest increase in the Indian standard of living .
 British government enacted educational reforms, initiated irrigation projects, reformed the police and judicial systems, and encouraged the cotton industry . The British government also initiated reforms in the 1930s .
 British government also expedited railway construction in India in order to be able to move troops rapidly . The Sepoy Mutiny was a major cause for the British government .
 By connecting much of the Indian interior with ports, railway development also encouraged production of Indian cotton, rice, oil, jute, indigo, and tea, which could now reach ports .
 The greater availability of food contributed to rapid population growth . Food availability contributed to the rapid growth of the population .
 The Indian subcontinent in the twentieth century would become one of the world's most populous places on earth .
 Some Indian merchants and manufacturers made money from expanded trading opportunities . But others lost out on expanded opportunities .
 Raw Indian cotton was shipped to England to be made into cloth there, and then re-exported to India . The cotton was then shipped back to India and re-transported to England .
 British tax collectors increased the indebtedness of Indian peasants in a vast nation beset by rising population, small holdings, and increasing subdivision of land .
 France made its first move to colonize Southeast Asia in the 1850s . The French colonized the region in the early 1850s.
 French and Spanish forces had bombarded the towns of Da Nang and Saigon in joint retaliation for the execution of a Spanish missionary . French forces had bombed the towns in response to the execution .
 When the Vietnamese counterattacked, a French admiral annexed three provinces . The Vietnamese were defeated by the French, who annexed three of the provinces .
 In the early 1880s, the Emperor of Annam sought Chinese assistance against the French, invoking China’s ancient claims to the region . The Emperor of Anhama sought Chinese help in the 1880s .
 An anti-foreign movement known as the “Black Flags,” harassed foreigners, aided by Chinese soldiers, harassed foreigners . The ‘Black Flags’ included Vietnamese and Chinese brigands, which included Vietnamese . brigands .
 In 1883, a French expedition captured the city of Hanoi in Tonkin in northern Vietnam . The city was captured by the French expedition in 1883 .
 French troops forced the Vietnamese to accept a protectorate that included all of Annam . French troops sent from Cochin forced the Vietnam to accept the protectorate . The protectorate included Annam and the rest of Vietnam .
 In 1887, France created the Union of Indochina, which included Tonkin, Annam, Cochin, and Cambodia . In 1893, it unilaterally added Laos to French Indochine .
 Britain held the Fiji Islands, some of which served as refueling ports, but little else . The Fiji Islands were some of the fabled islands of Fiji .
 Smaller islands were sometimes bartered and traded as trinkets by the European powers in the various agreements signed to settle major disputes over the larger colonies . Smaller island was bartered and traded as a trinket by the European powers .
 Japan maintained real independence and gradually emerged as a power in Asia . Contrasting experiences in contrast to other Asian countries, Japan maintained independence .
 Japan built up its army and navy after being opened to Western contact in the 1850s . The country was opened to the Western world in 1850s and opened up to Western contacts .
 The 1868 Meiji Restoration, ending a period of chaos, facilitated a remarkable Westernization of economic life in Japan . The Meiji restoration, ending an era of chaos in Japan, ended in 1868 . It was the beginning of the modern Westernization in the country .
 The new centralized state structure encouraged the development of international commerce and industry . The new central state structure was created in order to encourage international commerce .
 Military conscription and the implementation of Western technology made it possible for Japan, with a modern army and navy, to emerge as a world power .
 In China, the Ch’ing dynasty continued to be beset by internal division, as well as by the demands of the imperialist powers . The government only slowly began to adopt Western technology .
 Conservative opposition to modernization continued within the imperial court . Yet conservative opposition to modernization continued within imperial court.
 Some Chinese scholars believed that railways damaged ‘the dragon’s vein’ across the landscape, threatening the earth's harmony . Some scholars believed railways damaged the dragon's vein, threatening earth's harmonious harmony .
 Imperial officials feared that in case of war China’s enemies would quickly seize the rail lines . Imperial officials wanted to prevent enemies seizing rail lines from China .
 European powers sought to impose further trade and territorial concessions on China in the late 1890s .
 Internal uprisings, notably the Taiping Rebellion in South China in the 1850s and 1860s, further encouraged such reforms . Internal upsrisings in China in 1860s also encouraged reforms .
 Military weakness made China an easy target for expansion of European influence . China's military weakness made it easy target of expansion of Europe's influence .
 The Sino-Japanese War of 1894—1895 led to an independent Korea (which Japan made a protectorate and then annexed in 1910) China’s loss of the island of Formosa and part of Manchuria to Japan .
 China was forced to make concessions to Germany and Russia . Needing loans to pay off a war indemnity to Japan, China needed loans . Needed to pay for the loans, China made concessions to Russia and Germany .
 Following the murder of two German missionaries in 1897, the German government forced China to grant a ninety-nine-year lease on the north Chinese port of Tsingtao on Kwangchow Bay .
 Russia was eager to complete its own line to Vladivostok through Chinese territories, permitting it to open up the Chinese province of Manchuria, rich in soybeans and cotton . Russia was also eager to open its own lines through Chinese territory .
 Russia seized and fortified Port Arthur on the pretext of protecting China from Germany and compelled the Chinese government to lease Port Arthur and Dalian for twenty-five years . Russia seized the pretexts of protecting the Chinese from Germany .
 The Chinese gave France a lease on Canton Bay and recognized France’s trading ‘sphere of influence” over several southern provinces . The Chinese also recognized France's trading “sphere” of influence over several provinces . France was granted a lease of Canton
 The United States government now claims to seek an open door in China . The U.S. government now says it wants what it refers to as “an open door” in China.
 The powers agreed not to interfere with any treaty port or with the interests of any other power . The treaty port was a key part of the agreement .
 China agreed to lease Britain some of the Shandong peninsula and several ports . It also agreed to guarantee a British trade monopoly on the Yangtze River, the entry to central China .
 In northern China, many resented the foreigners, whom some blamed for floods and a drought . Events also were taken to mean that the “mandate of Heaven” of the ruling dynasty was at an end .
 The “Righteous and Harmonious Fists” was a secret anti-foreign society better known as the Boxers . The Boxers, after the training practices of its members, were called the "Boxers" by the society .
 These attacks spread quickly to the imperial capital and other parts of northern China . The attacks were carried out in the early 1900s .
 After the Boxers killed several hundred ‘foreign devils,” British, Russian, German, French, Japanese, and American troops put down the rebellion .
 Their governments assessed the Chinese government a crushing indemnity of 67. million pounds . The Chinese government was also assessed 67.million pounds .
 Japan took over and expanded the Manchurian railways . Following its victory, Japan took control of the railways .
 This humiliation, and the subsequent disadvantageous railway concessions granted to the European powers and Japan, intensified Chinese nationalist sentiment and contributed to the overthrow of the Ch’ing dynasty in 1911 .
 In the meantime, Japan’s aggressive imperialism in East Asia was well under way . In the 1980s, Japan's aggressive imperialism was under way in Japan .
 The United States, too, took colonies, believing that this was its right as an emerging world power . The U.S. believes that this is its right to have colonies .
 The American imperial venture in the Philippine Islands, an archipelago in the Pacific Ocean, was not all smooth sailing . However, it was not always smooth sailing.
 During the Spanish-American War of 1898, American admiral George Dewey (18371917) sailed into Manila Bay and defeated the Spanish fleet, capturing Manila . Dewey captured the Spanish capital in Manila Bay .
 A member of the ‘Righteous and Harmonious Fists’ secret society that rose up against foreign influence in the Boxer rebellion in China in 1900 . The United States had been helped by a Filipino nationalist, a Filipino national .
 President McKinley said it would be “cowardly and discreditable” to leave the Philippines . McKinley made the decision after the Spanish-American War ended in 1898 .
 Aguinaldo’s guerrilla forces defeated by U.S. troops after three years of fighting . United States troops defeated Aguinaldos’ guerrilla forces in 1945 .
 American soldiers herded Filipinos into prison camps, torturing and executing some of those they captured . American soldiers tortured and executed some of the captured Filipinos .
 Perhaps as many as 200,000 Filipinos died in the Filipino insurrection . Aguinaldo himself was taken prisoner in 1901, and the insurrection ended the following year .
 At the same time, the U.S. government did not want to be left out of the scramble for Chinese concessions . The United States did want to avoid being left out .
 In 1899, Secretary of State John Hay announced his country’s ‘Open Door Policy’ with regard to China . Hay tried to convince the other powers to leave China open to all trade .
 Only the British government publicly expressed its agreement with this principle, but the scramble for advantage in China went on . Only the UK government said it was in agreement .
 Map 21. demonstrates the remarkable impact of the scramble for colonies in Asia . Map 21 shows remarkable impact on the scramble to find colonies across Asia .
 The government of China was virtually helpless in the face of the imperial powers . The Chinese government was 'virtually helpless' in the fight against imperial powers.
 The eagerness with which Europeans embarked on or applauded imperial ventures can be partially explained by their assumptions that nonWestern peoples were culturally inferior . Europeans assumed nonWestern people were culturally incompetential and therefore were culturally insulted .
 The colonial powers assumed the right to exploit conquered “inferior” peoples and decide what was “best” for the colonized . The colonial power assumed the rights to exploit the conquered .
 Nineteenthand twentieth-century Western attempts to understand dominated or conquered peoples also reflected the intellectual and cultural processes of imperialism . Western efforts to understand dominant or conquered people reflected the process of imperialism, the author says .
 ‘Orientalism’ began with the assumption that not only were Asian, African, and other colonized peoples different, but they were inferior as well . It was the belief that Asian and African people were inferior to other Europeans .
 Egyptian exhibit at international exposition in Paris in 1900 was reflected by the Egyptian exhibit in 1900 . Egyptian exhibit was reflected in an international exhibition at international exhibition in Paris .
 There visitors could view what were presented as African and Asian villages, complete with ‘natives” on exhibit .
 Material progress represented by steamboats, railroads, and machine guns was assumed to follow logically from what was considered moral superiority . Material progress in the U.S. followed logically from the moral superiority of moral superiority, the author says .
 Imperial territories became a testing ground or laboratory for European science and technology . Imperial territories were used as testing grounds or laboratories for European technology .
 Enlightenment thinkers had come to view cultural differences of non-Western peoples with interest . They believed that they could learn from people who seemed different from themselves .
 Social Darwinists did not believe that they could learn anything from non-Western peoples . Likewise, social Darwinists in the nineteenth century did not think that they would learn anything .
 Social Darwinists argued that what they regarded as the natural superiority of whites justified the conquest of the “backward” peoples of Africa and Asia .
 They misapplied theories of biological evolution to the history of states, utilizing the principle of “natural selection” developed by Charles Darwin, in which the stronger prevail over the weak . “Natural selection’s” is a form of evolution, Charles Darwin’
 Nations, according to this view, must struggle, like species, to survive . Nations must struggle like species to survive. Nations, it says .
 Success in the international battle for colonies would develop and measure national mettle . Success would develop the nation's mettle, and measure its strength .
 Cultural stereotypes of the peoples of the ‘mysterious” East or the “dark continent” of Africa held sway . Cultural stereotypes were held sway.
 British doctors contributed to a prevailing juxtaposition of the “African jungle,” seen as a “hotbed of disease” by virtue of a lack of civilization, with the healthier “civilized” colonizers . The ‘African jungle’ was seen
 Even well-meaning critics of colonial brutality and other reformers assumed the inferiority of those they were trying to help assumed .
 At the beginning of the twentieth century, some feminist activists began to learn about and respect Indian culture and work closely with Indian women .
 Imperial officials adopted racist ideology to justify colonialism and the brutalization of indigenous peoples . Imperial officials adopt racist ideology and brutalize indigenous people .
 Colonial businessmen paid little attention to the damaging effects of colonialism on indigenous peoples . Colonial businessmen, as well as administrators, ignored the damage of colonialism . They claimed to ‘civilize’ the people they dominated .
 The experience of the Herero people in what had become German Southwest Africa provides perhaps the most egregious example of frightening Western attitudes toward indigenous peoples who stood in their way .
 In 1903, the Herero people rose up in rebellion after losing their land to German cattle raisers . They were angered by the unwillingness of colonial courts to punish cases of murder and manslaughter against them .
 The Germans killed about 55,000 men, women, and children, twothirds of the Herero people . The Germans chased survivors into the desert and sealed waterholes .
 The westward expansion of the American frontier helped reduce discontent by providing land and opportunity to the surplus population of the East Coast . At the turn of the century, the U.S. historian Frederick Jackson Turner held that the Westward expansion provided land for the surplus East Coast population .
 Some prominent Europeans began to believe that the powers could ‘export’ their more economically marginal or politically troublesome population to the colonies . The colonies became colonies in the 1930s .
 By “social imperialism,” colonies would help countries dispose of their “least fit’s” workers, such as unemployed or underemployed workers . By ‘social imperialism’, colonies would be able to dispose of the ‘le
 Social tensions and conflict would be reduced, the ambitions of the working class for political power would be defused . The working class's ambitions of political power was thus defused, says David Frum . Social tensions would also be reduced .
 The British colonial armies alone absorbed thousands of ‘surplus’ Scots and Irish . The latter making up about 40 percent of the non-Indian troops in India .
 Europeans employed technological advances in travel and weaponry in their subjugation of indigenous peoples . Europeans employed technology to subjugate their indigenous people . Europeans used technology to subvert the indigenous population .
 Railways aided imperial armies in their conquest and defense of colonial frontiers . Horses, mules, and camels still hauled men and supplies across African deserts and bush country .
 The steamship, like the train, lessened the time of travel to distant places . It was the first steamer to travel on a steamer .
 Suez Canal completed in 1869, linking the Mediterranean and Red Seas . British bureaucrats, soldiers, merchants, and tourists could reach India in about twenty days . By the end of the century, thanks to the completion of the canal, British bureaucrats and soldiers could reach the country in about
 The heliograph, which sent messages by means of a movable mirror that reflected sunlight, and then the telegraph, speeded up communications and led to better coordination of troop movements . It was used to send messages by using a mirror reflecting sunlight .
 Observation balloons and, later, power searchlights aided European armies . Observation balloon technology helped European armies in Europe .
 Advanced military technology invariably overcame open colonial rebellions . Advanced technology always overcame open military rebellions.
 Along the South African frontier, Zulu warriors resisted the British advance in the late 1870s . The Zulu fighters earned several victories with surprise attacks on the British .
 The gunboat was the prototypical instrument of European power and enforcement, as it had proven to be in China during the Opium War in the early 1840s .
 The Gatling, or machine, machine, gun and the single-barrereled Maxim gun proved devastating . The Maxim gun could fire rapidly without being reloaded without reloading .
 A single gunner or two could fend off a large-scale attack, and British casualties were reduced to almost none . British casualties in the battle were almost none.
 The colonial powers tested new, lighter artillery that could be moved quickly and new, more powerful shells . They tested new lighter artillery and lighter shells .
 The British developed the “dumdum’s bullet, which exploded upon impact, with the shooting of attacking ‘natives” in mind .
 For the most part, there was little to stop the European onslaught other than malaria and yellow fever carried by mosquitoes, and sleeping sickness carried by the tsetse fly .
 Indigenous peoples could express resistance to powerful outsiders in other ways besides risking annihilation in open rebellion . Yet indigenous peoples could have other ways to express resistance .
 The “weapons of the weak” ranged from riots and individual subversion to foot-dragging and gentle but determined defiance . The weapons of the strong included riots, individual subversions and foot-dagging .
 The latter included pretending not to understand, or sometimes what Chinese called “that secret smile” that suggested not compliance but rather defiance in the guise of deference . The secret smile was also known as ‘that secret smiles”
 Symbols, gestures, double meanings, and images were easily understood by the subordinate population, but sufficiently disguised from Europeans . Europeans . Symbols and gestures, gestures and double meanings were often hidden from Europeans.
 These were small victories of political dissent, but victories nonetheless . These are small victories, but not small victories nonetheless, say the author .
 European powers imposed commercial controls over natural resources . The European powers impose commercial controls on natural resources in response to the crisis .
 Imperial powers routinely blocked long-standing trade routes that led to other colonies, preventing commercial exchanges from which their own merchants did not profit . Imperial powers blocked trade routes from which they own merchants didn't profit .
 European merchants maintained a monopoly on the sale of their manufactured goods in the colonies . European merchants protected at home by high tariffs against foreign imports .
 Colonialists forced or, in the best circumstances, encouraged local populations to produce for the European market . Colonialists discouraged or forbidding the extraction of raw materials or production that would compete with that of the mother country .
 In Indonesia, for example, the Dutch employed the “culture” or “cultivation” system until 1870 . The Dutch used the ‘culture’ system in Indonesia until 1870.
 Trading ships in Calcutta at the end of the nineteenth century imposed production quotas on the indigenous population, organized forced labor, and ordered people in West Java to grow coffee .
 Local populations were forced over time to abandon traditional agricultural practices, ending up in a wage economy as poorly paid laborers . Local populations abandoned traditional farming practices .
 They also lost traditional rights to hunt, graze animals, and gather firewood on land they did not own . The process had also characterized the early stages of capitalist agriculture in Western Europe .
 In British Ceylon (Sri Lanka, captured from the Dutch during the Napoleonic Wars), Dutch Java, and German East Africa, indigenous people who could not produce formal, Western-style deeds or titles to their land lost it to colonial power .
 In North Africa, the French government promoted the economic interests of French settlers, giving them the finest Algerian land . The French government gave the best land in North Africa .
 The government ordered land owned collectively by Arabs to be sold as individual plots that only the French could afford to purchase . The government also ordered the sale of land owned jointly by Arabs . The French government ordered that only French could buy the plots .
 In Morocco and Tunisia, the French claimed ‘unexploited’ land, such as that belonging to nomad peoples . In Morocco, Tunisia and Morocco, the land was claimed to be underdeveloped by the French .
 In Algeria, the French government favored the Kabyles because their monogamous, sedentary, and mostly secular society with private property seemed to be more like republican France than did that of the nomadic Arabs . The French government preferred Kabyle because of its monogamous society .
 French colonial administrators sought to maintain order and collect taxes . Above all, French colonial officials sought to collect taxes and maintain order .
 Portuguese colonists imposed conditions of virtual slavery in their colonies in their African colonies in the nineteenth century . The conditions were imposed by Portuguese colonists in their colonial colonies .
 They kidnapped people from their colony of Angola, shipped them to the coastal island of Sao Tome . They forced them to work on the cacao plantations for a “contract” period of five years, which few workers survived .
 Forced labor on mine and construction sites by colonial merchants and administrators was common . About 80,000 Africans hauled goods for Germans on a single road in one year .
 Forced labor, which might be considered slavery in disguise, was widely practiced throughout most of the French colonies until 1946 . Forced labor may be illegal in disguise .
 European notions of the organization of states clashed with the way indigenous people lived . Colonial Administrations were the result of European ideas of state sovereignty .
 Africans lacked European obsession with fixing exact boundaries, one that intensified in the age of nation-states and aggressive nationalism . Almost all Africans lacked Europeans' obsession with exact boundaries .
 For most Africans living in tribal societies, European notions of “boundaries” and “borders” established by colonial powers left many societies arbitrarily separated and sometimes interfered with the movements of migratory peoples . For most African tribes, European ideas of ‘boundaries and
 Colonial powers exploited tensions between peoples and tribes, purchasing the allegiance of temporary allies . Colonial powers exploit tensions between people and tribes .
 The British manipulated age-old tensions between Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs to keep the Indian component of its army under control, ruthlessly repressing dissent .
 Historians have distinguished between “formal” and “informal . imperialism, although the distinction is mainly one of degree, not kind . Historians distinguish between ‘formal. and ‘informional’ imperialism, but the distinction has been largely
 Britain, above all, took the path of informal imperialism by maintaining control through economic and military domination, without necessarily taking over political functions, as with indirect rule in India . Britain took the same path as India, but not necessarily taking political control .
 A “resident, or representative,” or representative of Britain, retained ultimate authority . But a ‘resident,’ or British representative, retains ultimate authority.
 European power assumed “protectorate’s status over a territory, administering the colony directly . In formal imperialism, the European power assumes ‘protector’ status over territory, administered it directly .
 The nature of a colonial “protectorate’s” changed during the scramble for Africa .
 The establishment of a protectorate meant that a colonial power defended its interests by controlling the foreign relations of a territory . It left it to each ruler or chieftain to control his people, leaving it to the ruler .
 British colonial administration, headed by the Colonial Office in London with a relatively small staff, remained decentralized, like the home government itself . The colonial administration remained decentralized like the colonial administration itself .
 Colonial powers extended their authority over the local population through indigenous officials . But gradually the colonial powers extended its authority over local officials .
 Local rulers found earlier agreements broken, and were increasingly treated as little more than intermediaries between imperialists and their own people . Local rulers were increasingly seen as intermediaries .
 The British government wanted colonies to pay for themselves . chartered commercial companies had launched British rule in Nigeria, Uganda, and what became Rhodesia . Chartered companies had the bulk of expenses in exchange for the right to extract profit .
 The British colonial administration directed railways and private capital toward regions where raw materials could be extracted or markets found . The British government directed railways, private capital to those regions .
 Imperial policy forced indigenous populations as well as colonists to produce revenues to pay for railroads, roads, and administrative officials . Imperial policy made indigenous populations and colonists produce revenues .
 The fate of the Ashanti kingdom in West Africa, which dated to the early eighteenth century, illustrates how informal control of the kingdom was transformed into more direct authority . The kingdom, which dates back to the 17th century, was ruled out of control by informal control .
 In the early 1860s, British forces skirmished with the Ashanti people on the northern frontier of the Gold Coast . Over which Britain had established a protectorate, Britain established a gold-coast protectorate . In the 18th century, the British government had established an Ashanti
 After defeating the Ashanti in 18731874, Britain made the Gold Coast a crown colony, imposing more direct control .
 In 1891, the British proposed that the Ashanti kingdom itself become a protectorate . The British proposed to become an Ashanti protectorate in 1891 .
 Five years later, British troops occupied the Ashanti capital and deported the king when he could not come up with a huge sum in gold to buy continued independence . The king was deported by British troops when he failed to pay for continued independence in Ashanti independence .
 In 1900—1901, British troops crushed an uprising when the Ashanti refused to surrender the golden stool they treasured as the symbol of their people . In a bloody sequel in 1900, the British troops crush an uprising in Ashanti . The Ashanti people were killed by British troops
 African imperial ventures often began with the directors and principal shareholders of trading companies forging out territories from the underbrush and jungle .
 The Royal Niger Company began to develop what became Nigeria in 1886 . A charter from Parliament conveying administrative powers in 1886, it was given to the company .
 The British government authorized the Royal Niger Company to launch an expedition through the rain forests to reach Sudan . To counter French moves in East Africa, the British government had authorized the expedition to Sudan .
 When German merchants began to establish trading posts to the east in the future Cameroons, the British government declared a protectorate over the Niger Delta . The Cameroons are now the Cameroons .
 The French government and the Royal Niger Company settled their respective claims through conventions . The French and Niger Company's claims were settled through convention .
 When the Royal Niger Company went bankrupt in 1899, the British government took over administration of the territories . But when the government went bankrupt, it took over the administration .
 Given the size of the British Empire, the number of colonial officials seems surprisingly small . The British Empire's colonial officials seem surprisingly small, though .
 The sons of aristocrats became high-ranking administrators or officers in the navy and army . The British colonial administration provided a career outlet for the sons of British aristocrats .
 Eleven of the 14 viceroys who served in India from 1858 to 1918 were peers by birth . Eleven of those who served there were peer by birth.
 British officials recruited subordinates selectively from the colonial population . Upper-caste Indians were trained to work in the administration of the subcontinent . British officials trained upper-castes to be part of the colonial administration .
 In the first decade of the twentieth century, the British government expanded the participation of Egyptians in running their country . In response to the first stirrings of Egyptian nationalism, the government expanded participation of Egyptian citizens .
 In Malaya, the British “resident” was responsible for putting down disturbances that might threaten British control . Local rulers were placed in paid administrative positions but had authority only in dealing with religious matters .
 Indigenous men who rose to positions of relative responsibility under the British managed to look and sound as much as possible like British gentlemen . Many indigenous men rose to position of responsibility under British rule .
 Victorians ridiculed the ‘babu’ not because he seemed to be rejecting his own culture, but because they thought he could never be good enough to be British . Many Victorians disdained the Westernized Indian .
 At the same time, the British government often left intact the hierarchy of indigenous ruling elites . This seemed more natural and made administrating the colonies easier, the government said .
 French colonial rule differed from that of the British in ways that revealed contrasts between the British and French states . British colonial rule revealed contrasts with French rule in ways .
 French colonial administration reflected the state centralization that had characterized France’s development over the past century and more . The colonial administration of French colonial administrations reflected the centralization of France .
 Military control, more than commercial relations, formed the basis of its empire . Military control was more important than economic relations, the British Empire .
 The French colonial administration employed relatively more French officials and relied less on indigenous peoples than did its British rival . The French government relied less heavily on indigenous people than the British .
 The French colonial ministry then took a much greater role in economic decision making than its counterpart in the British Empire .
 The ministries of the navy and of commerce administered French colonies until the establishment of the colonial ministry in 1894 . The colonial ministry was established in the same period .
 The French colonial civilian administration was staffed by bureaucrats, some trained at the Colonial School created in the 1880s . Some of the French colonial civil servants were trained at Colonial School .
 Africans and Vietnamese worked for the French governors-general as virtual civil servants . Africans and . Vietnamese worked as . civil servants in France as . virtual civil . servants .
 French colonial administrators exploited pre-existing ethnic and cultural rivalries, using dominant groups to control their enemies .
 The sultan of Morocco and the bey of Tunisia still ruled their subjects, at least in name, but government and the exercise of justice remained in the hands of the French colonial administration .
 In Southeast Asia, the French government created the Union of Indochina between 1887 and 1893, which included Cochin, Tonkin, Annam, Cambodia, and Laos under a single governor-general . France left pre-existing monarchies intact .
 The French government centralized the administration of West Africa in 1895 . In 1910 it established the federation of French Equatorial Africa, made up of its Central African colonies . In 1895, the French government also centralized West Africa by forming the federation .
 Governors-general, based in Dakar and Brazzaville, served as the highest local administrative authority in the country . The governors-general were based in the capital and capital of Dakar .
 In the colonies, the British lived in isolation from the indigenous population . The British lived with the indigenous people in isolation .
 More than a quarter of all graduates of Oxford’s Balliol College at the turn of the century served in the empire . The upper class tried to replicate the world of the common rooms of Cambridge and Oxford .
 In India, British ‘hill stations’ had begun as isolated sanitaria where the British could recuperate from tropical heat and illness . Hill stations also provided commanding heights useful for surveillance. Hill stations in India were used for surveillance .
 They became part of the imperial system, both as centers of power and closed British communities, ‘islands of white” that replicated the architecture and lifestyle of an English village . They became centers of the Imperial system, and closed communities .
 In Kenya and Rhodesia, settler communities were organized around the sense of being ‘white’ in unsettling and dangerous surroundings .
 In German African colonies, German women imagined themselves as cultural ambassadors . colonial officials viewed them as representatives and even guarantors of German culture . Women would give birth and raise their children in the colonies as Germans .
 Colonial urban architecture reflected the attempt to represent Western domination . Colonial architecture was an attempt at representing Western domination in colonial architecture .
 In what became Vietnam in Indochina, the opera house built in Hanoi copied that in Paris . The opera house was built in Vietnam in what became what was known as Vietnam Vietnam .
 The French architects who planned the high Gothic vaulting of the cathedral in Saigon did not consider obvious differences in climate between France and Southeast Asia, providing insufficient ventilation . The cathedral's vaulting was designed by French architects .
 Outsized public buildings and long boulevards extended French authority in the form of architectural modernism into the daily life of French settlers and colonial population .
 In Madagascar, the medical school reflected design more appropriate to Lyon than tropical island .
 imperialists and indigenous peoples lived entirely in two different, necessarily antagonistic worlds . Yet one must also nuance the view that imperialists . imperialists. and indigenous people lived entirely . in two . different worlds .
 Cross-cultural interaction revealed more fluid boundaries between imperialists and the colonized . The colonialists and colonized are negotiating, learning, and exchange . Cross cultural interaction is a process of negotiation and learning .
 In acquiring objects that represented the colonized, imperialists helped transform their own identities . Imperialists acquired objects that symbolized their own identity, they say .
 Some of what they collected, now fills museums in London and Paris, is now in museums .
 Objects from the colonies became part of the material culture of imperialism, increasingly common in middle-class homes . Objects from colonies are now part of a material culture that is common in the middle class .
 Most colonists insisted that God was on their side . The “Civilizing Mission’s” mission was the ‘Civilizing’ mission .
 Thousands of Catholic and Protestant missionaries went to Africa, India, and Asia in the name of God to win converts . Thousands of Catholics and Protestants went to Asia, Africa, and India to convert people .
 In 1900, about 18,000 Protestant missionaries lived in colonial settlements around the world . In 2000, there were 18,500 Protestant missionaries living in colonial colonies .
 French missionaries increasingly saw themselves as bringing the benefits of the French ‘civilizing mission’ to indigenous people . French missionaries, both Catholic and Protestant, increasingly saw the benefits .
 French missionaries gradually accommodated themselves to the imperial project their work helped sustain . Despite several decades of hostile relations with officials representing the secularized French Republic, French missionaries continued their work .
 Some British officials considered Anglican and Methodist missionaries to be nuisances . Anglican missionaries were considered a nuisance by the British authorities .
 Most Dutch, Belgian, and Italian clergy made little pretense of bringing indigenous peoples ‘civilization’ Most clergy tended primarily to the spiritual needs of their troops and settlers .
 One aspect of the ‘civilizing mission’ continued to be the attempt of some reformers to limit or end abuses of indigenous peoples . Some reformers are still trying to end abuses against indigenous people .
 Missionary societies may have been the ‘conscience’ of European colonization, and a small conscience was better than none at all . Missionary society was the “conscience of European colonization,’s small conscience is better than all .
 For British reformers, the primary goal of the ‘civilizing mission’ in the early part of the century had been to abolish slavery in the British Empire, which was achieved in 1833 . The British Empire was abolished by the end of the first year of slavery .
 French religious leaders launched a campaign against the remaining Arab slave trade in Africa . The French religious leader led a group of religious leaders to oppose the trade .
 British officials protested the brutal labor practices of Portuguese and Belgian entrepreneurs . The British government protested the practices of the Portuguese and Belgians .
 The British government declined to press a campaign to reduce or eliminate the sale of arms and liquor to Africans . Both commodities were extremely lucrative to British merchants, according to the historian .
 It had refused to stop the sale of Indian opium by British traders in China . Similarly, it had also refused to halt the sale by British .
 Lord Frederick Lugard came up with the term “Dual Mandate” to describe what he considered the “moral” and “material” imperatives of colonial powers . Lugard was a British colonial official .
 The European powers had an obligation to ‘civilize’ native populations, he said . European powers also had to “open the door” to the material improvements brought by Western technology, he added .
 A few socialists believed that empires could improve conditions of life for colonial peoples . Imperialism became associated with conservative nationalism in Western Europe .
 European socialists did not view the question of imperialism as one of their central concerns . In general, however, European socialists were not concerned about imperialism .
 By the end of the century, the goal of assimilation had given way to a theory of “association,” similar to Lugard’s British Dual Mandate . The goal was assimilation .
 This theory of association held that although colonial peoples were not capable of absorbing French culture, French colonialists would help them develop their economic resources, to the benefit of both . This theory was based on the theory that colonial peoples would not absorb French culture .
 Senegalese voters elected the first black representative to the French Chamber of Deputies in 1914 . Only in urban settlements in Senegal in West Africa did newborn children automatically become French citizens . In 1914, the first African-American representative to be elected to the Senate .
 When missionaries arrived on the shores of Africa or Asia, they usually found that merchants and adventurers were already there looking for gold, ivory, and rubber . The Economic Rationale of the Missionaries' missionaries .
 The discovery of new markets was necessary in the 1880s, particularly to British manufacturers . European countries adopted high protectionist tariffs, especially in Britain .
 Cecil Rhodes’ brother Cecil Rhodes said the Waganda [of Uganda] are clamoring for shoes, stockings and opera glasses . Cecil Rhodes' brother said they would enrich British merchants peddling the products of the Second Industrial Revolution .
 He agreed that the great powers sought colonies because their economies required outlets for domestically produced goods and capital investment . The colonies were important outlets for capital investment and manufacturing .
 In Hobson’s view, businessmen, particularly the finance sector based in London, virtually determined British imperial policy . Hobson: Businessmen virtually determined imperial policy in Britain .
 Hobson believed that the quest for colonies simply deferred the resolution of the central economic problem in Britain . Money that went into empire resulted in the underconsumption of industrial goods at home .
 Imperialism would be unnecessary and China and other countries in Asia and Africa would be free to develop on their own . Imperialism is unnecessary, says China's ambassador to Africa . China would be able to develop its own way of life, he says .
 Hobson’s views on imperialism anticipated critiques in our day of the economic and social consequences of globalization . Hobson's views anticipated critiques of globalization in the 1930s and '60s .
 Hobson was not a Marxist, but his views in some ways echoed those of Karl Marx . Hobson's views were similar to that of Marx's .
 Subsequent Marxists agreed with Hobson’s linking of industrial capitalism and imperialism . Hobson linked industrial capitalism to imperialism . The link of imperialism and imperialism was therefore linked to industrial capitalism .
 Lenin, the Russian revolutionary leader, took Hobson’s analysis a step further . Hobson: Lenin's analysis of the revolution in Russia was a step from Hobson's analysis .
 He argued that the incessant expansion of capital inevitably brought with it colonial rivalries and war . In this final stage of capitalist development, ‘international trusts” would divide up the globe .
 If Hobson, Rhodes, and Lenin had ever sat at the same dinner table, they would have disagreed about a good many things . They would disagree about a number of things .
 There was a close connection between the great age of European imperialism and the quest for economic gain . But they would have agreed that there was a link between the two .
 Merchant traders counted on finding rich mineral deposits and untapped markets in Africa and Asia . Merchant traders, like their seventeenthand eighteenth-century predecessors, counted on .
 Gold and diamond discoveries in South Africa in the 1860s and again in the 1880s unleashed a stampede of prospectors and inspired colonists' dreams .
 Trade in palm oil, used in large quantities for making soap and glycerin, replaced the slave trade . Palm oil was used to make soap and make glycerins .
 To be sure, colonies provided some valued products for European markets .
 Ivory and rubber from Congo, rubber from Nigeria, palm oil from Nigeria and Ivory Coast, diamonds and gold from South Africa, coffee from British Ceylon, and sugar from Malaya proved to be lucrative commodities .
 The rubber trade of French Indochina, Dutch Indonesia, the Congo, and British Malaya expanded rapidly with the popularity of the bicycle and particularly when automobiles took to the road . The trade of rubber in France, Indonesia and the Congo expanded rapidly .
 The British colonies of Nigeria and the Gold Coast produced 4 percent of the world’s cocao in 1905 and 24 percent ten years later . In 1905, the British colonies produced 24 percent of cocao and 4 percent in 1905 .
 Consumption of tea, most of it from China and Ceylon, increased by almost four times between 1840 and 1900 . The consumption of tea rose by almost 4 times in the last century . Most of the tea consumption was from Ceylon and China .
 Colonies provided an inviting market for manufactured goods from the mother country . Colonies were a place to buy goods from their mother country. Colonies became a major source of commerce in the United States .
 British capital investment abroad was still directed toward its lost colony, the United States, as well as other independent states such as Ottoman Turkey . Yet British investment was still principally directed toward the U.S. as well .
 British subjects also invested in the settlement colonies— Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, as well as India .
 There was more British trade with Belgium in the 1890s than with all of Africa . More trade between Britain and Belgium than with Africa .
 Only a small percentage of French and German investment was directed into their respective colonies . Because colonial investments were risky, only a very small percentage was directed .
 French investment abroad was overwhelmingly directed toward other parts of Europe, particularly Russia . France invested heavily in Russia, especially during the Cold War .
 Only about 5 percent of French investment reached its colonies in 1900 . In 1914, France bought more goods from its colonies than it sold them in return . In 1900, France invested less than 5 percent in its colonies .
 By 1907, German investment in all German colonies fell slightly below the value of investments in a single large bank at home . The colony's value was less than that of investment in a large bank in Germany .
 Imperial governments had to foot the bill for troops, supplies, guns, and administrative and other expenses . Imperial governments became increasingly suspicious of adventurers' assurances of riches .
 The French colonial lobby, including chambers of commerce in manufacturing cities and ports, pictured western Sudan as teeming with lucrative commercial opportunities .
 It turned out that this vast region of desert offered merchants little more than rubber, a little gold, some peanuts, and an occasional elephant tusk . The region was known for its rubber, gold, peanuts and elephant tusks .
 The French government spent vast sums to administer and police an increasingly unwieldy empire . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government spent huge sums to police the French empire .
 The exploitation of natural resources by the imperialists contributed to the economic and political underdevelopment of these regions once they became independent nations in the twentieth century . In the meantime, the exploitation of . natural resources contributed to . the economic . and political . underdevelopment . of these areas .
 Key economic sectors did benefit substantially from raw materials and markets provided by the new colonies . Individual businessmen also benefited from the colonies .
 An economic explanation for colonialism was only one factor, often a minor one, and is difficult to detach from a more dominant motivation . Nonetheless, an economic explanation is not always an economic factor .
 The new imperialism was, above all, an extension of the search for security and power on the European continent in a period characterized by aggressive nationalism and bitter international rivalries . Imperialism and nationalism was a period of aggression and rivalry .
 Even in the case of Great Britain, the imperialist power with the greatest economic investment in colonies, the international rivalry of the European powers was the strongest impulse for imperialism .
 Britain expanded its domination into new regions, not only in search of new markets, but also to keep the French, Germans, or Russians from establishing bases and colonies .
 Britain’s definition of its interests in Egypt, the pursuit of which helped launch the landgrab in Africa, had far more to do with fear of competition from its rivals than economic motives .
 Burma absorbed by Britain after wars in 1824 and 1852 to protect India’s eastern frontier against possible colonial rivals . Burma was a case in point when it was absorbed by the British in 1852 .
 When France declared its economic interest in Burma in the late 1870s, the British expanded their control over Upper Burma . They fought a third war with Burma in 1885 .
 The reigning king was shipped off to India, shipped his throne to a museum in Calcutta, turned his palace into a British club . Burma annexed Burma to the administration of India .
 The establishment of a British protectorate over Afghanistan in 1880 can best be explained by a desire to place a buffer state between India and expanding Russian interests in the region .
 Britain’s immediate goal in what contemporary diplomats called ‘the great game’ between Britain and Russia in the Near East and Asia was to prevent Russian troops from occupying the high range of mountains in and adjacent to Afghanistan .
 The term “jingoism’s” came into use in English to mean fervent nationalism . The term was used to refer to fervent nationalism .
 In Britain, the colonial experience became an important part of the national consciousness, pervasive in literature and material culture . The colonial experience was important in British national consciousness .
 Newspapers, magazines, popular literature, and the publication of soldiers’ diaries and letters carried home news from the colonies . It made imperialism seem a romantic adventure .
 In 1880, the annual Naval and Military Tournament in London began to present reenactments of colonial skirmishes and battles . The tournament began in 1880 .
 One play, Siege of Delhi, ended with an Irish officer falling in love and dancing a jig as the curtain falls on Indians about to be shot out of a cannon .
 General Charles ‘Chinese’ Gordon was killed in Sudan by the forces of the Mahdi in 1885 . The British howled for revenge for the death of General Charles 'Chinese' Gordon in Sudan . General Charles "Chinese" Gordon died in Sudan in the fall of 1885
 Few Europeans wept at the destruction of entire cultures and the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people at the hands of European armies . Few Europeans weep at the loss of entire culture and the death toll of European soldiers .
 At a time of rising political opposition in Great Britain to costly colonial commitments, the romanticization of British expeditionary forces helped keep the Conservatives in power in 1900 .
 Voluntary associations pressured the colonial powers to devote more resources to the building of empire . Voluntary groups pressured the powers to spend more resources on the empire .
 In Great Britain, Germany, and France, geographic societies sponsored voyages that charted unexplored territories . Geographic societies, associations that met periodically to listen to talks about exploration in Africa and Asia .
 In Germany and Britain, naval leagues whipped up enthusiasm for imperialism . In Britain and Germany, the naval leagues were active in promoting imperialism .
 Primrose League in Britain had 1. million members by 1906, drawn primarily from business, finance, the military, and government, the groups with the greatest stake in imperialism . Primrose was the champion of colonial lobbying groups .
 The lengthy economic depression that gripped Europe between the mid-1870s and the early-1890s accentuated such lobbying for aggressive imperialism . The depression brought low prices for commodities, accentuating such lobbying .
 With British victory in the Boer War, anti-imperialist voices grew fainter in Britain . But with British victory the anti-colonialist voices in Britain faded .
 In France, anti-imperialists focused on the financial burden of expansion . In France they focused on financial burdens of expansion rather than financial burdens .
 In the United States, the American Anti-Imperialist League joined together groups opposing the annexation of the Philippines as a territory . The League was formed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 But everywhere the strident imperialist roar drowned out dissident voices. But everywhere, everywhere, it drowned out Dissident voices .
 The aggressive nationalism contributed to the aggressive nationalism that fueled the increasingly bitter rivalries between the European great powers and further destabilized the continent . It contributed to an aggressive nationalism .
 In 1500, European powers controlled about 7 percent of the globe’s land . By 1800, they controlled 35 percent . By 1914, they had controlled 84 percent of land .
 Between 1871 and 1900, the British Empire came to include one-quarter of the world’s land mass and population . The British Empire expanded to include 66 million people and 4. million square miles, the French Empire to 3. million sq miles, and Germany, Belgium,
 The shock of losing the Philippines and Cuba to the United States in 1898 led to an intense period of introspection by intellectuals known as the “generation of 1898” who wanted to “regenerate” Spain . In Spain, with little left from its once mighty empire
 The Spanish government took new colonies in Morocco and the Western Sahara . Spanish colonialists took control of Morocco and Western Sahara.
 Aggressive nationalism shaped the contours of the new European imperialism from the early 1880s to 1914 . Aggressive nationalism shaped European imperialism between 1880s and 1914 .
 Imperialism sharpened the rivalries of the great powers, while solidifying international alliances . Imperialists sharpened rivalries and solidified international alliances, while sharpening international rivalries . Imperialism was a form of peace in the Middle Ages .
 Competing colonial interests brought France and Britain to the verge of war after the Fashoda Affair of 1898 . France and the UK were at the brink of war over colonial interests in 1898 .
 Infused with the same sense of struggle that seemed to engulf Europe, these crises would defy peaceful resolution . Infused of the same . sense of . struggle that . seemed to . engulf Europe . Infusion of the . same sense . that seemed . to engulf . Europe . would defy
 Most statesmen, military leaders, and ordinary soldiers and civilians believed that the war would be over quickly, but it raged on for more than four years . The war raged for four years, although most statesmen and military leaders believed that it would end .
 A military stalemate, bogged down in grisly trench warfare on the western front, took the lives of millions of soldiers . Millions of soldiers were killed in the battle, which ended in 1918 .
 In 1917, a revolution overthrew the tsar of Russia, and then the Bolsheviks overthrew a provisional government, withdrew from the world conflict, and imposed Communist rule . The Bolsheviks were overthrown the provisional government and withdrawn from the conflict .
 The multinational Austro-Hungarian and Turkish Ottoman Empires (which had joined Germany on the losing side) also collapsed . The Ottoman Empire also collapsed in the aftermath of the war .
 Versailles Peace Treaty carved up the fallen empires, creating successor states in Central Europe . Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia were created from the treaty .
 The treaties signed between the victors and the vanquished left a legacy of nationalist hatred in Europe . It poisoned international relations during the subsequent two decades .
 Out of the economic, social, and political turmoil of the 1920s and 1930s emerged authoritarian movements that were swept to power in many European countries . Mussolini’s Italian fascists in 1922 began to emerge from the turmoil of that era .
 The Nazis drew on extreme rightwing nationalism that viewed the Treaty of Versailles as an unfair humiliation to Germany .
 Britain and France retained their parliamentary forms of government despite economic, social, and political tensions . France and Britain retained their Parliamentary forms of Government despite tensions .
 In this Europe of extremes, the search for political stability after World War I proved elusive .
 After coming to power in 1933, Hitler rearmed Germany and disdainfully violated the Treaty of Versailles by reoccupying the Rhineland in 1936 and forging a union with Austria . Hitler also reoccupied the Rhine in 1936, and forged an Austrian union .
 Hitler and Mussolini supported a right-wing nationalist insurrection in Spain against the Spanish Republic in 1941 . The same year, Hitler supported a nationalist uprising in Spain . Mussolini and Hitler supported an uprising against Spain .
 Spain sent planes, advisers, and war materiel to aid General Francisco Franco’s military forces, which were victorious three years later . The Francoist forces were victorious in Spain three years after they defeated the Spanish government .
 After Hitler’s initial aggressive moves against Czechoslovakia were unopposed by Britain and France, the German dictator brazenly sent German troops to occupy all of the Czechs in 1938 .
 Just weeks after signing a nonaggression pact with Stalin’s Soviet Union, Hitler began his longplanned invasion of Poland, which quickly fell . The invasion was the first of its kind in Poland .
 Hitler invaded France, the Netherlands, and Belgium in the spring of 1940 . After a brief “phony war” of inaction in the West, he invaded France and the Netherlands .
 Over 17 million people were killed in the fighting, and another 20 million civilians perished . More than 6 million Jews were systematically exterminated by the Nazis during the Holocaust .
 The war finally ended in 1945, after the defeat of Germany, Italy, and Japan .
 Europe and the entire world entered a new and potentially even more dangerous period, one in which nuclear arms made the threat of another world war even more horrible . The threat of a world war was made even worse by the use of nuclear arms .
 Sir Edward Grey was foreign secretary of Britain at the start of the Great War in 1914 . He was speaking at the time of the First World War, 1914 .
 His last-ditch diplomatic efforts to prevent war having failed, Grey was one of the few to share an apocalyptic vision of the conflict . Most people thought most people thought the conflict would be over by Christmas .
 Few observers anticipated that this war would be more destructive than any ever fought . The U.S. has been involved in more than 100 years of war .
 Peace conferences failed to take into account that future wars might be different from those of the past . Peace conferences held in The Hague in 1899 and 1907 had considered ways of reducing atrocities in war .
 The Great War was the first large-scale international conflict since the Napoleonic era . World War One was the largest-scale conflict in the world's history .
 The war involved all the great powers, with Italy entering in 1915 and the U.S. entering in 1917 . Italy entered the war in 1915, and the United States entered in 1917.
 Before the war ended, it would also draw a host of minor states into the monstrous struggle .
 The catastrophic conflagration was set off by the assassination of Austro-Hungarian Archduke Francis Ferdinand in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, on June 28, 1914, by a Serb nationalist .
 In little more than a month, war engulfed the powers of Europe through the decades-old system of entangling alliances that interwove their fates . War engulfed the European powers through the years-old alliances .
 Most heads of state, diplomats, and military planners expected a major war in their lifetimes . The situation in Europe seemed much more precarious in 1905 and 1911 than it did in 1914 before the assassination .
 Germany and France are the two most powerful nations in the world . Germany's relationship with France has been described as one of Europe's most powerful rivals .
 Cartoon satirizes the alliance between Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Turkish Ottoman Empire . The alliance was similar to that of that between Russia and the Balkans .
 South Slavs looked to Russia as the protector of all Slavs . It was accentuated by the presence within the Habsburg Empire of South Slav peoples who looked to the Russia .
 Russia has long-standing goal of increasing its influence in the Balkans . In the meantime, Russia has fanned the flames of Pan-Slavism . Russia's long-term goal of growing influence in Balkans is to increase its influence .
 Germany and Austria-Hungary became firm allies, with their alliance directed, above all, against Russia . The two nations were allied against each other .
 In 1882, Italy joined the two Central European powers to form the Triple Alliance . The alliance was revived in 1891 and 1902 . Italy joined in 1882 and joined the alliance in 1881 .
 Growing German and British economic and military rivalry helped drive together France and Britain, the oldest rivals in Europe . By 1905, the French and British nations were the world's oldest rivals .
 Entangling alliances left the great powers of Europe divided into two armed camps . Europe's great powers were divided between the two camps .
 The outbreak of war between any two rivals threatened to bring all of the powers into the conflict . Because of this alliance system, the outbreak of a war would bring all the powers of all the world into conflict .
 The French never reconciled themselves to the loss of two of their wealthiest provinces . The loss of the French provinces was never fully reconciled .
 Alsace had been an integral and strategically important part of France since the seventeenth century . Although most Alsatians spoke a German dialect, Alsac was an integral part of the country .
 Most people living in the parts of Lorraine annexed by Germany spoke and considered themselves French . Most people in Lorraine were French .
 Growing rivalry between France and Germany over colonial interests added to mutual mistrust . The growing rivalry between the two countries added to the growing mistrust .
 He remained a largely ceremonial figure identified with the survival of the polyglot Habsburg state in an age of nationalism . Respected by his people, he remained a ceremonial figure .
 Throughout his reign, the Habsburg emperor had been determined that the imperial army be strong and that his dynasty maintain international prestige . The emperor had spent fifteen years longer than even that of Queen Victoria of England .
 The Austrians and the Hungarians dominated the other nationalities of their territories (see Chapter 17), but other peoples were not satisfied with the result . The Austrian and Hungarians were satisfied, but others were not .
 Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, and others resented Austrian and Hungarian domination . Czechs and Slovaks resented Austrians and Hungarians .
 Romanians unhappy with Hungary’s vigorous campaign to ‘Magyarize’ public life at the expense of non-Hungarian minorities . And Romanians were unhappy with Hungarians’ vigorous campaign .
 The South Slavs were the most dissatisfied peoples within the AustroHungarian monarchy . They were most dissatisfied with their treatment of the AustoHungarians .
 Austria-Hungary included South Slav peoples who resented subservience to the monarchy . South Slavs were majorities in some regions . Austria's southern territories included some of the world's most populated areas .
 Russian government was eagerly fanning Pan-Slav fervor in the Balkans at the turn of the century . Russia was eager to fan the idea of Slavic Slavs, stirring ethnic tension in the southern regions of the Habsburg domains .
 Many Serbs were committed to joining Bosnia to Serbia . In the mountainous Habsburg Balkan territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina, many Serbs wanted to join Bosnia . Serbs, Muslims, and Catholic Croats were also committed .
 The implication of Pan-Slav nationalism, that Slavs sharing a common culture ought also to share a common government, threatened the very existence of the Habsburg monarchy, according to the Hapsburg monarchy .
 The threat of Russian-oriented Pan-Slavism made Austria-Hungary even more dependent on Germany, as it contemplated the possibility of one day being drawn into a war .
 Russia coveted the strategically crucial Dardanelles strait, as well as the narrow Bosporus strait of Constantinople, controlled by the Turkish Ottoman Empire . For centuries Russia had coveted the strategic strategic strait .
 Russian mastery of the straits would allow it to control entry to the Black Sea . It would also give it easy access to the Mediterranean .
 Russia’s defeat in the Crimean War by Britain, France, and the Ottoman Empire had only temporarily diminished Russian interest in the region . The Crimean War was only temporarily reduced Russian interest .
 British policy in the Balkans had long been predicated on keeping the straits from Russian control . The straits were once thought to be in the hands of Russia .
 Great Britain stood independent of any alliance until undertaking Entente with France in 1904 . Great Britain was independent of alliances until the Entente of 1904 . The Entente was the first alliance between Britain and France .
 Britain came to fear the expanding German navy more than French colonial competition or Russia . Britain was a colonial rival of both Germany and France .
 The diplomats of the great powers were the heirs of Klemens von Metternich, the Austrian leader who dominated international relations in the three decades following Napoleon’s defeat in 1815 .
 Many were conservative nobles determined, at least in Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Russia, to hold the line against forces of democratization in their own states . Many of them were conservative noblemen determined to keep the line .
 Diplomats believed that the great powers ought to make decisions in the interest of the smaller ones . Diplomats believe that great powers should make decisions on behalf of small ones .
 They embraced nationalism as a principle, but only when considering the rights of the great powers, they said . They said: "They embraced nationalism only when it was considered by great powers"
 If they allowed smaller powers some rights, they ascribed the non-European peoples (with the exception of the United States and Japan) none at all . The U.S. and Japan are the only non-Europeans with rights to the U.N. powers .
 Germany and Austria-Hungary had good relations with Russia, another autocratic power . The two countries first enjoyed good relations in the 1920s .
 Austro-Hungarian and Russian interests in the Balkans have long been linked to Russia . But it was difficult to gloss over tensions between the two countries in the region .
 When Russia sought and found occasions to extend its influence in that region, Austria-Hungary reacted with concern . Russia's influence in the region was seen as a major factor in the development of the region .
 In 1875, a revolt against Turkish rule had broken out in the Balkan provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The revolt broke out in 1875 in the region .
 Congress of Berlin in Berlin in 1878 left Bulgaria nominally under the authority of the Ottoman Empire but also subject to Russian influence . Russian intervention against and victory over Turkey in the Russo-Turkish War left Bulgaria under Ottoman rule .
 The Austro-Hungarian government would henceforth administer Bosnia and Herzegovina, although they would remain within the Ottoman Empire . The Austropomansi government would then administer the region .
 Both territories had populations of Serbs, who looked to Russia for leadership . But this had the effect of potentially antagonizing Russia, because both territories had Serbs . Russia's intervention in Serbia has been seen as a destabilizing factor .
 Congress of Berlin recognized the creation of Serbia and Romania as buffers against further Russian ambitions in the Balkans . Britain and AustriaHungary feared that Bulgaria might serve Russian interests .
 The Ottoman Empire ceded the Mediterranean island of Cyprus to British occupation . Montenegro also gained independence, and the island was ceded to the British .
 Muslim refugees fled Serbia, Bulgaria, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, pouring into the diminished Ottoman territories . Hundreds of thousands of Muslim refugees also fled Serbia and Bulgaria .
 By 1879, about half of the 1.1 million Muslims who had lived in Bulgaria were no longer there . 200,000 had died, and the others had taken refuge in Turkey . About half of Bulgaria's 1.2 million Muslims had lived there .
 In 1879, fearing Russian expansionism, Bismarck forged the Dual Alliance, the cornerstone alliance between Germany and Austria-Hungary . It predicated on German support for Habsburg opposition to an expansion of Russian interests in the Balkans .
 Although the details of the alliance remained secret, its general outlines were well known . The details remained secret .
 The alliance became one of the central factors of European diplomacy for the next thirtyfive years . The alliance was one of Europe's most important diplomatic relations in the world .
 When Italy allied with Germany and Austria-Hungary in 1882, the Triple Alliance was formed . The alliance was formed between Italy and Germany, Austria and Germany .
 Italian government also wanted support for its aggressive imperial ambitions, which were directed toward the Mediterranean region, particularly North Africa . The Italian government wanted support from the Arab world .
 France stood in the way, having occupied Tunisia in 1881 before the Italians could get there . Italy now sought support against France, and sought support .
 Germany’s alliance with Austria-Hungary made the Three Emperors’ League virtually meaningless . The League was made virtually meaningless by the alliance between Germany and Austria .
 Germany and Austria-Hungary each agreed to come to the aid of the other in the event of a Russian attack . Austria-Germany agreed to help each other in event of an attack .
 Bismarck had intended Germany’s alliance with AustriaHungary to force Russia to seek better relations with Germany . The alliance was intended to force the Russian to seek a better relationship with Germany.
 Austria-Hungary’s alliance with Germany had the potential to make instability in the Balkans a threat to European peace . The alliance would put Russia at odds with Austria and with Germany as well, according to the historian .
 The last thing Bismarck wanted was for his alliance with AustriaHungary to drive Russia and France together . France and Russia were the last two countries to join forces together .
 In a caricature of the alliance system, Otto von Bismarck is depicted as a puppet-master controlling the emperors of Russia, AustriaHungary, and Germany . Such an eventuality might one day leave such a power vacuum .
 In 1881, he resurrected the Three Emperors’ League, which again allied the tsar of Russia with the emperors of Germany and Austria-Hungary . The League was formed in 1881 .
 The Russian government entered this alliance as a hedge against Austro-Hungarian expansion in the Balkans toward the straits of Constantinople . Despite considerable points of tension with the Habsburg monarchy, the alliance was formed in 1881 .
 Bismarck’s resourceful diplomacy left Germany allied, in one way or another, with all of its potential enemies except France . The result was that Germany was allied with France, not Germany .
 As on the eve of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, France stood without allies . France stood on the brink of the war of 1870/1871 .
 Several factors seemed to draw Russia and France together, despite great differences in their political systems . Yet several factors seem to draw the two countries together, including Russia .
 Both France and Russia stood outside the Triple Alliance, which joined the powers of Central Europe with Italy with Italy . Both countries stood outside of the alliance .
 Russia, too, faced diplomatic isolation, despite the Three Emperors’ League, because its Balkan interests clashed with those of Austria-Hungary . Russia also faced isolation because of its interests in the Balkans . Russia faced isolation, because of the League’s conflict with Austria
 Russia hoped an alliance with France would limit German support for the Habsburgs in southeastern Europe . Russia hoped the alliance would limit Germany's ambitions for the region . The alliance would be aimed at limiting Germany's support for its ambitions .
 Cultural ties between the Russian aristocracy and France remained strong . Many Russian noblemen still preferred to speak French .
 French investment in Russia increased dramatically in the late 1880s and early 1890s . French investment increased in Russia during the period of the period .
 French bankers seized the opportunity to provide capital at attractive interest rates for Russian railway and mining development . French investors enthusiastically purchased Russian bonds .
 One-fourth of all French foreign investment was in Russia . By 1914, about one-fifth of all foreign investment in Russia was in France .
 Bismarck and his successors made it a policy to discourage and even to forbid German loans to Russia, although they invested in the AustroHungarian and Ottoman Empires . In contrast, they invested heavily in Austropropian and Ottoman empires .
 German private investors usually lacked the capital to undertake such loans . Private investors often lacked the money to take part in such loans, experts say .
 At the same time, German and French financial cooperation was extremely limited . At the end of the 1990s, the French and German governments were in touch with each other .
 Franco-Russian ties solidified by Tsar Alexander Ill’s visit to Paris during the Exposition of 1889 . Tsar visited Paris in 1889 during the Paris Exposition .
 French left outraged by government overtures to the autocratic and often brutal tsarist regime . Yet the French left was outraged by the French government's overtures .
 Russian Tsar Alexander III and his successor Nicholas II were uncomfortable with close ties to a republic . For their part, the Tsar was uncomfortable with the idea of a republic in Russia .
 Russia blamed Austria-Hungary for opposing what they considered its natural influence in the Balkans . The Three Emperors’ League lapsed after the Russian government blamed the Austrians for opposing their influence . The League was formed in 1883, when the League was founded .
 In 1887, Germany and Russia signed a Reinsurance Treaty, by which each pledged to remain neutral if the other went to war . The treaty did not cover the most likely contingency of war between Russia and Austria-Hungary . Germany was already committed to aid AustriaHungary if
 The young, headstrong Kaiser William II dismissed Bismarck as chancellor in 1890 . He was replaced by the Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1883 .
 Bismarck’s successors were increasingly anti-Russian and failed to prevent Russia's alliance with France . Russia's relationship with France was the result of a French-Russian alliance .
 The Dual Alliance, as it was called, countered the Triple Alliance . But the Dual Alliance was called by President Barack Obama .
 It defeated the most essential thrust of Bismarck's foreign policy by ending France’s diplomatic isolation . It ended the most important thrust of his foreign policy, ending French isolation .
 The possibility of Britain joining the Dual Alliance of France and Russia seemed remote in the 1890s . The Anglo-German Rivalry was rife in the early years of the era .
 Germany and Britain had some competing colonial interests in Africa and Indochina . France was jealous of British influence in Egypt, and France wanted British influence .
 A French force encountered a British army unit in 1898 on the upper Nile at Fashoda . War between the two seemed a distinct possibility before the French government backed down .
 Afghanistan, lying strategically between British India and Russia, was a particular point of tension between those two powers . Afghanistan was a point of interest between the British and Russian powers .
 The British government had long made it clear that it sought no alliance with anyone and that it would stand alone . The British empire protected by the great British navy .
 The British government signed the Entente Cordiale with France in 1904 . But the British government did not sign it until 1904 . It signed a treaty with France that was signed in 1904, ending the war with Italy .
 The hostile reaction from every power in Europe to the Boer War was demonstrated that it was one thing to stand in proud isolation from the continent, but another to have no friends at all .
 Germany's pointed criticism of Britain’s war with the Boers strained relations between the two powers . Germany's sharp criticism of the war with Britain strained relations with Britain .
 In 1895, Kaiser William II sent a telegram congratulating the president of the Boer Republic of Transvaal in southern Africa on the Boers’ successful stand against a British attacking force .
 Neither Anglo-German cooperation in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900, nor a joint operation to force Venezuela to pay some of its foreign debts in 1902, significantly improved Anglo-Germany relations .
 Gradually, the British began to realize the growing extent of German influence in the Turkish Ottoman Empire . The British were aware of the growing German influence .
 British military planners feared that Germany might be able to move troops overland into the Middle East faster than the Royal Navy could by ship .
 It also inspired a campaign to establish an empire-wide tariff barrier that would encourage trade within the British Commonwealth, while keeping foreign goods out .
 The Anglo-German naval rivalry pushed Britain toward a rapprochement with France . Above all, it was the rivalry that pushed Britain to a rauciement .
 In 1897 the Reichstag allocated funds for the accelerated expansion of the German navy over six years . In 1897 funds were allocated for the rapid expansion of Germany's naval fleet .
 William IFs uncontrolled enthusiasm provided no small degree of impetus . The vain kaiser loved breaking bottles over the bows of brand new ships of war .
 The nationalistic Pan-German League and the Naval League whipped up popular enthusiasm for the navy . The nationalist Pan-Germans and the naval league whipped up enthusiasm .
 The new German fleet began to include some of the biggest, fastest, and widest-ranging warships ever built . Germany's fleet includes the largest, fastest and widest ever built warships .
 Britain reacted quickly when confronted with the sudden and almost unexpected naval competition . Britain reacts quickly to the sudden, almost unexpected challenge .
 In 1906, the fastest and most powerful battleship in the world, the Dreadnought, took to the sea . In 1906 the world's fastest battleship, the dreadnought was the most powerful warship in history . It was the first battleship of its kind, the
 Wild British estimates had the Germans turning out even more, leading to a panic in 1909 that a German invasion of Britain was near . Germany began to build comparable ships of war, and wild British estimates led to a British panic .
 The British government took a hesitant step toward ending its diplomatic isolation by signing a treaty in 1901 with the United States . The treaty allowed the U.S. to construct the Panama Canal, which was built by the British .
 By undertaking an alliance with Japan in 1902, Britain sought to counter Russian ambitions in East Asia . The alliance was aimed at countering Russia's ambitions in Asia .
 The Russian Baltic fleet, embarking on a disastrous voyage around the world to confront the Japanese navy in the Yellow Sea, sank several British fishing trawlers in the North Sea . It somehow mistook them for Japanese ships .
 Germany expected France would immediately support Russia, with whom it was allied . Germany expected that France would support Russia . Russia is a major ally of the West .
 French Foreign Minister Theophile Delcasse helped mediate between Russia and Britain . Yet, to almost everyone’s surprise, he was not expected to mediate .
 Russia’s defeat in East Asia confirmed that Britain had far more to fear from Germany than from Russia . Britain has far more of a problem with Germany than Russia, says David Cameron .
 Britain recognized French interests in Morocco in exchange for the French recognition of British control over Egypt . Both sides accepted the existence of neutral Siam in Indochina standing between French and British-controlled Burma . They settled a centuries-old dispute over fishing rights off the coast of Newfoundland .
 Germany had only modest commercial interests in Morocco . William II convinced William II to test the recently concluded Anglo-French agreement and perhaps force the British government to leave France to its own devices .
 William II demanded that Germany receive from Morocco the same commercial benefits as any other trading partner . William II wanted to see Morocco as a trading partner with Germany .
 French government reacted with fury, but backed down when British support for war seemed highly unlikely . French government backed down after British support was highly unlikely to support war .
 Germany also pulled away from possible conflict, seeing that only Austria-Hungary took its side .
 The crisis ended with an international conference in the Spanish town of Algeciras in January 1906 . The crisis began with a crisis in Spain's capital Madrid .
 German government determined that another humiliation must not be suffered . This left the government determined to not suffer another humiliation .
 The incident seemed to confirm the bellicose and bullying nature of German foreign policy to both France and Britain . The incident also seemed to seem to confirm that .
 Anti-German feeling intensified in France among political moderates as well as those on the nationalist right . Anti-Germany feeling intensified among moderates and nationalists in France .
 French and British generals and admirals began to draw up joint contingency plans for combined warfare against Germany . France and Britain drew up joint plans to defeat Germany in 1940s .
 The Algeciras Conference also brought Russia and Britain closer together . The conference was attended by Russian Foreign Minister Alexander Izvolsky .
 Izvolsky: Russian interests were in the Balkans, not in Asia, where British interests lay . Izvolky: "Russian interests are in Balkans, where they competed with those of Austria-Hungary, not Asia"
 Russian government eager for better relations with Britain . Russia was on the road to recovery from disastrous Russo-Japanese War by British loans .
 The British government had long viewed Russian economic influence in Persia and Afghanistan as threatening to its interests . A strong Russian presence in Persia might one day compromise the sea route to East Asia . Afghanistan served as a buffer between Russia France and Germany quarrel over and British India .
 The Russians accepted British influence in Afghanistan, and both powers agreed to stay out of Tibet . Both powers agreed in Tibet, Tibet and Afghanistan to remain neutral .
 Russia hoped that Britain might support, or tolerate, its interests in the Balkans, and its ultimate desire of controlling Constantinople . Russia hoped Britain would support its interests, or at least tolerate its interests .
 The elimination of some of the tensions between Britain and Russia strengthened the Franco-British Entente Cordiale . Russia and Britain have been at odds for decades .
 The Europe of Two Armed Camps, 1905-1914 . The inclusion of Russia in what was increasingly known as the Triple Entente moved Europe toward a clear division into two camps .
 The German emperor was also the grandson of Queen Victoria of England . A standing joke in Berlin went that William feared no one except God and his English grandmother .
 Blood relations were subordinate to the logic of greatpower interests and alliances . But in the Europe of entangling alliances, blood relations became subordinate to great power interests . Blood relations had to be subordinate to those of Europe's great powers .
 The German government could find little reassurance in Italy’s nominal alliance with Germany and Austria-Hungary . The Italian prime minister is expected to make a speech in Berlin .
 Improved relations between Italy and France confronted Germany with the prospect that AustriaHungary would be its only dependable ally . Germany faced the prospect of losing Austria and becoming a dependent ally .
 Austria-Hungary might be left alone, encircled by enemies . Worst-case scenario: Germany may be left with enemies .
 The German high command prepared for a possible war against both France and Russia . A war that would have to be fought on two fronts, the German military said .
 This left the German government in the position of having to support its troubled Habsburg ally unconditionally in the Balkans . The German government was forced to support the Habsberg ally in the region .
 German government began to see military strength in a different way in 1904-1905 . German government, like the other great powers, saw military strength as a problem .
 German military planners were concerned that Russia was rapidly reconstituting its army in the years following its humiliating defeat in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 . Austria-Hungary also continued to build their forces, as did Germany and Austria-Germany .
 The powers increased ranks of soldiers and sailors, and almost frantically improved weapons, aided by technological advances . Weapons, machine guns, telephones, and even airplanes, at first intended essentially for reconnaissance .
 The German government demonstrated that it was increasingly willing to use the threat of war as a tool of diplomacy . Moreover, the German government showed it was willing to go on the attack .
 This new approach reflected a growing sense that it would be better to fight a war sooner rather than later . Germany still had what appeared to be a favorable military balance of power, the author says .
 The balance of military power came into play in the international crises that led to war in 1914 . perceptions of the balance of power came to play in international crises .
 Russia and Austria-Hungary had agreed informally to respect the status quo in the region in 1897 . In 1897, Russia and the Austrians and Germans agreed to an informal truce in the area .
 Cultural and political nationalism continued to grow among the South Slavs living within the Austro-Hungarian Empire, in Serbia, or under Ottoman rule .
 In the Balkans, the vast majority of peoples had remained indifferent or ignorant of nationalist identities until at least the beginning of the twentieth century . The majority of people in the Balkans remained indifferent to nationalist identities .
 Religious identities have always defined a sense of community, along with regional and village identities . Religious identities -- Greek, Russian, or Bulgarian Orthodox, Muslim, Catholic, or Jewish -- had always defined community .
 New states carved out of what had been Ottoman territory, national identities began to take hold . Then, encouraged by the new states, they began to develop their own national identities .
 This made southeastern Europe ever more the focus of the rivalry between Austria-Hungary and Russia . The two countries were involved in the conflict between Russia and Austria .
 Russia recognized the new king, Peter, after a bloody revolution led to the assassination of the king and queen of Serbia in 1903 . Russia hoped that Pan-Slav elements would dominate in Serbia .
 Fearing any delay would push Serbia closer to Russia, Austria-Hungary recognized the fait accompli . Fearing that Serbia would be closer to the Russian border, the deal was struck between Serbia and the West .
 Serb parliament voiced its unqualified support for Russian ambitions in East Asia and its disastrous 1904-1905 war against Japan . Serb MPs voiced their support for Russia in the war against East Asia .
 Serb nationalists began to call for union with Serbs in Macedonia, which was still part of the Ottoman Empire . Macedonians, Serbs, Bulgarians, Sephardic Jews, and Greeks, who had largely gotten along in the past .
 As Greek and Bulgarian Orthodox churches battled for the allegiance of peasants, the strident, aggressive calls of various nationalist groups helped create a nationalism that had previously existed on only a superficial level .
 Greek, Bulgarian, and Macedonian armed groups operated inside Macedonia, as did Bulgarian, Macedonian nationalists . Now armed groups are operating inside Macedonia .
 Provocative addresses to minorities worsened ethnic tensions in the region . Provocative speeches to minority groups worsened ethnic tension .
 Religion became much more identified with emerging national identities . Religion became more identified as national identity .
 Serbia tried to lessen its economic dependence on Austria-Hungary by signing a commercial treaty with Bulgaria . Vienna responded by forbidding the importation of Serb livestock . Vienna also banned the import of Serbs livestock .
 The humble pig formed a basis of Serbia’s fragile agricultural economy . Thus began an economic battle in 1906 that became known in much of Europe as the ‘Pig War’
 The Habsburg government responded in 1908 by announcing the construction of a new railroad that would further isolate Serbia economically . The new railroad was built in order to further isolate the country economically .
 Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Balkan states, including territory acquired in Balkan Wars of 1912-13 . Serbian nationalists viewed Bosnia and Herzegovina as South Slav states that should, with Russian encouragement, become part of Serbia .
 Political instability in Turkey in the early 1870s had further whetted the appetites of both Russia and Austria-Hungary for the Balkans . Financial crisis, poor harvests, and opposition of religious conservatives to secularization in Turkey .
 Britain and France had condescendingly invited the sultan “to participate in the advantages of public law and the system of Europe,” while insisting on further Western reforms .
 Ottoman governor of Egypt was constrained to sell his shares of the Suez Canal to the British government for a quarter of their real value, leading Egypt to bankruptcy . Egypt was forced to sell its shares to British government, leading to the country's bankruptcy .
 Turkish Sultan Abdiilhamid II agreed to a constitution upon his ascension to the throne in 1876 . The constitution consolidates some of the reforms of the past several decades .
 The constitution established parliamentary rule and guaranteed personal freedom and equality before the law . The constitution was established in 1973 .
 The sultan hoped to discourage the powers from intervening in Ottoman affairs on the pretext of forcing political reform . He hoped the sultan wanted the powers to discourage them from interfering with the Ottoman government .
 In 1878 he suspended the constitution and dissolved the parliament it had established . But in 1878 the constitution was suspended and the parliament was dissolved . He suspended it and dissolved it in order to get around the world .
 During Abdiilhamid’s rule, foreign trade increased, agriculture developed, railway lines and paved roads more than doubled, and public schools increased in number . During the reign of AbdiIlhamid, the number of schools in the region increased .
 His reign was also marked by the brutal repression of non-Muslim peoples of the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was also known for its repression of the Muslim population .
 About 200,000 Armenians (who made up about 6 percent of the empire’s population) were slaughtered in 1894-1895 in eastern Anatolia in response to Turkish fears of Armenian nationalism .
 The empire continued to be beset by financial problems, including high-interest debt owed to foreign bondholders . The empire was beset with financial problems .
 A group of nationalists in 1889 founded the Committee of Union and Progress, finding support in the bureaucracy and army . Influenced by Western political ideas and reflecting the emergence of a generation of Turkish intellectuals .
 In 1908, the "Young Turks" revolted in the name of “order and progress” and forced the sultan to restore the constitution of 1876 . In July 1908, these “Young Turks,” as they were called, revolted .
 The Young Turks wanted to unify and modernize the Ottoman lands, while preventing Western intervention on behalf of the Armenians . The Armenians were the only Armenians in the Ottoman Ottoman Empire .
 Abdiilhamid II was deposed in 1909 when he tried to plot a counter-revolution . A Western-like bureaucracy was put in place in the Middle East .
 The Young Turks, 1908. The chaos within the Ottoman Empire seemed to promise the realization of the Russian dream of opening the Young Turks .
 The Austro-Hungarian government faced the possibility that lands still held by the Ottoman Empire might be added to Serbia and Romania, further destabilizing the Balkans . The Austo-Hungarians faced the prospect of the addition of the Ottoman lands to Serbia .
 This pushed Russian and Austro-Hungarian relations toward a breaking point . Russia and Austria-Hungary relations have been strained for years .
 Turkish instability led to the Bosnian Crisis of 1908 . The crisis was the first Bosnian crisis since the S.E. Bosnian War of 1907 .
 Congress of Berlin authorized Austria-Hungary to occupy Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878 . Both territories technically technically were still part of the Ottoman Empire .
 Austria-Hungary had done so, at the risk of bringing more Slavs into the empire, not only to solidify its position in the Balkans but also to prevent Serbia from absorbing them . Austria had brought in Slavs to protect Serbia from being absorbed by Serbia .
 The Russian government had been secretly negotiating with Austria-Hungary to trade Russian acceptance of the absorption of Bosnia and Herzegovina for Austria’s support for the opening of the Bosporus and the Dardanelles straits .
 Austro-Hungarian government decided to annex Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908, fearing the influence of the Young Turks there . Bulgaria declared its independence a day after Bulgaria declared independence .
 The annexation was a clear violation of the agreements reached at the Congress of Berlin in 1878 . The annexation of Crimea in Crimea was a violation of those agreements reached in Berlin .
 Serbia, furious that two territories in which many South Slavs lived were to be incorporated into the Habsburg Empire, mobilized its army with Russian support . Serbia was furious that Serbia, which had been in control of many of the territories, was to be annexed .
 The annexation also strained relations between Austria-Hungary and Italy, because of Italian strategic and economic interests on the Adriatic coast . The annexation strained relations with Italy because of its economic and strategic interests in the region .
 The resolute opposition to war by Hungarian leaders within AustriaHungary, as well as the opposition of the heir to the Habsburg throne, Archduke Francis Ferdinand, helped defuse the crisis . Archduk Francis Ferdinand was the son of the Hungarian prince .
 Victory might well add a considerable South Slav population to Hungarian territories . War would be expensive, but victory would be costly .
 Despite diplomatic bluster, Russia was not ready to fight in the Balkans . France was unwilling to go to war over the Balkans, where it had no interests . Russia was reluctant to fight, and its ally France was not willing to go on the war .
 Russia backed down, forcing Serbia to recognize the Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina . Lacking French or British support, the Russian government backed down . Serbia was forced to recognize Austria's annexation of the territory .
 European powers had drawn significant conclusions from the Bosnian Crisis . War had been avoided, but the European powers drew significant conclusions . The Bosnian crisis had been averted, but it was not the end of the conflict .
 Both Berlin and Vienna viewed Italy’s commitment to the alliance as uncertain . Italy remained allied with both Central European powers, but remained allied .
 Italy's problematic status as an ally thus further firmed up Germany’s alliance with Austria-Hungary . Germany's relationship with Italy further strengthened its alliance with the Austrians-Hungarians .
 The German government has demanded that Russia recognize Austria-Hungary’s annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The annexation was Austria's annexation of the region in 1883 .
 Russian government viewing itself as a victim of German bullying, now sought a closer relationship with Britain . Russian government viewed itself as victim of bullying by Germany .
 With German shipyards producing the most modern and heavily armed fighting ships at a frightening pace, British officials quickly gave up their reservations about the Entente Cordiale with France .
 The Bosnian Crisis left deep scars on Russian relations with AustriaHungary . The crisis was triggered by the Bosnian War in 1992 .
 The Habsburg government presented poorly forged documents to support claims that Serb authorities were trying to stir up the Slav populations within the empire . The documents were forged to support the claim that Serbs were stirring up Slav populations .
 Several groups of devoted Serb nationalists received tacit support from the Serb state, as well as Russian encouragement . The People's Defense and Black Hand were among those groups that received tacit backing from the state .
 Germany also provoked the Second Moroccan Crisis . The Second Moroccan crisis was triggered by Germany's intervention .
 France established a virtual protectorate in Morocco, which violated the Algeciras agreements of 1906 . France had established an illegal protectorate of Morocco, violating the agreements .
 Using a local rebellion against the new Moroccan sultan as an excuse, a French army marched on the town of Fez, allegedly to protect French settlers . The French army used it as a pretext to invade Fez .
 German emperor sent a small gunboat to the port of Agadir . When the French government did not offer to compensate Germany because France had added another protectorate to its empire .
 It arrived on July 1, 1911, with demands that Germany receive the French Congo as compensation for France’s claiming Morocco as a protectorate . The Congo was a French protectorate of Morocco .
 France refused, bolstered by its closer relations with Britain and Russia’s increased stability, and a wave of nationalist sentiment at home . France refused .
 In November 1911, Germany agreed to recognize Morocco as a French protectorate in exchange for 100,000 square miles of the French Congo . Germany agreed in November 1911 that Morocco would be a protectorate of Morocco .
 Britain and France now formalize the agreement by which each pledged to aid the other in case of an attack by Germany . The two countries have pledged to help each other in the event of a German attack .
 In April 1912, the British and French admiralties established zones of responsibility for their fleets . The French in the Mediterranean and the British in the English Channel and the North Sea .
 Bosnian Crisis of 1908 demonstrated that events in the Balkans could carry Europe to war . The Bosnian crisis of 1908 was the first time Europe had seen a war in the region .
 Late in the year, Italy invaded Libya, part of the Ottoman Empire, in what became known as the Tripoli War . Italy overcame resistance in October 1912, overcoming resistance in Libya .
 France acquiesced to the Italian seizure of Libya in exchange for Italian recognition of Morocco’s status as a French protectorate . Italy also recognized Morocco as a protectorate in Morocco .
 Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro, and Greece had formed the Balkan League with the intention of freeing the Balkans from Ottoman rule . The League was formed in order to free the region of the Balkans .
 Turkey declared war on Turkey in 1912 after failing to put down an insurrection in Albania in 1910 and by the Turkish defeat in Libya, they declared war .
 The First Balkan War lasted less than a month, with the Balkan League emerging victorious . The war was the first of its kind and lasted just over a month .
 The success of the Balkan states worried the Austro-Hungarian government . However, the success was not enough to worry the government of Austria .
 Russia and the Austro-Hungarian monarchy seemed on a collision course in the Balkans . Russia and Austria's monarchy were at odds with each other in the 1920s .
 New foreign ministers, Sergei Sazonov of Russia and Leopold Berchtold (1863— 1942) of Austria-Hungary, helped defuse the crisis . The new foreign ministers of both Russia and Hungary helped to end the war .
 Austria-Hungary’s goals were to see that no Balkan state became so strong that it could generate nationalist agitation within its territories, and to prevent Serbia from gaining a port on the Adriatic . Russia's friend, Serbia, was also trying to gain access to the
 Britain and France supported Austria-Hungary’s call for the creation of the independent state of Albania on the Adriatic, which would prevent Serbia from having its port . In the interest of peace, the two countries supported the move .
 The German government viewed these issues as sufficiently grave to warrant its unconditional support for Austria-Hungary . The German army's support was seen as sufficient to warrant unconditional support .
 The Treaty of London of May 1913 divided up most of the remaining Ottoman holdings in southeastern Europe among the Balkan states . The treaty of London divided up some of the Ottoman holdings among the states .
 Bulgaria felt aggrieved by the fact that Serbia and Greece had ended up with large parts of Macedonia and attacked both states . However, Bulgaria was not interested in the situation and attacked Serbia and Macedonia .
 Serbia and Greece, with the assistance of Romania and the Turks, quickly defeated Bulgaria in 1913 in the Second Balkan War . Serbia, Greece and Greece defeated Bulgaria with the help of Romania, the Turks .
 With the Peace of Bucharest, Serbia received the parts of what had been Ottoman Macedonia, which Bulgaria was to have received . Greece gained more territory on the Aegean coast as well as Crete, where Greeks had risen up against Turkish rule on two previous occasions .
 Serbia emerged from the Balkan Wars larger, stronger, more ambitious, and more ambitious . Austria-Hungary had frustrated its quest for an Adriatic port . Serbia was angry at the failure of a port in the region .
 Germany may have emerged with the impression there were limits to its support for Austria-Hungary . The German government had at least appeared to restrain the Habsburg government’s aggressive response to Serbia's demand for a port .
 This image of the Balkan Wars, 1912- 1913, had a ring of prophetic accuracy . This image was taken in the early years of the conflict in Yugoslavia .
 Sazonov placated Serbs by telling them that their promised land lay inside the frontiers of Hungary . After backing down against Austria-Hungary for the second time (the first having been the Bosnian Crisis in 1908), the Serbs backed down for the first time .
 Some Serb political leaders sympathized with the young fanatics of "The Peoples Will" and "The Black Hand" nationalist organizations . Some Serbs sympathize with the fanatics, including those of “The Peoples will’s Will”
 In 1910, a boy who had been taught to shoot a gun by a Serb officer attempted to use it on the Austrian governor of Bosnia . The youth committed suicide after failing, becoming a martyr in Serbia . The boy committed suicide in 1910 .
 A few Habsburg personages, possibly including the Archduke Francis Ferdinand, may have been willing to consider the South Slavs as partners in a tripartite empire . The mere suggestion of which infuriated almost all Magyars and most Austrians .
 Austro-Hungarian government considered the South Slav nationalists to be threats who would ultimately have to be crushed . But the government considered them threats and would have to crush .
 The German military command once again turned its attention to readying its army . It reacted to Russian measures of military preparedness . Because of the Balkan situation, the military command has turned attention to the situation .
 In 1914 Europe seemed far less close to war than it had been in 1905 and 1911, the years of the two Moroccan Crises . But in 1914 Europe was far less likely to be at risk of war than in 1911 .
 The powers of Europe were poised for conflict, divided into two armed camps by two rival alliances . The powers were poised to conflict, but Europe was divided by two armies .
 The outbreak of war was probably not inevitable—although many nationalists and military planners believed it to be . Many nationalists believed it was likely to be, but many believed it would be .
 The entangling alliances that pitted the Triple Alliance against the Triple Entente seemed likely to bring all of the European powers into the conflict . Furthermore, once two powers seemed on the verge of war, all of Europe's powers seemed to be in danger .
 Archduke Francis Ferdinand was heir to the Habsburg throne . Assassination in Sarajevo was an attempt to assassinate him .
 His first love was his commoner wife, Sophie; his second, hunting . He bragged of having killed 6,000 stags in his lifetime and of having bagged 2,763 seagulls on a single day .
 The archduke was not considered particularly pro-German . He probably had more sympathy for the problems of the South Slavs than any other member of the royal family .
 Hungarians disliked him, fearing that when he came to the throne, he might grant the South Slavs the same status as Austrians and Hungarians .
 Serb nationalists would accept nothing less than an expanded independent Slavic state, or what they called Greater Serbia . But many Serbs would accept an expanded state of Greater Serbia, or a greater Serbia .
 On June 28, 1914, Francis Ferdinand and his wife were on an inspection tour of the army in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia .
 As the archduke’s motorcade approached the center of the city, a small bomb exploded under his car . The bomb was detonated by a bomb that exploded under the Archduke's car .
 The archduke expressed his indignation at the attempt on his life . The motorcade continued to the town hall, where he expressed his outrage .
 When the motorcade departed, the drivers had not been informed of a change in route chosen to avoid the tangle of streets in central Sarajevo .
 When the first several vehicles began to turn into a narrow' street, the military governor ran ahead, ordering their drivers to back up . The military governor ordered their drivers back up and ordered them to back down .
 Archduke Francis Ferdinand and his wife bathe in Sarajevo . Gavrilo Princip saw' his chance, as a young member of the Black Hand Serb nationalist group .
 Austrian description of the youthful killers as puppets whose strings were pulled in Belgrade was incorrect . Serb government had been aware of the Black Hand nationalist organization and some individual officials had supported it .
 Serb newspapers virtually celebrated the death of the Habsburg heir . Nonetheless, Serb media virtually celebrated his death .
 In Vienna, even those who had disliked the archduke for having married a commoner now mourned the couple fervently .
 The Habsburg imperial administration had the chance to crush Serbia had arrived, and that, unlike 1908 and 1912, this time the opportunity would not be missed . Many officials immediately took the view that the opportunity had arrived . The Ultimatum was the Austrians' first attempt to crush
 The usually indecisive Austrian foreign minister, Leopold Berchtold, now took a hard line . He had opposed war during the Balkan Crisis of 1912 .
 William 11 urged retaliation, blaming Serbia for the assassination . William 11 has urged retaliation for the killing .
 German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg stubbornly held the view that Germany’s strength must be paramount . He said that Germany's strength must always be paramount in Europe .
 Bethmann-Hollweg was now determined to stay the course with a numbing fatalism accentuated by the recent death of his wife . Bethmann: "I'm not going to let my wife die, I'm going to do it. I'm not scared"
 He advised his son not to plant trees that would take a long time to grow because they would please only the Russians, whom by then he expected to have occupied northeastern Germany . The trees he planted in his estate would be difficult to grow, he said .
 In Berlin, the German government gave an Austrian official a “blank check” to act with full German support . Germany would, if necessary, fight both France and Russia if those two powers intervened once Austria had declared war .
 Berchtold convinced the Hungarian leaders to support war against Serbia . He promised that no Slavs from territories taken from defeated Serbia would be incorporated into Austria-Hungary .
 On July 21, 1914, Russian Foreign Minister Sazonov warned Austria-Hungary against taking any military measures against Serbia . The Russian ambassador was encouraged by Maurice Paleologue, the French ambassador, to take action .
 The Austrian ambassador in Belgrade presented a lengthy ultimatum to Serb officials . On July 23, 1914, almost a month after the assassination, the Austrian ambassador presented the message . The Austrians were in the midst of a war with the Serb Republic .
 Austro-Hungary demands included the end of all anti-Habsburg publications, the dissolution of all Serb nationalist organizations, and a purge of officials and army officers to be named by Austria-hungary . Austria-Hungarian demands included end of anti-Austro-
 British foreign secretary calls ultimatum “most formidable document ever presented by one independent state to another’s . Grey: It is ‘the most formidable document’ ever presented’ by independent states .
 Its options wre either to capitulate completely to the ultimatum and suffer a humiliating diplomatic defeat, or, as one official put it, to die fighting .
 He blamed Germany, claiming that the ultimatum was part of a German plan to keep Russia from reaching Constantinople . He claimed that Germany was behind the attack on Russia .
 Some of Tsar Nicholas ll’s advisers saw war as a means of rallying the support of the Russian Empire behind the tsar . Some of the advisers saw it as a way to rally the support .
 Sazonov’s first concern was to mobilize French support against Austria-Hungary, believing that a united show of strength would force the Central European allies to back down . The Russian president was hoping to mobilize France's support in a show of unity .
 A coup in Turkey in 1913 brought the Ottoman Empire even closer to Germany . From the Russian point of view, if Austro-Hungarian influence expanded in the Balkans, German influence would soon be manifest in the straits .
 French President Raymond Poincare’s state visit to Saint Petersburg from July 20 to July 23 seemed to indicate that France would stand by Russia . Saxonov received quick assurance from the French ambassador of full French support from the ambassador .
 On July 25, 1914, two days after the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum, the tsar placed the Russian army on alert . The Russian army would normally normally precede mobilization . The tsar ordered the army to be on alert two days later .
 Such a step was fraught with consequences for the military planners of each power . Such a move was fraught for the countries involved in the conflict .
 Mobilization meant preparing an army for war, calling up reserves, declaring martial law' in frontier areas, readying the railways for hauling troops and supplies, and accelerating the production of munitions . Mobilization also meant calling up reserve troops and declaring 'martial law' on frontier areas
 A Russian decision to mobilize would be tantamount to an act of war in the eyes of German military planners . In these circumstances, a Russian decision would be considered a war in Germany's eyes .
 Count Alfred von Schlieffen drew up plan for war against France in 1905 . Plan was drawn up in 1905 by former chief of the German general staff .
 The Schlieffen Plan called for the German armies to use a lightning attack to knock the French out of the w'ar . Based on the assumption that it would take Russia, France’s ally, several w'eeks to prepare its armies to fight .
 German forces would be able to confront the Russian army attacking in the east . Then the German forces w'ould be . able to . confront the . Russian forces attacking in east .
 German troops would march through the flat terrain of Belgium and the Netherlands . They would turn south once the last soldier on the northern flank had brushed his sleeve against the English Channel .
 A pincer movement southward would encircle Paris from the northwest, and then turn to trap the French armies that had moved into Alsace-Lorraine . The French army would then be trapped by the pincherr movement .
 Schlieffen and his successors recognized that the plan would probably bring Great Britain into the war . Great Britain would never accept the violation of Belgian neutrality and the possible presence of an enemy power .
 German commanders believed that the war on the continent would be over before the superior British navy could make a difference . The small, volunteer British army posed little immediate threat .
 There would still be time to ship enough of the victorious army to the east to defeat the Russians as they rolled slowly toward Germany . Then there would be time for the Russians to defeat Germany .
 This was the solution to Bismarck’s nightmare, a simultaneous war on two fronts, he says . The solution was to the problem of a simultaneous invasion of Germany, he writes .
 With the bulk of the German army tied up by French and British troops in Belgium and, at worst, northern France, the way to Berlin would be open . The bulk of Germany's army is tied up in Belgium, and northern France .
 Unlike Germany, the French army enjoyed the advantage of being able to focus its full attention on Germany . Germany had to contemplate fighting a war on two fronts .
 The French plan counted on the Russian army attacking Germany from the east by the sixteenth day of mobilization . The Russian army would be attacking Germany by the end of the month .
 British government suggested that, following Russian mobilization, the other powers help arrange a peaceful solution . Britain suggested that the other nations help arrange the peaceful solution.
 Britain was unwilling to back Russia, a move that might have made AustriaHungary and Germany back down .
 The German government still assumed that the British would remain neutral in a war between France and Russia against Germany and Austria-Hungary . The British government still believed that the country would be neutral .
 The Russian government continued to believe that its resolute support for Serbia might well be enough to force Austria-Hungary to reconsider . Russia continued to think that its support might well have been enough for Serbia to reconsider its decision .
 Austria-Hungary and Germany were laboring under the same kind of illusion about Russia . The two countries were working together under the illusion about each other, says historian .
 Both believed that a show of unconditional support would force Russia to pull back . Germany’s “blank check” to Austria-Hungary was thought to be the reason for the move .
 Germany's aggressive support for its ally, combined with the bellicose prodding of the Russian government by the French ambassador, had just the opposite effect . Yet Germany’s aggressive support was not enough to stop Russia from joining the West .
 It then presented a formal reply to the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum just before the forty-eight hours had elapsed .
 Serbs accepted five of the demands without reservation; four others they would accept pending discussion and some further explanation . Serbs accept five without reservation, four more pending discussion . Serbians accepted the demands, but four more would require more explanation .
 Austro-Hungarian representatives rejected one request that they collaborate in the investigation of the Serb “plot” against the Habsburg Empire . The Austrians rejected only one outright — that Austro -Hungarians collaborate with the Serbs .
 The Austro-Hungarian government viewed anything less than total compliance as unsatisfactory . Austo-Hungarians viewed anything . less than complete compliance was considered unsatisfactory by authorities .
 It ordered military mobilization against Serbia, but stopped short of declaring war . The Serbian government has not declared war on Serbia . It has ordered military mobilization against Serbia .
 The British again proposed a meeting of the powers in the hope of avoiding conflict in the Balkans . The meeting would be limited to the Balkans, or at least keeping it limited to Balkans .
 This the German government rejected, believing that Britain would not go to war unless it appeared that Germany was intending to conquer and absorb France . This was rejected by the British government . The German government refused to go to the war .
 The declaration claimed an unsatisfactory Serb response to the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum, as well as an attack on the Bosnian frontier . The declaration never took place .
 Foreign Secretary Edward Grey asked if Germany would participate in a last-ditch attempt to negotiate a settlement to the crisis . The British Foreign Secretary asked Germany to take part in the negotiations .
 Germany accepted but did nothing to try to forestall an Austro-Hungarian invasion of Serbia . Germany accepted, but at the same time did not try to protect Serbia .
 In Saint Petersburg, the Austro-Hungarian declaration of war generated popular support for Serbia . Serbia was declared war in 1918, but Serbia was not defeated in the war . Serbia became part of Russia in 1918 .
 On July 28, the same day as the Austro-Hungarian declaration of war, Bethmann-Hollweg sent a telegram to Vienna suggesting that its ally find a way to make it appear that, if a European war followed, it would be Russia’s
 Austria must stay the course, even if it led to war, or else renounce its status as a great power, he says . And finally he warned that if Russia continued to support Serbia, Austria would be forever renouncing its status . Austria would also renounce the status of a
 By the time the British cabinet discussed the Serb crisis on July 24, it was clear that Germany would not restrain Austria-Hungary . By the end of July, it had been clear that the British government would not intervene .
 Liberals had long opposed entangling international alliances and large military expenditures . Liberals had come to power in 1905, but were divided over British intervention .
 Many Liberals and most Labourites disliked the idea of fighting alongside tsarist Russia . Most Labourites were opposed to the idea .
 The government was beset by a number of pressing political issues, including the Home Rule Bill for Ireland . On July 16, British troops had fired on rioters in Dublin, Ireland .
 It contained a demand that German troops be allowed to march through Belgium . The demand was met with a demand for German troops to march in Belgium .
 William II sent a telegram to the tsar expressing his desire for peace . William II also sent a request for peace with the Russian tsar .
 Russian ministers and generals debated since July 28 whether the crisis called for a full mobilization of a million soldiers on the Polish and Galician frontiers . Russian ministers had debated since . July 28 over whether a . limited mobilization was a limited mobilization or full mobilization .
 On July 29, word reached Saint Petersburg that the Austrians had bombarded Belgrade from the Danube . The Austrians bombed Belgrade on July 29 .
 Nicholas II ordered a full mobilization on July 30 for the following day . After twice changing his mind, he ordered the full mobilization . Nicholas II twice changed his mind .
 The Russian mobilization put an end to any hope for a negotiated settlement to the crisis . The Russian mobilisation put a hope for any hope of a negotiated solution to the situation .
 In Vienna, Francis Joseph declared general mobilization against Russia and Serbia . In Vienna he declared general mobilisation against Russia .
 French troops were pulled back several kilometers from the frontier to avoid any incident with German units . The army had already readied France’s frontier defenses .
 Many socialists hoped that French and German workers would lay down their weapons and refuse to fire on fellow proletarians . Many socialists still hoped that . workers would . lay down weapons and . refuse to fight .
 Anti-militarism ran deep in some of France, not only because the army took sons away from farms, industrial work, and families, but also because the French government used the army to break strikes . The French government was known for its use of the army in the 1930
 The government maintained a list of socialists and other leaders of the left to be arrested in the event that war was declared . In the event of a war, the list was kept in touch with the government .
 Russian and French ambassadors demanded assurance of British military support . Russia and France have demanded assurances of British support .
 The French ambassador even asked if the word ‘honor’ would be stricken from British dictionaries if Britain refused to join France and Russia .
 Britain asked both Germany and France for a guarantee that Belgian neutrality would not be violated . Belgium's neutrality had been accepted by Britain, France, Austria, Prussia, and Russia in 1839 .
 In Berlin, even the Social Democratic newspapers now accept war as inevitable . Even the Social Democrat newspapers now accepted war was inevitable .
 Helmuth von Moltke pushed for an immediate attack on France . He feared that should Russian mobilization proceed any further, the Schlieffen Plan might fail . The general staff chief of the German general staff pushed for the immediate attack .
 On July 31, 1914, Germany warned Russia to suspend mobilization at once . Germany also warned Russia not to engage in war with Russia .
 Germany demanded that France guarantee its neutrality in the event of a Russo-German war, and that German troops be allowed to occupy a number of French frontier forts as a show of French good faith .
 When no response was heard from either Russia or France, on August 1, the German army mobilized . The German army was mobilized in response to no response from Russia and France .
 Grey’s frantic attempts to arrange a direct negotiation between Russia and Austria failed . In Britain, Grey tried to arrange for a direct negotiation between Russia and Austria .
 The struggle of socialists in many countries to rally opposition against the war fell far short . Socialist parties failed to rally the opposition to the war . The struggle for the opposition against war failed to overcome .
 On July 31, a rightist assassinated the popular French socialist leader Jean Jaures . The rightist killed the popular socialist leader in France .
 Jaures, too, had apparently just come to the conclusion that he should support the war against autocratic Germany . But he had apparently decided not to support Germany .
 Of the powers, only Italy was not committed by alliance to fight, unless its allies in the Triple Alliance were attacked . Italy could now claim that Austria-Hungary and Germany were launching hostilities .
 France ordered mobilization after receiving the impossible German demands . French President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered mobilization in response to Germany's demands . France had to mobilize troops after receiving impossible demands from Germany .
 This obliged France, by virtue of its alliance with Russia, to fight Germany . France's alliance with Germany obliged France to fight against Germany, he says .
 German troops invaded Luxembourg claiming a French attack was imminent . They claimed they needed to seize the small duchy’s railroads to defend themselves .
 On August 2, the German ambassador in Brussels handed the Belgian government the letter requesting permission to march armies through its territory . The letter was signed by the German Embassy in Brussels .
 Britain assured France that the Royal Navy would defend its Channel ports . France assured Britain that the British Navy would protect its ports .
 Germany falsely claimed that French planes had attacked Nuremberg . On August 3, Germany declared war on France, falsely claiming that France had attacked .
 When Moltke’s army marched into eastern Belgium, Britain declared war on Germany on August 4, 1914 . The German government ignored the British government's formal demand that they withdraw .
 When war was declared, eager commanders put long-standing military plans into effect . The Outbreak of War was declared in 1918 .
 The German general staff counted on a rapid victory against France in the west before the giant Russian army could effectively be brought into action in the east . The Russian army was expected to be deployed in the eastern part of the country .
 Britain entered the war on the side of France and Russia . The violation of Belgian neutrality brought Britain into the war .
 These alignments had been shaped by the international tensions of the past decades . The alignments were shaped by international tensions, the BBC says .
 The Schlieffen Plan dictated the course of the opening hostilities . The opening of hostilities was based on the plan .
 Moltke had eliminated the Netherlands from the invasion plan and reduced the strength of the attacking force in order to bolster German defenses in Alsace-Lorraine . The Netherlands was eliminated from the plan .
 The French high command had known the basics of the Schlieffen Plan for years . They did not believe the German army could move rapidly through Belgium, in part because of the imposing fortress at Liege .
 The French doubted that reserves incorporated into the German army could quickly become an able fighting force . The French also doubted that reserves could quickly be an able force in Germany .
 The French command expected a frontal attack between the Meuse River and the hills of the Ardennes in northeastern France . In any case, the French command expects a frontal assault .
 French generals underestimated the speed with which their enemy could attack . The French generals also underestimated the strength of the French army .
 Liege fell on August 16 after a massive bombardment, followed by the fall of Namur . Namur was the second fall of the Belgian army in the same month . The Belgian army fought bravely against vastly superior strength .
 Moltke then deployed seven divisions to prevent the Belgian army from escaping, further weakening the attacking forces that Schlieffen had anticipated would move as rapidly as possible toward the English Channel . The Belgian army was forced to withdraw from the battlefield .
 General Alexander von Kluck, commander of the First German Army, turned his troops toward the Belgian town of Mons . The battle of Mons was the first battle of the Second World War .
 He hoped to force the French to surrender before they could bring up more troops from the Paris region . He said he hoped the French would surrender before the French could bring in more troops .
 Both the French and German high commands still considered success in Alsace critical to their strategies and morale at home . The French, German high command considered success critical to both their strategies .
 The British Expeditionary Force of 100,000 troops arrived to take its place on the French flank on August 20 . The British expeditionary force arrived on August 21 .
 At Mons and then Le Cateau, the British army fought its biggest battles since Waterloo in 1815 . The Battle of Mons was one of Britain's biggest since Waterloo at the end of the war .
 The Germans, fatigued by the pace of their march, also suffered from Moltke’s indecision and inadequate communications . The Germans suffered from the Germans’ lack of communication .
 Moltke, surprised by rapid Russian mobilization, ordered four divisions to confront the Russian advance . He was told of an early Russian victory on the eastern front .
 The French government provisionally withdrew to the safety of Bordeaux, just as they had been forced to do during the Franco-Prussian War . It was the same thing they had done during that war .
 Despite heavy losses, Joffre was able to reinforce his defensive positions around Paris . The French capital was heavily damaged by the fall of Napoleon III .
 The French had concluded a secret treaty by which Italy agreed to remain neutral if Germany attacked France . This was in part possible because of the French's secret commitment to Germany and Austria-Hungary .
 The German government, unaware of the treaty, still hoped Italy would join Germany and Austria-Hungary . The treaty was signed in 1903, but the treaty was never signed .
 The Germans moved quickly into Belgium and France, largely following the SchliefFen Plan of 1905 . The German advance was largely the result of the 1905-191918 plan .
 At the dawn of air warfare, a French reconnaissance pilot noticed Kluck’s army changing direction as it swept toward a point southeast of Paris, leaving its flank open .
 The French army rushed every available soldier into action, some arriving at the front in requisitioned Parisian taxis . Some of the soldiers arrived at the warfront in Parisian taxi taxis .
 When the Germans crossed the Marne River on September 5, the French counterattacked . The French counter-attacked the Germans, who crossed the border . The battle began in France in September 1944 .
 Two German armies retreated, fearing that the French might take advantage of a sizable gap between their forces . Two armies retreated from the battlefield, fearing the gap between forces .
 The British poured through another gap between German armies, forcing the Germans to retreat forty miles to the Aisne River . The Germans were forced to withdraw forty miles from the French capital .
 The Germans fortified their position by digging deep defensive trenches on September 14, 1944 . The Germans are known for digging deep trenches in the area .
 The Battle of the Marne saved France in 1914 . Like the Battle of Valmy in 1792 during the French Revolution, the battle saved France . The Marne was a major success in the French revolution .
 The Germans then tried to outflank the Bi^tish and French forces in what amounted to a race for the sea . Allied armies kept pace, holding much of Picardy and Flanders, before both sides ran out of space .
 A series of attacks and counterattacks in the fall took frightful tolls . Neither side was able to break through, with neither side being able to .
 In November 1914, the last open battle of the western front was fought in the mud around Ypres in Belgium . British forces prevented the Germans from reaching the French Channel ports .
 By the end of the year, the German and French armies had combined casualties of 300,000 killed and 600,000 wounded . By the year's end, the combined casualties had reached 300,00 killed .
 The German and Allied armies stared at each other across a broad front that reached from the English Channel to Switzerland . The changing nature of war has changed since the First World War .
 Two long, thin lines of trenches ended dreams of rapid victory based on a mastery of offensive tactics . Two long lines of trench warfare ended hopes of rapid success based on rapid victory .
 Few analysts had considered the possibility of a frozen front that would rarely move more than a few hundred yards in either direction . Several million soldiers would die along the frozen front along the way .
 Besides trench warfare, new weapons dramatically changed the nature of battle . New weapons were introduced in World War II .
 Poison gas, hand grenades, flamethrowers, tanks, airplanes, and submarines entered the arsenals of both sides . During the war, poison gas and hand grenades were used in both sides arsenals .
 A new scale of warfare required an unparalleled, total mobilization of the home front to sustain the war effort . The home front must be mobilized in order to sustain a war effort, says President Roosevelt . The war effort was unprecedented, says Roosevelt .
 Trench Warfare Spades for digging trenches and rows of tangled barbed wire became more important than the rifle and bayonet, weapons of attack . Spades were used to dig trenches and trenches for trench warfare .
 The front-line trenches were six to eight feet deep and about fifty yards to a mile apart . Front-line trench trenches were about 50 yards to one mile apart and six feet deep . The trenches were set apart from each other .
 They were supplemented by support trenches several hundred yards to the rear and linked by communications trenches . Support trenches were also linked by communication trenches .
 Small fortress-like “strong points” held the line together even if part of the system was overrun . The system was designed to hold together even though it was overrun by enemy forces .
 As the months passed in sectors where the front lines were immobile, the trenches became more elaborate . The trenches offer electricity and a certain minimal level of comfort .
 The French theater star Sarah Bernhardt was carried on a stretcher near the front so she could entertain soldiers by reciting poetry . Bernhardt, who had herself lost one leg to amputation, performed poetry .
 The trenches offer soldiers some protection from rifle or pistol fire, but not from direct artillery hits . Since they were below ground, trenches offered soldiers protection from rifles or pistols .
 The periscope was the only safe way to look across at the enemy lines without being shot by enemy snipers . It provided the only way of looking across the enemy line without being hit by snipers .
 The front-line soldier lived amidst the thunder of barrages and the scream of falling shells . He lived in front of the thunder and screams of falling bombs .
 Persistent lice, mice, and enormous rats were his constant companions in the stagnant water .
 For many, venereal disease was contracted in brothels near the front . So, for many, it was . So was venerea disease .
 You can hear the rats nibbling, running, jumping, rushing from plank to plank, emitting their little squeals behind the dugout’s corrugated metal . The rats nibbled, ran, jumped, and squealed behind the metal .
 The rats and the lice get up too; waking to life is also waking to misery . The rats, lice and lice also get up to life .
 German army was so sure of an easy victory that it had not equipped its men with high lace-up boots or adequate coats . The German army had not been equipped with adequate coats or lace-ups .
 German troops prized the British soldiers’ sheepskin coats and removed them from enemy corpses when they had the chance . The coats were prized by the Germans and were removed from enemy bodies .
 After battle, the screams of the wounded and dying filled the air . groans in German, French, and English from no-man's-Iand grew increasingly faint, but sometimes lasted for days .
 Hundreds of thousands of soldiers suffered shell shock, psychologically devastated by the battle raging around them . The soldiers suffered from shell shock .
 On the western front, both sides believed that a breakthrough was possible . Massive attacks were preceded by intensive bombardment of enemy positions .
 Such bombardments, lasting hours and days, clearly indicated where the next attack could be expected, allowing the enemy to bring up sufficient reserves to prevent a breakthrough . The bombardments could be seen as a way to keep the enemy from attacking .
 Both sides adopted the use of ‘‘creeping barrages,” which moved just ahead of the attacking army to soften resistance . Both sides used ‘creep barrages’ as a way of easing resistance .
 The shelling mangled the terrain, leaving huge craters, thereby creating unanticipated obstacles to the attacking troops . The shelling maimed the terrain and created obstacles for the attackers .
 Machine gun was the most effective weapon of trench warfare . Machine gun mowed down line after line of advancing soldiers carrying rifles, bayonets, and pistols .
 If attacking Allied troops managed to reach, take, and hold the first line of trenches, they confronted fresh reinforcements as well as an even more solid second line of defense . The battle was likely to be a repeat of the Battle of the Second World War .
 The defensive lines could bend, but then snap back against attacking forces that soon outran their cover . This is not the first time the defensive lines have been able to bend and snap back .
 Joffre’s second offensive in Champagne in 1915 illustrated this situation well . The second offensive was in France in 1915, and the second in 1915 .
 French offensive ran right into the second line of defense, took enormous casualties . French soldiers wearing gas masks prepare to attack . The French offensive took place in the first place of the French offensive .
 Victims of a German gas attack lined up at a field hospital . Then faced a vigorous counterattack .
 The Germans lost 75,000 killed and wounded, the French 145,000, for not more than a few miles of ravaged land . The French were only the survivors of the Battle of the Second World War .
 German attacks against British positions around Ypres featured a horrifying new weapon, mustard gas . The gas, carried by the wind, burned out the lungs of the British soldiers .
 A member of the British medical corps wrote, “1 shall never forget the sights I saw by Ypres after the first gas attacks.” A British soldier wrote: “I shall never remember the sights . I saw the sights ... I saw a lot of what I saw
 Men lay exhausted, gasping, frothing yellow' mucus from their mouths, their faces blue and distressed . Men lying all along the side of the road .
 The gas mask soon offered imperfect protection—“this pig snout which represented the war’s true face,” as one combatant put it . The mask was first worn in World War II .
 In the first months of the war, airplanes were only used for reconnaissance in good weather . In 1915, techniques evolved and pilots began to photograph enemy trenches .
 Some pilots kept carrier pigeons in a cage, so that they could scribble their approximate location on a paper and send the information back to headquarters with the bird .
 Machine guns could be mounted and timed to fire between the blades of the plane’s propellers . Pilots fired pistols and hurled hand grenades and even bricks at enemy planes and troops .
 When Richthofen was shot down behind British lines in April 1918, he was buried by his enemies with full military honors .
 Although the “dogfights” of combat in the skies had a romantic dimension, the airplane soon began to terrorize civilians . The airplane soon became the airplane terrorizing civilians .
 Paris and London were bombed several times during the war as the speed and capacity of the first warplanes increased . Rhineland German cities suffered heavy bombardments later in the conflict .
 By the war’s end, Germany had produced more than 47,000 aircraft, France more than 51,000, and Britain more than 55,000 planes .
 European powers fighting a land war unlike any ever seen, and conflict having taken to the skies, the seas remained relatively quiet in the 1930s . With the European powers on the warring side of the Atlantic Ocean, the oceans were relatively quiet .
 The British navy retained control, and the famed and feared German dreadnoughts stayed in port . German dreads remained in port, with the British navy retaining control .
 The British navy won a series of initial encounters as far afield as the coast of Chile, the Falkland Islands near Argentina and the Indian Ocean .
 German battleships trapped in the Mediterranean at the beginning of the war took refuge in Constantinople and were turned over to the Turks . The Turks turned over the German ships to the Turkish side .
 Austro-Hungarian navy, based in Trieste, was small and its influence was limited to the Mediterranean .
 German and British planes in a dogfight high above the trenches . The British admiralty possessed the German code book—plucked from the Baltic Sea by Russian sailors .
 Certain that the German fleet was going to sail from Wilhelmshaven, the British Grand Fleet lay in wait . The German fleet sailed from the German port of Wilhelmhaven .
 At Dogger Bank on January 24, 1915, the Royal Navy sunk a German battleship . The sinking of the battleship was the first of its kind in the world .
 The British blockaded the principal German ports, neutralizing the kaiser’s proud fleet . The British blocked the main German ports and neutralized the German fleet .
 Late in the 1880s, several countries had experimented with underwater warfare .
 At the turn of the century, the United States Navy was the first to commission a submarine . The U.S. Navy was commissioned a submarine in 1903 .
 All of the powers had submarines by the time of the Great War, those of Germany made the greatest impact . Germany's submarines were the most powerful submarine in the world .
 The German navy believed that its fleet of submarines could force Britain to pull out of the war by sinking its warships and by preventing supplies from reaching the British Isles from the United States .
 In September 1914, a German submarine, or “U-boat,” sank three large British armored cruisers off the coast of Belgium . The U-boat sank the British armored cruiser in September 1914 .
 The waging of war on such an unprecedented scale required the full support of the ‘home front,” the very concept of which emerged during the war . The Home Front is the concept of the "home front," the idea of the home front .
 Sustaining the massive war effort depended first on mobilizing enough soldiers and food to supply the front . Then on producing enough guns and shells, the war effort went on .
 German propagandists portrayed the war as a fight for German culture, besieged by Russian barbarians and the dishonorable French . The war was fought in Germany against Russia and France .
 British propagandists depicted the Allies as defending law, liberty, and progress against German violations of national sovereignty and international law .
 False tales of Germans impaling children and raping nuns were horrifying British and French readers in 1914 . By the end of 1914, false tales of German rape and child impaling were horrifying readers .
 The German high command instructed officers to ignore provisions of the Hague Conventions that sought the humane treatment of soldiers and civilians during war, which Germany had signed . Germany's high command had instructed officers not to ignore .
 The German army executed 5,500 Belgian civilians in two months . In Louvain, troops panicked when they heard shots fired in the distance by French troops and mistook them for Belgian citizens .
 These actions, reflecting the brutalization of war and the banalization of death, foreshadowed a new kind of war . A total war in which civilians were not spared, they say .
 German propaganda smeared their enemies, particularly the British, who supposedly used dum-dum bullets that exploded upon impact and gouged out the eyes of German prisoners . German propaganda also smeared the British .
 The outbreak of the war pushed aside bitter political divisions at home . It was the first time the war had been declared in Afghanistan .
 In France, competing parties proclaimed a “sacred union,” and the socialist Jules Guesde became minister of commerce . The socialist party became the government of commerce in France .
 There was little public criticism of the way the war was being run until later in the conflict when casualties mounted . Little public criticism was made of the war's handling of the conflict .
 Socialist opposition to militarism based on class solidarity quickly turned patriotic support . In Germany, too, it has turned to patriotic support for the military .
 In Russia, at least in the first few years, only the tsar’s will seemed to matter . The tsar's will seems to matter only in Russia .
 In Austria-Hungary, the ability of the imperial bureaucracy to supply its multinational army seemed almost miraculous . The prestige of the prestige of which had helped keep the Habsburg Empire together, helped keep it together .
 Tensions between the empire’s nationalities remained beneath the surface, at least in the early years of the war .
 In Britain, angry quarrels over strategy among the generals, as well as between them and the cabinet, were well hidden from the public .
 A volunteer army was raised with remarkable enthusiasm and speed, aided by an effective recruitment poster sporting the face of Lord Horatio Kitchener, the secretary of war .
 The volunteer force that German Kaiser William II had called “a contemptible little army” fought very well . The volunteer army was called a “disgraceful little army,” by the German Kaiser .
 The act forbade strikes and provided for the requisition of skilled workers for labor in factories converted to the production of war materiel . The act was passed in 1945 .
 As heavy drinking became more widespread, legislation restricted the hours of British pubs . Legislation restricted the operating hours of pubs in the UK to protect drinkers .
 Some complained that the war had brought Britain a loosening of morals, frivolous dress and dancing, and an increase in juvenile delinquency . Some complained of loosening morals and frivolous dress .
 Daylight savings time was introduced for the first time to conserve fuel . Daylight savings was introduced to help save fuel costs .
 A successful campaign for voluntary rationing of essential commodities such as sugar allowed the British to avoid mandatory rationing until early 1917, when hoarding contributed to shortages . The British were forced to rely on rationing in order to avoid shortages until 1917 .
 The government instituted a coupon system, but price controls on essential commodities served to ration food . Price controls also rationed essential commodities .
 Suffragette leaders threw their support behind the war . Suffragettes had put aside their campaign for women’s right to vote .
 She considered pacifism almost the equivalent of treason . Let us show ourselves worthy of Citizenship, she said .
 Early in 1915, the French general staff predicted that its army would break through the German lines . The war rages on in the trenches .
 A British assault at Neuve Chapelle on March 10 gained 1,000 yards at a cost of 13,000 casualties . The British assault on the same date was at the height of the March 10,000-plus casualties .
 The British lost almost 300,000 men in 1915 alone . The Germans suffered at least 610,000 casualties in 1915 .
 Both nations’ casualties, however, paled alongside those of the French, who suffered 1,292,000 killed and wounded in 1915 . The French suffered more than 1,300,000 dead and wounded .
 French infantrymen were not helped by the fact that their uniform pants were, at least in the early stages of the war, bright red, which could be more easily seen through the morning mists .
 Italy entered the war on the Allied side through the secret Treaty of London, signed in April 1915 . Italy had remained neutral at the outbreak of the war but gave in to street demonstrations after street demonstrations .
 Major battles from 1914-1917, and location of trenches at end of 1915 and at the end of 1917 . northern Adriatic coast . northern Italian coast .
 Italian nationalism, as well as the desire of powerful Italian businessmen to find new markets in the Balkans, had proved stronger than Italy’s pre-war commitment to its former allies .
 AustriaHungary now found itself, like Germany, fighting a war on two fronts . Austria, Hungary and Austria now found themselves fighting on the same front .
 The struggle between Britain and Turkey carried the war into the Middle East . Turkey was also allied with the Central Powers . The struggle was also carried into the Mideast .
 Japan entered the war on the Allied side in 1914 . It was seeking sanction for its interest in northeastern China . Japan coveted several German islands in the Pacific and the German naval base at Kiao-chao .
 In late August 1914, German forces trapped a Russian army almost 200,000 strong at Tannenberg in East Prussia, killing, wounding, or capturing 125,000 soldiers . The Russian army was trapped by German forces in August 1914 .
 Russian forces would remain outside of German territory for the duration of the war . Two subsequent military victories ensured that Russian forces remained outside German territory .
 General Paul von Hindenburg and General Erich Ludendorff embellished their reputations in these battles . On the more confident German side, General Hindenburg was a stolid Prussian .
 The Austro-Hungarian army had no joint plan of military coordination with its German ally . The huge Russian army found it an imposing foe .
 Too many divisions had been diverted to the punitive invasion of strategically unimportant Serbia, too many of them were diverted to it .
 Many conscripted Slavs felt more allegiance to Russians, their fellow Slavs, than to their German-speaking officers . Many of these were conscripts who felt more loyal to Russians .
 In January 1915, the Habsburg forces launched an offensive against the Russian army in the Carpathian Mountains . The Russian army was defeated in the same battle as the Austrians in 1915 .
 Although the offensive looked good on a map, the reality was otherwise . The United States won't be able to repeat the victory in the United States .
 When the Russians counterattacked, the Germans had to send troops to support their ally in the Carpathians, and as a result they lost over 350,000 men . As a result of the loss, the German army lost over 300,000 troops .
 With the stalemate in the west, the Germans wanted to defeat the Russians before the latter could vanquish the Habsburg army . The Russians were defeated by the Germans before they could defeat them .
 The Russian retreat, which had been orderly in the beginning, turned into chaos . The retreat was orderly and orderly, but chaos was quickly overtaken by chaos .
 The Russian retreat from the Carpathian Mountains gave the Austro-Hungarian forces some badly needed breathing room . The retreat of the Russian forces in the region was seen as a relief for the Austrian forces .
 Russian and AustroGerman advances and battles along the eastern front; Austro-Hungarian and Italian armies face off along the Italian front; and Turkish and Allied armies clash on the Balkan front . The Eastern, Italian, and Balkan Fronts were captured in the Battle of the
 British military and political leaders were divided between those who believed victory would have to be won in the west . Others pushed for a series of dramatic strikes against Germany or its allies on Europe’s periphery .
 Such victories might also expand the British Empire, thus such a campaign would please the colonial lobby at home . The British Empire might also even expand to expand .
 This strategy angered the French government, which bitterly opposed any reduction of British support on the western front . The French government was angered by the British strategy .
 Churchill and Kitchener planned an attack on Germany’s ally, Turkey . Churchill and Lord Kitchener wanted to attack the country's ally .
 The Dardanelles strait separates the Aegean Sea from the Sea of Marmara . When the Turks entered the war on the side of Germany and Austria-Hungary in November 1914, they closed off the strait .
 This cut off an important route for supplies to Russia through the Black Sea . This is the first time this has been cut off from Russia's supply routes to the region .
 If everything goes well, a British success might bring an end to the power of the pro-German faction in the Turkish government . If everything went well, the British success could end the power in the government .
 A successful campaign could open up a route to Russia through the Black Sea . Russia could also be opened up to a new route to the region through the sea .
 With Turkey out of the war, Churchill reasoned, the German effort in the Balkans could be undermined, and Bulgaria would stay out of conflict . Churchill reasoned that with Turkey out, it could undermine German efforts in Balkans .
 British soldiers hurled themselves against the well-defended heights held by the Turks . The battle was fought in the early hours of September 18th, 1914 .
 British troops managed to dig in during the ill-fated Gallipoli campaign . British troops still managed to find their way into Turkey .
 British, French, and German submarines were active during the campaign . Both sides had to adapt supply tactics to the new threat .
 After committing more than 400,000 men, half of whom were killed or wounded, the British were fortunate to evacuate their remaining forces in January 1916 .
 Churchill and Kitchener lost influence amid harsh criticism of the campaign’s humiliating failure . Churchill lost influence after harsh criticism .
 Some historians consider it an imaginative, even brilliant stroke that might have won the war . Some historians say it might have been a brilliant stroke .
 Others agree that it was a needless diversion dictated by British colonial interests in the Middle East . Others agree with most contemporaries who believed that the Australian and New Zealander troops paid a disproportionate price .
 The Allies tried to coax Bulgaria into the war on their side . Still hoping to knock Turkey out of the war, the Allies wanted to knock it out .
 In October 1915 Bulgaria joined the Central Powers, who promised Bulgaria all of Macedonia . The Allies could not because of Serb claims there, as well as much of Thrace . The Central Powers also promised Bulgaria part of Macedonia, which the Allies couldn't .
 AustroHungarian and Bulgarian forces thus controlled an important part of the Balkans . AustraHungarians and Bulgarians controlled the region .
 A month later, a Franco-British force landed in Salonika, Greece, to try to aid Serb troops . A month after that, a French force arrived in Greece to help Serb forces . A French force landed on Salonika in Greece, a month after the Serb
 Within two months, the German, AustroHungarian, and Bulgarian armies had crushed the Serb army . By 1916, the Serbs had suffered 100,000 deaths of the 450,000 men serving in 1914 .
 The Germans called Salonika their “largest internment camp,” since that campaign tied up half a million Allied troops fighting the Bulgarians . Salonika was the site of the second World War II invasion of Greece .
 British troops fought a desert war against the Turks in Palestine and Mesopotamia . In the meantime, British troops were fighting in the desert in Palestine .
 German Togoland fell in August 1914, German Southwest Africa in 1915, and the German Cameroons in 1916 . German South Africa fell in 1915 and German Cameroon in 1916.
 In German East Africa, combat continued for the duration of the war, pitting German troops against British and South African soldiers .
 In Asia, Japanese forces captured the fortress and port of Tsingtao from a German garrison, and seized the undefended German islands of the Marianas, Carolines, and Marshalls in the North Pacific .
 Following Gallipoli, the British again focused on the western front . The Western Front was the focus of the war for the first time .
 Southern England was so close to this front that officers who had lunch in private railroad cars before leaving Victoria Station could be at the front—and perhaps dead—by dinner .
 British miners managed to blow up a previously unconquerable ridge near Messines in western Belgium . It was said that the explosion could be heard in Kent when it struck .
 General Douglas Haig was named commander in chief of the British army in France in December 1915 . He was the first British commander in charge of the army in the war in France .
 The expansion of the war beyond Europe to the German colonies in Africa and the Far East . The World War expanded beyond Europe and beyond Europe .
 Great Britain, Great Britain and U.S. AUSTRIAHUNGARY . Great Britain: Gibraltar . Mongolia: Mongolia, Mongolia, Portugal, Mongolia .
 The assault would have to await the arrival of more British soldiers and good weather . The assault is likely to take place in good weather and more British troops are needed .
 General Erich von Falkenhayn planned an assault on the fortresses surrounding Verdun in eastern France . The new German commander in chief planned the assault on Verdun .
 Falkenhayn had no illusions about breaking through the French lines, but he believed that with a massive attack on Verdun, the Germans could “out-attrition” the French, who, by virtue of a lower birthrate, could not afford to lose as many soldiers
 Falkenhayn assumed that France would lose five men for every two German soldiers killed . He assumed that five men would be lost for every German soldier killed .
 The German command needed to force the French to sue for peace in order to keep Russia out of the war . Austria-Hungary could not hold off both the Russians and Italy in the south .
 Some of the guns weighed twenty tons; it took nine tractors to move each piece and a crane to load the shells . The shells were loaded with 20 tons of ammunition .
 In the damp, chilling mists of the hills northeast of Verdun, hundreds of thousands of men died, killed by shells that rained from the sky .
 French troops supplied by a single ‘sacred road’ on which trucks and wagons arrived from the town of Bar-le-Duc . French troops were supplied by the single “sacred’ road”
 A new system of furloughs meant that nearly everyone in the French army spent some time in the hell that was Verdun . Verdun was truly a national battle, in part because of the new system .
 The cost of this victory came close to fulfilling Falkenhayn’s expectations, but the cost of the victory was not as high as his expectations .
 The French lost 315,000 men killed or wounded . 90,000 died at the appropriately named “Dead Man’s Hill” alone . The French also lost 90,00 men at ‘Dead Man's Hill’
 A French counterattack in the fall recaptured several of the forts the Germans had taken, and again the casualties mounted . French counterattacks recaptured some forts, but casualties mounted again .
 French suffered 540,000 casualties and Germans 430,000 at Verdun . In all, the French and Germans suffered more than 5,000 deaths .
 At one of the forts, Douaumont, one can still see plaques put up by proud, grieving relatives after the war . One plaque reads, “For my son.” at one of those forts . At another, the plaques read, �
 The Battle of Verdun merely postponed plans for a huge British offensive on the Somme River, supported by a similar French thrust . The battle was extremely important as a symbol of French resistance, but postponed .
 After a week’s bombardment, the assault began on July 1 in the hills and forests along a front of eighteen miles . The assault began in the . hills and . forests along the front of 18 miles .
 Allied troops climbed out of the trenches at dawn to the whistles of their officers and moved into no-man’s-land . No-man-land was the first time Allied troops had entered no-men-land since the Second World War .
 Many British soldiers managed only a few yards before being hit, falling with the sixtysix pounds of equipment they were carrying . Many of the British soldiers were hit by the bombs, many of them carrying equipment .
 A captain sought to inspire his men by jumping out of the trench and leading the attack by dribbling a soccer ball across no-man’s-land . A captain jumped from the trench to lead the attack .
 British commanders sent wave after wave of infantrymen ‘over the top’ to their death . corpses piled up on top of those who had died seconds, minutes, or hours before . The British commanders used the tactic to get their troops to their deaths .
 Sixty percent of the Tenth Battalion of the West Yorkshires died in the initial assault . 60 percent of those killed in the assault were from the Tenth battalion .
 At the end of the first day of the Battle of the Somme, about 60,000 soldiers of the 110,000 British soldiers had become casualties, including 19,000 killed . At the start of the battle, 60,00 British soldiers were casualties .
 When the disastrous offensive finally ended in mid-November 1916, Britain had lost 420,000 men killed and wounded . The disastrous offensive ended in November 1916 .
 Such losses convinced the German high command that only a campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare against ships supplying Britain might bring victory .
 The maximum German retreat was a few kilometers; in most places, Allied gains were measured in yards . Yet, most of the German retreats were limited to a few meters . Allied gains in most of these places measured only yards .
 Stalemate and stalemate prevailed on the mountainous Austro-Italian front, where in 1916 there were twelve different Battles of the Isonzo River .
 Italian army considered one of these, the sixth, a great victory because it moved three miles forward . The Italian army was considered a 'great victory' by the Italians .
 After half a million casualties, the Italians were still only halfway to Trieste . The Italian army was still only half a mile from Trieste when it died .
 In the twelfth Battle of Isonzo in 1917, Austria-Hungarians and German forces broke through Italian lines . More than 250,000 troops were captured in the battle .
 In June 1916, Russian offensive pushed back the Austrians by combining smaller surprise attacks by specially trained troops, without preliminary barrages, against carefully chosen targets .
 In 1916, the British poet Isaac Rosenberg, who would later be killed in the war, wrote “Break of Day in the Trenches,” one of the most haunting poems to come out of war .
 It is the same old druid Time as ever, Only a live thing leaps my hand, A queer sardonic rat, As I pull the parapet’s poppy To stick behind my ear .
 Droll rat, they would shoot you if they knew Your cosmopolitan sympathies, they said . Droll . rat . They would shoot . you if you knew your cosmopolitan . sympathies .
 It seems you inwardly grin as you pass Strong eyes, fine limbs, haughty athletes, . Less chance than you for life, Bonds to the whims of murder, Sprawled in the bowels of the earth .
 Poppies whose roots are in man’s veins Drop, and are ever dropping; But mine in my ear is safe— Just a little white with the dust .
 There seemed few families on either side who had not lost a relative or friend at the front of the crowd .
 On the Allied side, there was some cheer when Romania joined the war in exchange for the promise of some Hungarian territory with a significant Romanian population once the Central Powers were defeated .
 Falkenhayn was removed from the western front in disgrace after Verdun . But he quickly defeated the Romanian army in a single victory .
 In December 1916, both states issued declarations expressing willingness to discuss terms for peace . Both declared readiness to discuss peace terms in 1916 .
 Emperor Charles I of the Austro-Hungarian Empire sent the Allies a peace proposal, without having consulted Germany . Charles I assumed the throne after the death of Francis Joseph in November 1916 .
 It included a willingness to recognize French claims to Alsace-Lorraine . The French government also recognized French claims in Alsaclorraine, a French province .
 Talk of compromise peace was hushed and, at least in Vienna, deemed unpatriotic . But talk of a compromise peace has been hushed .
 Unlike the French and British, the Germans realized that victory by breakthrough was extremely unlikely, if not impossible . Unlike the British and French, the German realized that it was impossible to win by breakthrough .
 To the Allies, a compromise peace seemed out of the question given that enemy troops were occupying much of the north of France . A compromise peace was not likely to be possible given the situation in France .
 The complete withdrawal of German troops required a total victory that would guarantee France’s future security, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said . The German withdrawal of French troops would require total victory, he said .
 Joffre was replaced by General Robert Nivelle as commander in chief of the French forces in 1916 . He was criticized for the staggering casualty rate .
 Nivelle insisted that a breakthrough on the western front could be achieved . He insisted a breakthrough was possible on the west front .
 Even after staggering losses on the Somme, he agreed with British commanders that military victory was possible if the Allies cooperated more closely . The Somme was one of the most successful battles of the Great Depression .
 The British government rejected a peace note sent by Germany on December 12 . The aim of the peace note was to force an end to the war by splitting apart Britain and France . Germany sent the note to the British government .
 Elegantly dressed people of means dining in the finest restaurants or watching the races at Derby and Ascot contrasted dramatically with the returning trainloads of badly wounded soldiers .
 Nurses served courageously at the front and were acclaimed as heroines . Nurses were considered heroines at the time of the Second World War II .
 Women took over many of the jobs of men who left to fight, or who had been wounded or killed . Women took up many jobs in the early 1900s .
 Over 1 million British women stepped into jobs from which they had previously been excluded, including tram conductors and sharpshooters in a trench on the eastern front .
 Women workers, as in the past, received lower wages than their male counterparts . Many employers reduce expenses and increase profits with lower wages . Women workers receive lower wages, allowing employers to reduce expenses .
 In France and Austria, women workers struck in 1917 and 1918 to protest working conditions . Women workers in both countries protested working conditions in 1918 and 1917 .
 Everywhere, shortages and economic hardship made women’s tasks of managing the household economy that much more difficult, including standing in line for hours at stores . Women stood in line at stores for hours to buy clothes and shoes .
 Censorship prevented the population from knowing about the staggering death tolls, or about the strategic blunders of the generals . The death toll was staggering .
 The British poet Robert Graves wrote that “England looked strange to us soldiers.” The poet said that England “looked strange”
 Lord Northcliffe, the press baron named by the British government to provide the public with reports of the war, described the trenches, “where health is so good and indigestion hardly ever heard of”
 The men in the trenches forged close bonds with those with whom they served . The men served in World War II .
 They bitterly resented senior officers who barked out deadly orders from the safety of requisitioned chateaux behind the front lines . They detested government propagandists and censors .
 On leave, soldiers headed together to music halls, cabarets, and bars, hoping to forget the war . They felt uncomfortable trying to describe to civilians who knew so little about it . Soldiers felt uncomfortable to describe the war they felt uncomfortable .
 Embittered soldiers sometimes felt more sympathy for those in the opposite trenches than for the politicians and generals at home . More than this, embitters soldiers sometimes sympathised with those in opposite trenches .
 On Christmas Day, 1914, on the western front in France, German and British soldiers spontaneously declared their own one-day truce . Some soldiers met in no-man’s-land to exchange greetings, souvenirs, and even home addresses .
 There were even informal arrangements between units that had been facing each other across no-man’s-land for several months .
 A British writer later recalled calmly discussing Nietzsche with a German he had captured just minutes after almost killing him . A German he captured moments later calmly discussed Nietzsche with him .
 An entire regiment of German, French, and British deserters lived under no-man’s-land in tunnels, coming out only at night to rob corpses and steal food and drink from both sides . One prevalent rumor in both trenches had an entire . regiment of . German
 As casualties mounted and the fighting ground on, opposition to the war emerged, particularly in Britain . Opponents of the war in Britain emerged, especially in Britain, as casualties mounted .
 A relatively small number of pacifists and conscientious objectors protested against the war in Britain . Elsewhere in Britain, pacifists protested against war .
 In 1916, when Britain adopted military conscription, pacifists became more vocal . The pacifists were more vocal in 1916 when the government adopted conscription .
 Irish Republicans opposed Britain in order to gain Ireland’s independence . They opposed the British government to gain independence from Ireland .
 Germans encouraged Irish Republican preparations for an insurrection in Dublin set for Easter Sunday, 1916 . The Germans encouraged preparations for the uprising in Dublin .
 Sir Roger Casement tried to form an Irish Legion and urged the Germans to send military assistance to those working for independence in Ireland . Casement denounced conditions under which indigenous laborers worked in imperial colonies .
 He landed on the Irish coast with the help of a German submarine . But seeing that the Germans had no plans to offer substantial help, he landed in Ireland . He was arrested immediately .
 Casement was among those executed, traitor to the British, hero to many Irish . Casement, a hero to the many Irish, was executed by the British army .
 In Germany, Clara Zetkin went to jail because she refused to stop denouncing the war . She tried to mobilize working-class women against a struggle between capitalist states that pitted worker against worker . In Germany she was jailed for refusing to denounce war .
 Rosa Luxemburg, a Polish socialist living in Germany, also went to prison for her efforts to turn more members of her party against the war . Luxemburg was a member of the Polish Socialist Party in Germany . She was imprisoned for trying to turn members of the party against war .
 Siegfried Sassoon, wounded at the front, returned to England and publicly declared, “I believe the War is being deliberately prolonged by those who have the power to end it.” Sassoon .
 After being incarcerated in a mental asylum, he returned to the front because of his allegiance to his comrades . He was incarcerated in an asylum, but returned to his duty .
 French government faced different problems on the home front than those confronting Britain . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government has been in the spotlight for months .
 The German armies occupied some of France’s richest agricultural land and industrial centers of the north and northeast . The German invasion of France in the early 1900s took place in France's northern and northeastern areas .
 Refugees from the war zone arrived in Paris and, increasingly, the south carrying their remaining possessions . Refugees are arriving in Paris, increasingly in the south with their possessions .
 The French home front held together, despite ebbs and flows in morale as the war went on and on . But the French Home Front held together in the aftermath of the First World War .
 There were relatively few signs of opposition to the war in France, particularly early on . Although there was grumbling about peasants profiting from price rises for commodities, there was relatively little opposition to war .
 Families with husbands, brothers, and sons in uniform in uniform were popular in the first month of the war . The governments decision in the wars first month to provide some financial assistance to families with husbands in uniform was popular .
 With the German army deep inside France, close to Paris, capitulation was unthinkable . Even a negotiated settlement was unthinkable, as was even a negotiated agreement .
 Sign of war weariness increased in 1917 as casualties reached astronomical levels . Rumors spread that the campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare against the Allies was failing .
 In July, the Reichstag passed a resolution by a large majority asking the government to repudiate a policy of annexation and commit itself to seeking a peace of reconciliation . The Reichsag passed the resolution in July .
 The Reichstag had little influence in what amounted to a military government . But the Reichsag was little influence .
 William Ill dismissed Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg in 1917 . William Ill gave Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff even more power .
 In 1917, two events of great consequence changed the course of the war . The Final Stages of the War in 1917 were the most dramatic events in the war's history .
 The United States entered the war in April on the Allied side . Reacting in part to the German campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare against Allied shipping, the U.S. entered in April .
 Russia withdrew from the war after the Bolsheviks seized power in October . And Russia, where the February Revolution toppled the tsar, withdrew from war .
 A massive German offensive that began in March 1918 pushed Allied forces back farther than they had been since 1914, before grinding to a halt in the face of stiff resistance . Allied forces were pushed further back into the trenches than they were since 1914 .
 The U.S. government had adopted a declaration of neutrality, but American popular sympathy generally lay with the Allies . The German government tried to capitalize on American resentment of the British blockade of American ships .
 U.S. bankers made profitable loans to both sides, but far more funds went to the Allies than to the Central Powers .
 On May 7, 1915, a German submarine sank the British cruise liner Lusitania off the coast of Ireland . The ship was the first of its kind to be sunk by a German sub-submarine .
 The U.S. protested vigorously, and on September 1 the German government accepted the American demand that it abandon the unrestricted submarine warfare . The United States was already outraged by the recent German introduction of mustard gas into combat .
 Germany, wanting to keep the U.S. neutral, adopted a policy of warning liners before sinking them . Germany wanted to protect the United States, providing for the safety of passengers .
 The fact remained that only with submarines could Germany prevent Britain from maintaining total control of the high seas . Only with submarines, only with . submarines could . keep Britain from being .
 In 1916, the German fleet left port to challenge the British Royal Navy . It was the first time a German fleet had left port .
 The German admiralty hoped to entice part of the main British fleet into a trap by offering a smaller fleet as a target off the Norwegian coast .
 German and British fleets stumbled into each other off the coast of Denmark, in the Battle of Jutland, May 31 — June 1, 1916 . The battle was fought off the Danish coast of the island .
 In a heavy exchange of gunfire, the British lost 14 ships and about 6,000 men . Eleven German ships were sunk and about 1,500 men were killed . 11 German ships also sunk .
 The German fleet fled, leaving the Royal Navy in control of the seas for the duration of the war . In the end, it was the German fleet that fled .
 In March 1916, the U.S. government had forcefully protested the sinking of the British ship Sussex in the English Channel, with the loss of American lives . The sinking of Sussex in England Channel was the first American ship to sink .
 Germany agreed to the “Sussex pledge,” reaffirming the agreement to give up unrestricted submarine warfare . The pledge was reaffirmed by the "Sussex Pledge"
 This was a calculated risk, like the invasion of Belgium in 1914, because it would surely entail American intervention . The invasion of France in 1914 would surely involve American intervention. This was the case, and the invasion was calculated risk . This was not the first time the U.S.
 Two weeks earlier, the United States intercepted a coded telegram from the German foreign secretary . Allied tanks stuck in the mud were captured by Allied tanks . The U.S. intercepted the telegram .
 The “Zimmermann telegram” brazenly offered Mexico German help in taking back the states of Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico if it would go to war against its powerful northern neighbor .
 Wilson used the telegram to bolster support for a declaration of war on April 6, 1917 . Wilson used more Americans killed in submarine attacks to get support for war declaration .
 The United States turned its industrial might toward wartime production and drafted and trained an army that reached 4 million . Half of the U.S. army was in France by November 1918, half was in the war .
 Entry of the United States into the war tipped the balance fatally against Germany . The entry of the U.S. into the World War II was a fatal blow for Germany .
 German submarines sank one-fourth of all ships sailing to Britain . During 1917, one-in-four ships were sunk by German submarines .
 The British admiralty discovered that heavily escorted convoys could get through . But in the midst of despair, the British admiral discovered that heavy escort convoys were still possible .
 Submerged mines at the entrances to the Channel also helped reduce the German U-boat threat . The mines were also used to sink German submarines .
 Within a few months, the first American troops reached the continent, along with a steady stream of military supplies . The U.S. arrived in the Philippines in December 1945 .
 Russia Withdraws from the War . The second remarkable event of 1917 was the Russian Revolution . The Russian Revolution took place in Russia in 1917 .
 The eastern front had stabilized following the Russian offensive at the end of 1916, as the Russian and Austro-Hungarian armies were depleted and exhausted . Russia and Austria-Hungary armies were exhausted and exhausted after the offensive .
 In February 1917, amid a chorus of demands for political reform, strikes and bread riots in Petrograd spread rapidly . In 1917, Petrograd was the capital of Russia's first major city .
 The head of the provisional government had no intention of abandoning the war effort . Alexander Kerensky ordered the commander in chief to launch another offensive on July 1 .
 Bolsheviks aimed to seize power and then take Russia out of the war as quickly as possible . As the Russian provisional government faced opposition from many sides, the Bolsheviks faced opposition . The Bolsheviks wanted to seize control of Russia and then leave the war .
 They expected revolutions to break out in other countries as well, beginning with Germany . The revolution was expected to begin in Germany, but it was not the first time .
 The German government desperately wanted to force the Russian provisional government to make peace as soon as possible, so that the German high command could turn its full attention to the western front before the American entry into the war could turn the tide .
 Lenin returned to Russia from neutral Switzerland through Germany and Finland . The exiled Bolshevik leader was allowed to return to Russia through neutral Switzerland . Lenin was exiled from Switzerland in 1918 .
 The Germans were happy to comply with Lenin’s request for an immediate armistice . Lenin's request was met with an immediate response to the request .
 The German government wanted the revolutionary government to agree to the independence of Finland, Poland, Galicia, Moldavia, and the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . In return, the government agreed to an agreement on independence in Finland and Poland, Poland and Galicia .
 Their goal was to create a series of small buffer states between Germany and Russia that they could dominate . They wanted to create smaller buffer states that could be dominated by Russia and Germany .
 The Allies worried that such a peace between Germany and Russia would make it difficult to obtain peace in the west, as the German army could devote all its attention to that front . The Allies were worried that the peace between Russia and Germany would be difficult .
 The French and British governments feared the effect Russia’s withdrawal from the war might have on workers and socialists at home, as well as on the outcome .
 French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau and British Prime Minister Lloyd George denounced the Bolsheviks, but relatively few people in Russia wanted the war to continue .
 In December, the Bolsheviks unilaterally declared the war over and signed a temporary armistice with Germany . The Bolsheviks declared the end of the war in December . The war was declared over by Bolsheviks, who declared a temporary cease-fire .
 When the revolutionary Russian government did not agree to the German terms for a formal armistice, the German armies marched into the Russian heartland . The revolution in Russia was the result of the German invasion .
 The Germans offered a cessation of hostilities in return for virtually all Russian war materiel they could carry with them . The Germans then offered a cease-fire deal with Russia in exchange for most of their weapons . The deal was agreed to a halt of hostilities and the Russians could carry virtually all
 They also demanded independence of the border states of the Russian Empire . They also again demanded the independence .
 Bolsheviks abandoned Russian claims on Poland, Ukraine, and what would become Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . The Bolsheviks also abandoned claims on what would then become Estonia and Latvia .
 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk officially ended Russian participation in the war in March 1918 . In March 1918, Russia was officially declared out of the war .
 The year 1917 brought another major Allied offensive in the west . The year was marked by a series of major events in the war .
 General Nivelle convinced his British counterpart in February that a British attack would divert German forces along the Aisne River . The French general said the long-awaited knockout punch was at last possible in February .
 On April 16, Nivelle sent 1. million soldiers into battle along the Aisne River in miserable weather .
 Allied tanks were introduced into battle for the first time in 1916 . Allied tanks became stuck in the mud or in shell craters during the battle .
 Ten days later, French losses totaled 34,000 dead, 90,000 wounded, and 20,000 missing . Ten days after, French forces lost 34,,000, and lost 90,00 .
 Soldiers sang, “If you want to find the old battalion, I know where they are,” soldiers sang . “They’re hanging on the old barbed wire.” Soldiers sang .
 Nivelle again promised the government in Paris that the breakthrough was just around the corner . The French government is increasingly anxious that a breakthrough is coming .
 Some French regiments were heard “baaing’s like sheep led to the slaughterhouse as they marched past their commanding officers . Some regiments heard ‘baiting’ like sheep being led to slaughterhouse . Some French troops were heard "baiting" like
 Soldiers who refused to go over the top knew they could be summarily shot . By the end of the month, they had spread to other regiments, even though soldiers refused to .
 Some regiments elected spokesmen, who declared that they would defend the trenches against German attacks, but would not participate in any more foolish assaults . Some of the German troops elected to stay out of the trenches .
 The mutinies affected half of the French divisions along the western front . At the beginning of June only two of twelve divisions holding the line in Champagne had been unaffected .
 General Petain, the hero of Verdun, tried to improve the conditions of daily life for the soldiers . He knew otherwise, and at least improved the conditions .
 Haig had not bothered to inspect the front himself, nor did he pay attention to the pessimistic reports of his intelligence staff . Haig did not bother to look at the front of the front .
 He had not reported estimates of German troop strength to the war cabinet in London . War cabinet had not been informed of the German troop numbers .
 Heavy rain turned the chalky soil into something like the consistency of quicksand . The battle began in heavy rain; the preliminary barrage turned the soil .
 Battle of Passchendaele named after a devastated village . British gained four miles in exchange for 300,000 dead or wounded in the Battle . The Battle was named after the devastated village in which it was named .
 Georges Clemenceau rallied the war effort after again becoming prime minister . He was the prime minister of France during the war .
 He ordered the arrest of those calling for peace without victory, including his minister of the interior . The president ordered the arrests of those who called for peace, without victory .
 A cartoon in Britain—unthinkable until 1917—pictured the encounter of two enlisted soldiers at the front . The cartoon was made of a pair of enlisted soldiers meeting up .
 They pushed the Italian army back seventyfive miles in the Battle of Caporetto on the Isonzo River in October 1917 . They took three-quarters of a million prisoners .
 Despite 200,000 casualties and twice that many desertions, the Italians held along the Piave River, just twenty miles from Venice . The Italians held on to their ground, just 20 miles from the city .
 In October 1917, they established a Supreme War Council, which held regular meetings of the prime ministers of France, Britain, and Italy, as well as a representative sent by President Wilson .
 The discovery of oil there prior to the war had dramatically increased the stakes for influence in the region . Oil discovery of the region has dramatically changed the stakes in power .
 During the war, the British took advantage of Arab resentment of the Turks, who had ruled much of the Middle East for centuries . The Turks had ruled the region for centuries, but the British were able to take advantage of them .
 Lawrence coordinated attacks against the strategically important Turkish railway that led from the sacred city of Medina to Damascus . Lawrence was a British colonel who coordinated attacks on the railway .
 In the last decades of the nineteenth century, more Jews in Europe had begun to long for a homeland in Palestine . The Ottoman Empire was part of the Turkish Ottoman Empire, and Palestine was a major Jewish colony .
 British government in principle supported the Zionist movement for a Jewish state . The British government supported the movement for the Jewish state.
 On November 2, 1917, the Balfour Declaration expressed British willingness to support the future creation of a “national home” for the Jews in Palestine . Such a state would recognize the rights of the Arab populations who already lived there there .
 This declaration partially contradicted the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916, which had secretly divided Syria and other parts of the Middle East into British and French zones of influence . This declaration was partially contradicted by the agreement of 1916 .
 The British government hoped that the eventual creation of a Jewish state in Palestine could serve as a buffer between the Suez Canal and Syria, the latter controlled by France . The state was created in the 1920s and the 1930s .
 In the spring of 1918, the Germans launched their first major offensive since 1914 . The German Spring Offensive took place in the spring and summer of 1918 . It was the first major German offensive since the fall of 1914 .
 Austria-Hungary showed signs of virtually dissolving, with major national groups openly calling for independence . Austria-Hermania was Austria-Austria, but it was ruled by the Ottomalia monarchy until 1918 .
 General John Pershing led a ‘punitive expedition’ against Mexican bandit Pancho Villa . The expedition turned out to be a wild-hunt for the Mexican bandits .
 He had also served in campaigns against the Sioux in the American West, and fought in the Philippines and Cuba .
 Ludendorff decided on a massive German assault along the Somme River, avoiding mud of Flanders and the hills and forts of eastern France around Verdun .
 When the weather cleared at noon, British pilots observed that the Germans had succeeded in breaking through the Allied lines .
 German units pushed forward thirty-six miles . Five days later, some German units had pushed forward 36 miles .
 The Germans now advanced in Flanders, moving forward with relative ease against troops from Portugal . Portugal had recently entered the war on the Map 22 .
 The spring offensive of 1918 in which the Germans attacked the Allies in five separate offensives along the western front . The German Offensive, 1918, was one of the most successful off-the-line offensive of the century .
 The Germans bombarded the French capital with their giant gun, “Big Bertha,” which could lob shells, each weighing up to a ton, twenty-four miles through the air before they fell to earth with deadly impact .
 Late in May 1918, the offensive pushed French troops back to Reims, and then as close to Paris as the Marne River in early June . In June 1918, French troops were in control of the French capital as far as Paris .
 French Marshal Ferdinand Foch assumed command of the combined French, British, and American armies .
 The Germans had outrun their cover and supplies, and faced fresh Allied reserves . However, the Germans were able to get out of the battle zone . The battle was over for the first time since the Second World War .
 Ludendorffs offensive, which he viewed as the last chance to win the war, had failed . Ludendorf's offensive was seen as a last chance of winning the war . His offensive had failed.
 Morale plunged in Germany, amid extreme shortages of food, gas, and electricity . Morale plunges in Germany after extreme shortages in food and gas shortages .
 Inflation was rampant, pushed by the circulation of more paper money, as gold and silver were withdrawn to prevent hoarding . Gold and silver was withdrawn to stop hoarding, and paper money was used to make money .
 In January 1918, 400,000 workers in Berlin went on strike, demanding a democratization of the government and peace . In 1918, Berlin's government was overthrown by the Nazis . Berlin was the capital of Germany's first war in the early 1900s .
 Carefully couched criticism of the war and of Kaiser William II began to appear in the press . The Kaiser was assassinated in 1918 . He died at the age of 92 .
 The British used their tanks with increasing effectiveness to go over craters and barbed wire and protect the advancing infantry . The British use their tanks to protect their advancing troops .
 Coordinated attacks on the German lines began on August 8, 1918, when the British moved forward eight miles north of the Somme River .
 A month later, the Germans had been pushed back to the positions they had held at the start of the Ludendorff spring offensive . The Germans had held on to a month after the offensive .
 The Allies were now confident that they would win the war, probably in 1919 if all went well . The Allies now believed they would be able to defeat the Germans in Germany .
 Ludendorff advised the kaiser to press for an armistice before it was too late . Ludendorf advised the German leader to push for an end to the conflict .
 The Reichstag passed laws making ministers responsible to it and not to the kaiser . The laws were passed by the Reichsag in 1903 .
 Austro-Hungarian Emperor Charles I seemed little inclined nor able to continue the war as desertions mounted . His armies in retreat, his armies retreated, and he was forced to abandon the war .
 There was now little doubt that the defeat of Germany and Austria-Hungary was near . The defeat of Austria and Germany was near, says historian .
 His “Fourteen Points” were based upon his understanding of how the Great War had begun and how future wars could be avoided . His ‘Fourteen points’ were based on his understanding how the war had begun . His 'Fourteen Point’ was based on
 The first point called for “open covenants, openly arrived at,” in place of the secret treaties whose obligations had pulled Europe into war . Europe's secret treaties pulled Europe to war .
 Wilson called for freedom of the seas and of trade . Wilson also called for the impartial settlement of colonial rivalries . Wilson was born in 1881 .
 Other points included the principle of nonintervention in Russia; the return of full sovereignty to Belgium and of Alsace-Lorraine to France; autonomy for national groups within the Austro-Hungarian Empire; and the independence of Romania, Serbia, Montenegro, and Poland
 The Fourteen Points called for the establishment of an organization or association of nations to settle other national conflicts as they arose . The last of the Fourteen points was called for an organization to settle national conflicts .
 If the desire of the European peoples to live in states defined by national boundaries had been one—if not the principal—cause of the war, then a peace that recognized these claims would be a lasting one .
 Germany now appeared willing to accept Wilson’s Fourteen Points as grounds for an armistice . Germany hoped to circumvent the British and French governments, which clearly would demand unconditional surrender .
 The British, for example, opposed the point calling for freedom of the seas .
 Wilson considered what to do with the German proposal for an armistice . A number of U.S. citizens were killed when a U-boat again sank a British ship .
 An angry Wilson then replied to Prince Max that the German military authorities would have to arrange an armistice with the British and French high command, and not with him .
 Germany tried to convince Wilson that recent changes in the civilian leadership in Berlin amounted to a democratization of the empire . Germany called off unrestricted submarine warfare and tried to persuade Wilson that it was a democracy .
 Foch and Clemenceau demanded unconditional surrender of the German fleet and occupation of the Rhineland by France . Foch also demanded the German forces surrender and the French occupation . The German fleet was forced to surrender and was taken over by the French .
 When French and British troops moved into Bulgaria in September 1918, Bulgaria left the war, as did Turkey the next month . Bulgaria and Turkey were the last two countries to leave the war .
 Czechs in Prague proclaimed an independent Czechoslovakia . The Austro-Hungarian Empire tried to get Wilson to negotiate an armistice based on the Fourteen Points . The Fourteen points trumpeted the sanctity of the nation-state .
 Croats and Slovenes announced that they would join the Serbs in the establishment of a South Slav state of Yugoslavia . Croatia and Slovenia joined the Serb in the creation of the state in Yugoslavia . The Serb state was formed in Yugoslavia in the 1960s .
 Hungary, too, proclaimed its independence, as if the Great War had been something forced on it by the Austrians . Hungary also declared its independence as if it had been forced to do so . The Great War was the first major conflict between the two countries .
 The Italian army finally managed to advance into Habsburg territory . Facing no opposition, the Italian army was able to advance . The Italian government was victorious in the battle .
 German sailors mutinied in the Baltic port of Kiel and riots rocked Berlin . Berlin riots rocked the city in the wake of the mutiny .
 An insurrection in Munich led to the declaration of the Bavarian Republic . The Bavarian republic was formed in 1883 .
 On November 7, 1918, an ad hoc German Armistice Commission asked the Allies for an end to hostilities . An ad hoc commission issued a request to end hostilities in Germany .
 William II blamed socialists and Jews for the overthrow of the empire and then fled across the Dutch border . William II fled across Dutch border to escape .
 On November 11, 1918, a representative of the provisional German government and General Foch signed an armistice in a railroad car in the middle of the forest near Compiegne, north of Paris . A representative of a German government signed the agreement in a rail car .
 Wilfred Owen's mother received news that he had been killed as the church bells of her village were ringing for victory . The mother of the poet received news of her son's death as the village bells were ringing .
 A French veteran, tiring of the street festivities in his town, went at dusk to a cemetery . The veteran was tired of street festivities, he went to the cemetery at dusk .
 There had been nothing like the Great War in history . The impact of the war was not unlike anything else in history.
 Of the 48 million men who served in the Allied armies, at least 18 million were casualties . Not including the hundreds of thousands listed as missing as missing . Of 48 million soldiers, 18 million died in the war .
 Central Powers mobilized 25. million men and had 12. million casualties . Central Powers had 12 million casualties, again not counting the missing . The Central Powers mobilize 25 million men .
 In all, approximately 9. million men were killed or “disappeared,” 21. million wounded, and 7. million prisoners of war . 7 million may have been left permanently disabled .
 Many civilians died from war-related causes, principally related to not having enough to eat . Millions of people died from not being able to eat during the war .
 About 50 million people died in a worldwide influenza epidemic in 1918—1919 . The epidemic killed more people in Europe than did the war. 50 million died in 1918-1919.
 Of the wounded who survived, many were condemned to spend the rest of their lives in veterans’ hospitals . Many of those who survived were left with short lives, shortened lives, in veterans' hospitals .
 Soldiers who had lost limbs or who were mutilated in other ways became a common sight in European cities, towns, and villages after the war . Soldiers with lost limbs and mutilated bodies became a popular sight in Europe after war .
 So many men were killed in the prime of life that the birthrate fell markedly after the war . Europe seemed a continent of widows and spinsters; Europe seemed to be a continent .
 Families of dead soldiers and invalids unable to work strained national budgets . Support for families of the dead soldiers has strained national budget .
 Russia 18,100,000 died in Great War; France 7,891,000 1,375,800 4,266,000 537,000 6,178,800 78.30 G.B., Emp. and Dom. Casualties in the Great War .
 1.75 million Armenians forced to leave their homes in Turkey in 1915 . More than a third of them perished without water in the desert sun on the way to Syria .
 The economic structure of northern France and part of Belgium had been chewed up in the fighting . Northern France and parts of Belgium were devastated by the conflict .
 The psychological damage to the generation of survivors can hardly be measured, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The psychological damage [can't] be measured," he says .
 The post-war period, rampant with hard times and disappointments, caused many people to look back even more on the pre-war era as the “Belle Epoque,” the good old days . Many people still look back on the ‘Belle E
 Woodrow Wilson was not alone in thinking that the Great War was the war to end all wars . He was convinced that the war was the end of all wars, and that it would end it .
 Many people reasoned that no one could ever again wish such a catastrophe on humanity on humanity . Many people thought it would never be possible to wish such an event again again .
 It took the British a month to walk to it -- a whole empire walking very slowly, dying in front and pushing forward behind . The British empire walked very slowly in front of the world, dying slowly and pushing behind .
 Another empire walked very slowly backward a few inches a day, leaving the dead like a million bloody rags . And another empire walked . slowly backward . The dead are the dead .
 Entangling alliances of the European great powers were undeniably a principal factor in the outbreak of hostilities . To be sure, the entangling alliances .
 Aggressive nationalism spilled out of opposing alliances during this period . Aggressive nationalist spilled out from the opposing alliances .
 Schoolchildren throughout much of Europe were taught that their country was the greatest nation in history, and that their rivals and enemies were craven reptiles . Schoolchildren in Europe were told that their nation was the most powerful in history .
 The imperial rivalries of the great powers helped make the alliance system more rigid . The alliance system sharpened rivalries between Germany and Britain and France .
 Military planners in Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, and, a lesser extent, Russia, considered war not only inevitable but desirable . War planners considered war inevitable and desirable .
 War would be the ultimate test by which the fit—individuals and nations --w ould be measured . War would test individuals and nations' fit, individuals, nations, nations .
 Soldiers returned home to find skyrocketing prices and unemployment awaiting them . Soldiers were sent home from the war to find unemployment and rising prices . Soldiers returned to the U.S. to find they had to deal with unemployment .
 In Britain, parents whose sons had died as foot soldiers in France or Belgium learned that families of aristocratic officers had complained that their sons had been buried alongside ordinary people .
 Politicians who had put aside their differences during the war in a common effort for victory reverted to bitter disagreements that were compounded by the dilemmas posed in the peace settlement . Politicians in France, France, Germany, Germany and France were at odds with each other .
 The problems of making peace and putting Europe back together again, as well as paying for the war, would not be easily resolved . The problems are not easily resolved, says David Cameron .
 U.S. participation in the war and, particularly, the Russian Revolution, would each have a profound impact on Europe’s future . The next chapter will examine the impact of the Russian revolution on Europe's future .
 Nicholas was sensitive to the tsar’s traditional role as the Holy Father of all his people . He was convinced that it was his duty to uphold the principles of autocracy .
 "He wanted to reaffirm the ties that bound his subjects to him, and he to them," he said . He said .
 The festival attracted enthusiastic crowds numbering in the hundreds of thousands . The festival was held in New York City, New York, on Saturday .
 The festival featured rides, fortune telling, and other staples of Russian popular festivals . The festival was held in Moscow, Russia, in the summer of 2013 .
 More than 1,200 people were crushed to death in a stampede to get free beer and coronation souvenirs . Between 9,000 and 20,000 were injured in the stampede, which killed more than a million .
 The heavy chain of the Order of Saint Andrew dropped from Nicholas’s shoulders to the ground . And during the coronation itself, the heavy chain dropped .
 Many people, perhaps even the superstitious tsar himself, saw these events as bad omens for the tsar’s reign . Many people—perhaps even the . superstitious Tsar himself—saw these events . as bad . omens .
 Failure to implement meaningful political reform brought down Nicholas II and the Russian autocracy in 1917 . Not bad omens, however, but rather the failure to implement political reform led to the fall of Nicholas II .
 First, the Revolution of 1905 led to reforms but did not alter the autocratic nature of the regime . Second, the revolution of 1906 led to a series of reforms, but not a change in regime .
 The tsar regained the upper hand in the counter-revolution that began in 1906, yet the Revolution of 1905 demonstrated the vulnerability of even a police state to popular mobilization . These reforms had disappeared, for all intents and purposes, when the tsar .
 In August 1914, the Russian Empire went to war, and the conflict itself encouraged those who demanded political reform . The Russian Empire was overthrown by the Russian Revolution in 1914 .
 The Russian Revolution of 1917, like that of 1905, was not the kind of revolution that populists or anarchists had predicted . But peasant rebellion was an essential ingredient in both revolutions . The Russian revolution of 1917 was not a revolution predicted by populists .
 Karl Marx’s prediction that a successful bourgeois revolution would be followed by a revolution undertaken by an industrial proletariat . Nor did it correspond to his prediction that the revolution was followed by that of an industrial proletic revolution .
 Russia’s shocking defeat in the Russo-Japanese War and, above all, the horror of the Great War created hardships that undermined the legitimacy of the tsarist regime . The Great War led to the collapse of the Russian Empire .
 War and Revolution Reformers were still biding their time when Russia went to war in 1914 . Reformers still bided their time in Russia when the war broke out .
 Lenin was dumbfounded when most socialists in other countries supported their nation’s mobilization for war . Lenin was shocked by the support of other countries, including Russia, for war mobilization .
 ‘Defensists’ argued that Russian workers should defend their country against German attack . Among Russian socialists, ‘defensists' argued that Russians should defend themselves against German attacks .
 Lenin took the war as a sign that capitalism might be ripe for what he thought was its inevitable fall . Lenin thought the war might be a sign of capitalism's imminent fall .
 Marx believed that if revolution were to break out in several countries, the fall of Russian autocracy and capitalism could be near, even without the true ‘bourgeois revolution” Marx had predicted .
 Even if the Russian working class was less developed than those of Western nations, the corresponding weakness of the Russian bourgeoisie could facilitate a successful revolution .
 This revolution would be followed by the establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat, the Bolsheviks . This revolution was followed by a mobilized working class led by its most dedicated elements, his party, Bolsheviks.
 The revolution would then spread to other countries, where the working classes would follow the example of the first successful socialist revolution . The working class would follow in other countries .
 The Great War became a catalyst for demands for reform within Russia . First in the management of the war itself, and then in Russian political life. Russia at War .
 Within a year, the war had shattered the ‘sacred union’ that represented a patriotic consensus in 1914 . The war was over within a year and the union was shattered .
 By 1917, 15 million men had been drafted into the army, the vast majority of whom were poor peasants . The majority of the men drafted were men who had to go to war in Russia .
 It proved difficult to transform peasants who were more used to holding rakes than rifles into soldiers . The peasants were used to hold rakes rather than rifles, the army said .
 Russian losses were staggering . High command sent by high command into battle ill equipped, Russian losses are staggering .
 In the interest of the war effort, the government allowed national organizations to exist that earlier had been forbidden . National organizations were allowed to exist in order to aid the war efforts .
 These groups became the organizational base for the liberal opposition . These groups were the groups that became the foundation for the opposition .
 Liberal zemstvo representatives established a committee, the Union of Z emstvos y, to organize relief for the sick and wounded . An organization of municipal governments, the union of Towns, was also created .
 In the spring of 1915, liberal Duma members began to express open dissatisfaction with the way the war was being run in Russia .
 Russia's factories experienced difficulties in meeting military needs . Army lacked sufficient rifles and artillery shells, army lacked enough rifles, artillery shells .
 The tsar permitted industrialists to form a War Industries Committee, to which delegations of workers were added, in order to expedite wartime production .
 The war gradually transformed Petrograd (the new name given to Saint Petersburg, because it sounded more Russian), accentuating social polarization . Petrograd was renamed Saint Petersburg after the war, and the city was renamed Petrograd .
 By 1916, most of Petrograd’s workers, who made up 35 percent of Tsar Nicholas II, had left Petrograd . Tsar's troops were the most loyal supporters of the Tsar, who died in 1916 .
 More peasants flocked to the capital, as did waves of refugees from the war zones of Russian Poland and the Baltic states . More peasants and refugees from war zones also moved to Russia .
 As Russian society strained under the pressures of war, liberals demanded that the Duma be allowed to meet and that Tsar Nicholas dismiss a number of reactionary ministers . The Duma refused to meet with the Tsar .
 The tsar established a Council for National Defense after a series of disastrous military defeats . The council was formed after a disastrous defeat at Tannenberg in 1877 .
 In August, some liberal members of the Duma formed a “Progressive Bloc” committed to working with the tsar in the hope of encouraging reform . The group hopes to encourage reform by working with Russia's president .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is a controversial figure in Russia . But he retained the respect and distant affection of most of the country's people .
 Born in Germany, she was the granddaughter of Queen Victoria and had been raised in England before marrying Tsar Nicholas in 1894 . She was born in Germany and had a daughter in England .
 The illness of their only son, Alexei , a hemophiliac and the heir to the throne, increasingly weighed on the royal couple . Alexei is a member of the royal family . He is the son of Prince Alexei, who is heir to Russia's throne .
 As she became ever more conservative, Alexandra extended her influence over her weak-willed husband . Alexandra extended their influence over their marriage . Alexandra became increasingly conservative in her life .
 Nicholas dismissed ministers on the whims of Tsarina Alexandra with Grigory Rasputin . Tsar Alexandra was the head of the tsar .
 The tsar followed Alexandra’s instructions to clutch a religious icon . When he met in an emergency session with his Council of Ministers, the tsar used the icon to clutch .
 Many Russians wrongly believed that Alexandra was actively working for the interests of Germany . No German agent could have served Germany as well as a German agent as well .
 Liberals feared this could lead to more military disasters, and would also take the tsar away from Petrograd, leaving imperial decision making even more subject to the influence of Tsarina Alexandra . Liberals feared it would also leave imperial decision-making even more dependent on the power of the ts
 Claiming occult power and the ability to heal Alexei’s hemophilia, Rasputin had moved gradually into the inner circle of court life . Claimed occult power .
 On one occasion, he predicted that one of Alexei’s spells would shortly subside, and it did . On another occasion, Alexei's spells would subside .
 To the consternation of the tsar’s ministers, the influence enjoyed by the man the . tsarina called “our friend” became a matter of state . The influence of the man called ‘our . friend’ became an issue of state,
 In December 1916, noble conspirators feared Rasputin’s influence on military operations . They put what they thought was enough poison into his many drinks to kill a cow . The poison was thought to be enough for a cow to kill .
 When Rasputin seemed unfazed, they shot him repeatedly and smashed his skull in a protracted struggle . Rasputina's skull was smashed in a long struggle with the authorities .
 Food shortages eroded the revival of the workers’ patriotism that had accompanied the beginning stages of the war . Food shortages erode the revival in workers' patriotism .
 The growth of public organizations, which opened up a larger public sphere for discussion and debate, helped mobilize opposition to autocracy . Public organizations are key to opposition to authoritarianism, author says .
 Cooperative associations formed by workers to resist high prices had 50,000 members by the end of 1916 . Cooperative associations were formed in response to high prices .
 Workers on the War Industries Committee pushed for greater militancy . Some workers on the committee pushed for more militancy.
 The Duma passed a resolution calling on the Duma to stop cooperating with the tsar in December 1916 . In December 1916 the latter passed on the resolution calling for ministerial responsibility . The tsar was the prime minister of Russia .
 Liberals remained paralyzed, however, cowed by tsarist repression amid increased worker militancy . Liberals remained cowed, but remained paralyzed . Liberals were paralyzed, but cowed .
 Outright revolution or violent repression seemed equally dangerous to both . Outright violence or right-wing violence was equally dangerous for both sides .
 The state needed the continued participation of voluntary committees and agencies of local self-government in order to keep the state from collapsing into shortage-induced anarchy . Local self-governors must continue to participate in voluntary committees .
 Liberal-dominated committees and agencies required the centralized apparatus of the state to carry out their work . Liberal- dominated committees and . agencies required a centralized . apparatus of . the state, the government said .
 Police repression of strikes helped close the ranks of workers against the government . Police repression led to the deaths of many of the country's workers .
 In Lithuania, nationalists demanded autonomy within the empire . Some nationalist agitation occurred in other Russian borderlands as well as Lithuania .
 Muslims in Turkistan in Central Asia rose up in arms against Russian rule in 1916 . The government attempted to move a quarter of a million people to factories near the front . Muslims rose up against the government after the government tried to move them to factories .
 Increasing anger at the continued arrival of Russian settlers in Turkistan also played a role in the unrest .
 These occurrences revealed the complexity of the problem of nationalism in the Russian Empire .
 Alexander Kerensky, a lawyer, denounced the war in a speech whose daring rhetoric had never been heard in the Duma . The speech was made by a lawyer and leader of the Socialist Revolutionaries . The war was the first of its kind in Russia .
 Nicholas replaced members of the Progressive Bloc with uncompromising reactionaries . But Nicholas replaced them with reactionary reactionaries.
 He and his family withdrew into retreat, leaving the government floundering like a rudderless boat in high seas . The government has been left floundered by the government .
 Petrograd’s neighborhoods reflected social segregation in Petrograd . Petrograd was one of the largest cities in the Soviet Union .
 The upper and middle-class residential districts and the palatial buildings of imperial government lay on and near a long street called the Nevsky Prospect . The upperand middle-classes lived in and near the palaces of imperial buildings .
 This central artery was lined with banks, hotels, restaurants, cafes, cafes and a giant department store .
 Streetcars did not run as far as the muddy streets of the workers’ districts, nor did the city’s water mains or electric power lines . The streetcars were not able to reach many areas of the city's muddy streets .
 Epidemics were still frequent in Petrograd, as in Moscow and other Russian cities . Petrograd was characterized by acute overcrowding and inadequate sanitation .
 Revolutionary organizations prepared a massive general strike in early 1917, the anniversary of Bloody Sunday in 1905 . The strike was planned to coincide with Bloody Sunday's anniversary of that day .
 During January and February, almost half of the capital’s 400,000 workers went out on strike, including munitions workers at the Putilov factory . The largest factory in Europe is the largest in Europe with 30,000 people .
 Petrograd garrison of about 160,000 soldiers still seemed adequate to the task of maintaining order, even though most were raw recruits . Most of the Petrograd population was raw recruits, most of them being raw recruits from Russia .
 Demonstrators demanded that a provisional government be appointed with the power to enact major reforms . Demonstrator: Provisional government should have the power of the government to enact reforms .
 Food lines stretched longer in Petrograd, Moscow, and other cities in temperatures that reached forty below zero . Temperatures reached 40 below zero in some cities .
 Bread riots, in which many women and young people participated, became a daily occurrence . Bread riots became daily occurrence in the 1930s and '90s .
 On February 23 (all subsequent dates in this chapter refer to the Old Russian calendar, which was thirteen days behind the Western calendar), more determined demonstrators took to the streets . The Old Russian Calendar was 13 days behind Western calendar .
 Workers in the Putilov munitions factory tore up factory rule books and created committees . Workers created committees to represent their interests to the company . Workers tore up factories rule books .
 Petrograd's Duma debated ways of dealing with severe food shortages . Crowds of ordinary people poured into Petrograd’s center in Petrograd, Petrograd .
 Tsar Nicholas ordered the commander of the garrison to suppress demonstrations . Tsar Nicholas ordered the suppression of demonstrations in Tsar Tsar Russia .
 The attitude of soldiers, most of whom were peasants or workers, now became crucial . Soldiers' attitude was crucial to the success of the French Revolution .
 When a commanding officer tried to restore order by reading a telegram from the tsar, he was shot . He was shot while trying to flee the barracks .
 Thousands of soldiers and some officers went over to the insurgent side . Many officers and soldiers who continued to resist were summarily executed after being captured .
 The capture of the Petrograd arsenal put thousands of rifles as well as ammunition into the hands of workers . Thousands of rifles and ammunition were captured in the city .
 Nicholas, who was away at his seaside resort with his family, now ordered the Duma to dissolve . Nicholas is away in his holiday with his wife and family .
 Some of its members drawn from privileged society obeyed, but the majority simply moved to a new meeting place .
 They voted to remain in Petrograd, a move not unlike the Tennis Court Oath of the third estate during the first period of the French Revolution . The third estate was keenly aware of the precedent of which they were aware of .
 The Duma then elected a provisional committee, whose mandate was to restore order . The committee was elected by the Duma, the Russian parliament's parliament .
 In the meantime, the liberals, who tried to walk a tightrope between a desire for reform and a fear of the masses, now are in the position of trying to contain the revolution they helped set in motion .
 The Russian Revolution of February 1917 was unplanned and its outcome uncertain . The revolution was the first Russian Revolution to take place in 1917 .
 Socialist Revolutionary, Menshevik, and Bolshevik activists helped impart a sense of direction to the movement . Experienced in strikes, they were experienced in strikes . The movement was founded by the Socialist Party in 1918 .
 Their goal, unlike that of the liberals, was the overthrow of the tsarist regime . The liberals wanted only reform, but the liberals wanted to overthrow it . Their goal was to overthrow the tsar regime .
 Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies was created in response to calls in the streets . On February 27, 1905, Petrograd was created as a result of the revolution in Petrograd .
 Members of the organization included several hundred workers, some of whom demonstrators had freed from jail . Some of the demonstrators had been placed for their political or trade union activities, as well as soldiers .
 Petrograd soviets elected officers, discussed ways to defend Petrograd against a possible German attack . They also sent representatives to encourage the formation of sovets in other cities . Petrograd was the first city to hold a soviet in Petrograd .
 Menshevik leaders took the lead in the Petrograd Soviet’s creation as Bolshevik leaders held back . Bolshevik leaders feared that a large and effective soviet might make it more difficult for their party to direct worker militancy .
 The tsar now decided to return to Petrograd . Hoping to overwhelm the rebellion with his presence, the tsar decided to stay in Petrograd, Russia .
 He spent almost two full days aboard his private train, critical moments in the February Revolution . The Russian Revolution was held in February .
 On the train, the tsar received an erroneous report that insurgent troops held the next stations and that they would refuse to let his train through . The tsar was traveling in Russia when he received the report .
 Nicholas then went to the northern military front, hoping to find a loyal army ready to march on Petrograd . Nicholas hoped to find loyal troops ready to take on the capital, Petrograd.
 In disbelief, he learned that Moscow, too, had fallen almost overnight to insurgents . He learned that he was in disbelief when he learned of the fall in Russia .
 Workers at the giant Putilov factory in Petrograd vote during a meeting of the Petrograd Soviet. vote . His generals made no effort to save the workers from the disaster .
 They believed the tsar’s cause lost and that only his abdication could prevent civil war, and perhaps military defeat at the hands of Germany as well . The tsar's cause was lost, they believed, and only his . abdicated could prevent a civil war
 Nicholas II abdicated on March 2, 1917, leaving the throne to his brother, Prince Michael . Prince Michael was Prince Nicholas II of Russia .
 A few hours in revolutionary Petrograd convinced Prince Michael to refuse to succeed his brother . Prince Michael refused to succeed Prince Michael in Petrograd .
 The Soviet placed the tsar and his family under house arrest until the summer, when they were taken by train to a small Siberian town . The tsar's family was moved to a Siberian town in the summer . The family was taken to the town by train .
 The Russian autocracy had fallen in a matter of days, with only about a thousand people killed . Only about one thousand people died .
 The provisional government and the Petrograd Soviet were left in the awkward position of serving as dual or parallel governments . The Provisional Government and the Soviet left in an awkward position .
 The provisional government included Constitutional Democrats, liberals who had only demanded only that the tsar initiate political reforms . Constitutional Democrats were Constitutional Democrats who had demanded that reforms be made .
 Petrograd Soviet consisted largely of workers and soldiers who had helped overthrow the tsar . Petrograd was largely dominated by workers and troops who helped overthrow tsar's overthrow of the Tsar .
 The relationship between the moderate provisional government and the radical Soviet would ultimately affect the course of the Russian Revolution itself . The relationship would ultimately influence the outcome of the revolution .
 Petrograd Soviet promised to accept the provisional committee’s authority . For the moment, it has said it will accept the authority of the committee . The Petrograd-Petrograd Soviet promises to accept its authority .
 Both the provisional government and the Soviet met in the same palace, with Kerensky, named minister of justice but also a member of the Soviet, running back and forth .
 On March 8, the provisional government granted civil liberties, including the right to strike, democratized local government . It announced that it would convene a constituent assembly to establish a constitution .
 Petrograd Soviet is now with 3,000 members and an executive committee meeting virtually around the clock . It demands immediate economic and social reforms, demanding immediate economic reforms .
 The provisional government and the Soviet quickly became the focus of attention of competing political groups . Liberals, Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, and Bolsheviks wanted to shape Russia’s future .
 In the meantime, the army was the last functioning imperial institution . The Army is now the most important institution in the world .
 Petrograd Soviet issued Order Number One on March 1, which claimed for the Soviet the authority to countermand orders of the provisional government on military matters . The order also called for the election of soldiers’ committees in every unit .
 In fact, such elections had already widely occurred, such an attempt to democratize army life had already occurred . The elections were a remarkable attempt to democraticize army .
 The danger that the military front might collapse against German pressure seemed quite real . Yet the danger was quite real, the danger that it might collapse was real .
 For the moment, however, the Bolshevik promise of “land and peace” seemed a distant prospect . For the rest of the time, the promise of land and peace seemed to be an elusive prospect .
 The United States, first, and then Great Britain, France, and Italy quickly gave diplomatic recognition to the provisional government . The U.S. hoped that the Revolution would not drastically affect the Russian commitment to hold the eastern front .
 Russian troops fraternized with astonished German and Austro-Hungarian soldiers . But in a few places on the front, Russian troops were friendly with astonished Germans and Austrians .
 As news of the Revolution spread, ordinary people in the vast reaches of what had been the Russian Empire attacked and disarmed police stations .
 It sometimes took weeks for ‘commissars of the revolution’ to arrive . Yet it sometimes took several weeks for them to arrive at the end of the year .
 In some industrial regions, workers had already occupied factories, demanding higher wages, an eight-hour day, and control over production . In some factories, workers demanded higher wages and an eight hour day .
 With Petrograd and much of European Russia caught between war and revolution, some of the minority peoples of the empire began to demand more favorable status .
 Their demands were as myriad and complicated as the old Russian Empire itself . The demands of the Russian Empire were as many as those of the old Soviet Union .
 Among the nationalities, some nationalists sought only cultural autonomy . Others wanted some degree of political freedom within the context of a federal structure . Still others demanded outright independence .
 Such demands soured relations in regions where ethnic and religious tensions had persisted, sometimes centuries, sometimes for centuries . Such demands have soured ties in some regions, sometimes by centuries .
 In the steppes of Central Asia and in the northern Caucasus, fighting broke out between Russian settlers and the Cossacks . The KazakhKirghiz, the Bashkirs, and other Turkish peoples were also involved .
 In Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, nationalist movements grew rapidly . In the Baltic states, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania, nationalists grew rapidly in the 1930s .
 The provisional government’s goal was to hold the empire together until a constituent assembly could be elected to establish the political basis of the new state . A constituent assembly would be elected by the provisional government .
 Its declaration of civil rights for all peoples had made each nationality in principle equal . The Declaration of Civil Rights for all nations had made all nations equal .
 In some places, representatives of the new regime immediately turned over administrative responsibility to local committees or individuals .
 Local peoples set up their own institutions of self-rule in the hope of maintaining order . But elsewhere, local people set up institutions of themselves to maintain order . Some of the world's most violent anti-government protests have taken place in recent years .
 The provisional government feared that if it granted Ukrainian autonomy, other nationalities would demand similar treatment .
 Shortly after the tsar’s abdication, Ukrainian socialists had formed a soviet . Shortly after that, Ukraine's socialists formed a state of socialism .
 On March 4, 1917, nationalists and socialists established the Ukrainian Central Council . The council was established by nationalists and socialist nationalists .
 Centuries-old resentment of Russia, based on cultural and linguistic differences, rose to the surface . Russia's resentment of the Soviet Union rose to a high level in recent years .
 As more radical nationalists gathered in Kiev, the Rada convoked a Ukrainian National Congress, which began to draft a statute for autonomy . The congress began drafting a law for autonomy in Ukraine, drawing up a statute .
 Rada broadens its social and national base by including non-Ukrainian residents . Serving as a de facto provisional government in Ukraine, the Rada has broadened its social, national base .
 In the meantime, nationalism began to grip Ukrainian peasants, and many of them occupied lands owned by Russian or Polish landlords . Many of these lands were owned by Russians or Poles .
 In regions with sizable Muslim populations, national movements are divided between religious conservatives, Western-looking liberals, and leftist Socialist Revolutionaries . In regions of Muslim population, movements divided between conservatives and left-wingers .
 The first All-Russian Muslim Congress, which began on May 1, 1917, reflected these divisions . The first Congress was held in Moscow, Russia, in 1917 .
 The congress announced the future formation of a religious administration that would be separate from the state . The congress also announced the formation of the religious administration .
 The provisional government ordered the army to curtail the unpopular requisitioning of grain . The government also had to make sure that the military front held .
 The provisional government faced increasing pressure from the Soviet for economic and social reforms, above all, land reform . At the same time, the provisional government was facing increasing pressure for reforms .
 The provisional government authorized the formation of local food supply committees and “land committees” The committees were charged with gathering information to draft a land reform measure for the Constituent Assembly .
 Liberals also wanted land reform, but insisted it be carried out in a deliberate, legal manner . Liberals also want land reform but insisted that it be done in a legal way .
 An All-Russian Congress of Soviets began at the end of March 1917 in Petrograd . The Congress of Soviet Soviets was held in the Russian capital .
 Congress transformed Petrograd Soviet into a national body, establishing a central executive committee dominated by members of the Petrograd Soviets . Congress was attended by representatives of other soviets that had sprung up after the Revolution .
 A groundswell of opposition to Russia’s continued participation in the war drove a wedge between workers and soldiers and the provisional government . The opposition to Russian involvement in the conflict was a major source of tension in Russia .
 At the All-Russian Congress of Soviets, the Bolsheviks’ call for an immediate end to the war was easily defeated . The Bolsheviks were defeated at the congress in Moscow .
 Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries were willing to continue the war, but on the condition that the provisional government work for peace without annexations of land from Russia’s enemies . Menshevik and the Socialist Revolutionary were willing .
 Protests by the Petrograd Soviet and demonstrations against the war led to his resignation from the government at the beginning of May . Protests led to the resignation of his government .
 The April Crisis led to the formation of the first coalition government, which reflected the push to the left . The April crisis was the first time the government was formed .
 The provisional government accepted the Petrograd Soviet’s demand that ‘peace without annexations’ be henceforth the basis of Russian foreign policy . ‘Peace without annexing’ was henceforth to be the basis for Russian foreign policies .
 Worsening material conditions radicalized many workers, particularly trade unions . Trade unions had sprung up since February 1917 . Worsened material conditions were radicalized .
 Many children or grandchildren of former serfs began to occupy the land of the lords for whom they had worked . They often killed landlords or former imperial officials in the process .
 The percentage of landless peasants may have fallen by half during the 1917-1920 period .
 In some villages, the Orthodox Church could no longer compel obedience . The Orthodox Church no longer has to compel obedience in some villages .
 The German government expedited Lenin’s return to Russia from Switzerland from Switzerland . Lenin had been in exile since 1900 .
 The Bolshevik leaders return might exert further pressure on the provisional government to sue for peace, allowing the German army to concentrate its efforts on the western front . The return of Bolshevik leaders might exert more pressure .
 Lenin arrived in Petrograd in early April 1917 . After passing through German territory in a sealed railway car, he was sealed in the country . Lenin was sent to Petrograd by a sealed train car .
 Russian withdrawal from the war was viewed as a serious obstacle to Bolshevik victory . No support for the provisional government, no support for provisional government; a call for revolution in the other countries of Europe; and the seizure of large estates by peasants .
 Lenin argued that wartime chaos allowed the bourgeois and proletarian revolutions to merge in a short period of time . In his ‘April Theses,’ he argued that war chaos had allowed the revolution to merge .
 The overthrow of the autocracy had suddenly . unexpectedly handed power to a weak bourgeoisie . The overthrow had suddenly and unexpectedly handed . power to the weak .
 The bourgeoisie, holding power through the provisional government, could be overthrown by the proletariat . The proletariat, supported by the poorest peasants, could overthrow the bourgeois government .
 Aided by the provisional government’s division and growing unpopularity, Bolshevik support grew among factory committees, Red Guards (newly created factory workers’ militias), sailors at the naval base of Kronstadt, and soldiers within Petrograd garrison .
 The failure of the existing provisional government to provide either peace or land undermined its support among peasants . The failure to provide both peace and land undermined the provisional government's support .
 It was powerless to resolve industrial disputes or put an end to land seizures, it said . It was also powerless to end industrial disputes and end land seizures .
 Menshevik leaders warned that continued Bolshevik radicalism might push conservatives toward launching a coup d’etat . Mensheviks warn that continued radicalism could push conservatives to launch a coup-d'etat in Russia .
 In mid-June Kerensky announced a Russian offensive in Galicia . Although neither troop morale nor the military situation boded well, the situation was not good . The July Days were the worst of the July Days .
 This was to reassure conservatives and moderates that military discipline had been restored . It was also to convince the Allies that Russia remained committed to winning the war . Russia was determined to win the war and to reassure the Allies .
 They had been encouraged by increasing popularity among workers, the ongoing agrarian revolution, and widespread dissatisfaction with the war .
 Nearly 100,000 soldiers who feared being sent to the front joined the chaotic uprising . The uprising took place in a chaotic state of chaos in 2011 .
 The Bolshevik Central Committee tried to call off the insurrection the next day . However, sensing defeat, the Bolshevik Central Party tried to cancel the insurrection .
 Most troops remained loyal to the provisional government, and the insurrection failed . The insurrection failed, and most of the troops stayed loyal .
 Kerensky became prime minister of the second coalition government, depending even more on support from the liberal Kadets . He was prime minister in the second government, which relied heavily on the Kadets' support .
 The provisional government now believed that the Bolsheviks were finished . It believed the provisional government believed that it was finished .
 Kerensky tried to portray Lenin as a German agent, noting that the Bolsheviks in exile had received some German money . Lenin was assassinated in October 1918 .
 Kerensky’s government disarmed army regiments it considered disloyal, and staged a state funeral, replete with national and religious symbolism, in honor of soldiers killed at front .
 The repressive measures were relatively ineffective because of the disorganization of the judicial apparatus, the rapid turnover of government officials, and the support the Bolsheviks enjoyed in the working-class districts of Petrograd . But the repressive measures undertaken against the . Bolsheviks were relatively . ineffective because the
 Many Bolshevik leaders escaped arrest and others were soon released from jail . Many of the Bolshevik leaders were soon out of jail . The Bolshevik leader escaped arrest .
 The repressive measures further discredited the provisional government, which seemed to be using the July Days as an excuse to undertake a counter-revolution . The July Days were used as a pretext for a counterrevolution, the government said .
 Bolsheviks turned to factory committees to consolidate their support . Doubts the revolutionary potential of the soviets, many of their members and leaders remained Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries .
 Bolshevik newspapers denounced the provisional government and accused moderate socialists of counter-revolution . Bolshevik newspapers and brochures in factories denounced the government .
 Russian conservatives began to think in terms of a coup d’etat . Disillusioned by Kerensky’s indecision, frustrated by ineffectiveness of the repression against the Bolsheviks .
 General Lavr Kornilov seemed the obvious candidate to overthrow the provisional government . He was newly appointed commander in chief of the army and a tough Cossack . Lavr was appointed as head of the armed forces .
 Prelates of the Orthodox Church sent him icons in the hope that the military could restore religious principles to Russia . Prelates sent icons to the military in hope that they could restore the country's religious principles . Prelateates hoped that the Russian military would be able to take religious principles back
 Most of the delegates believed only a military dictatorship could save Russia from the soviets and from having to pull out of the war . Most of them were leaders of trade unions, as well as bankers, bankers, state dumas, military leaders, and professionals .
 German troops had captured Riga, a major Baltic seaport, posing a direct threat to Petrograd . Petrograd was threatened by the capture of Riga . Riga was a major city in the Baltic Sea of Latvia .
 Kerensky wanted Kornilov to form a military government that could restore order, but he believed that the general would remain loyal to him and to the idea of establishing a democratic republic . Kernilov believed that he would be loyal to the general .
 Kornilov probably wanted to seize power and impose a right-wing military regime, says Putin . He says he wanted to impose a military regime on Russia .
 A confusing exchange led each leader to misconstrue what the other meant . The two leaders had a confusing exchange of words . The incident was captured on camera .
 Kerensky demanded Kornilov’s resignation as commander in chief . When the latter refused, he called on the army to remain loyal to the provisional government . Kerenky demanded the resignation of the Russian army chief .
 Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and Socialist Revolutionaries formed a committee against counter-revolution . The committee was formed by the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks . The Committee was formed in response to the threat of counterrevolution .
 Bolsheviks were among those receiving arms at the arsenals in anticipation of a stand against a military coup . The Bolsheviks received arms in the hope of standing against a coup .
 No coup d’etat took place, and probably nothing specific had actually been planned . But no coup d'etat was actually planned, and no one was killed .
 The Kornilov Affair aided the Bolsheviks, who portrayed themselves as the only possible saviors of the Revolution . However, by raising the specter of counter-revolution, the affair aided the Bolshevik Party . The Affair was the first time the Russian Revolution was overthrown
 The provisional government seemed both incapable of solving the worsening economic crisis and unwilling to take Russia out of the war . The October Revolution was the first Russian revolution since the fall of the Soviet Union .
 The workers of Petrograd were organized and armed, their demands increasing . Petrograd workers of the Petrograd area were armed and armed .
 Only the Bolsheviks promised in their program to turn over to the soviets some degree of political power . Only the Bolshevik party promised in its program to give the sovets power . The Bolsheviks did not promise to give them power over the power of the state .
 The radicalized All-Russian Executive Committee of the Soviets approved the Bolshevik demand that a “democratic” republic be declared by a government “of representatives of the revolutionary proletariat and peasantry” from which Kadets, moderate constitutional democrats would be excluded .
 Lenin convinced the Bolshevik Central Committee that a second insurrection could succeed . The Bolsheviks seized power in Petrograd in October 10, 1917 .
 Bolshevik propaganda hammered away at the theme that their party was untainted by support for the provisional government . Bolshevik propaganda said they were untainted .
 Lenin’s assessment that they would not oppose their seizure of power proved correct . Even if a majority of soldiers or of the population of Petrograd or of Russia did not necessarily favor the Bolsheviks, the majority of those in Petrograd did .
 Late on October 24, 1917, Kerensky shut down Bolshevik newspapers and sent troops to hold the bridges over the Neva River . He shut down newspapers and ordered troops to block the bridges .
 About 12,000 Red Guards launched the insurrection, supported by factory committees in Petrograd’s industrial districts . The uprising was the first to break out of the Petrograd-era Soviet Union .
 Leon Trotsky (Lev Davidovich Bronstein, 1879—1940) coordinated the uprising . Leon Trotsky was a member of the Trotskyist movement in Russia .
 Trotsky borrowed his alias from one of his prison guards . Trotsky was the revolutionary son of a wealthy Jewish farmer . He had borrowed the alias from a prison guard .
 Bolsheviks repelled an attack by army cadets loyal to the provisional government . The only serious fighting of the October Revolution was the only serious attack .
 The regiments upon which Kerensky had counted remained in their barracks, their neutrality striking a blow for the insurrection . Kerenksky counted the Russian Revolutionists in Russia .
 Kerensky left Petrograd the same day in a car borrowed from the U.S. embassy . He hoped to rally military support at the front of the Soviet Union .
 That night, the battleship Aurora lobbed a couple of shells toward the Winter Palace, where the last ministers of the provisional government were holding out . The battleship was under the control of revolutionaries .
 Provisional government surrendered after eight months of existence . The provisional government was formed in 2008 .
 There were fewer people killed than in the February Revolution or even in the July Days . The February Revolution and July Days were less violent than in other days .
 Restaurants, casinos, theaters, and the ballet remained open, although banks closed and streetcars were hard to find .
 Shares on the stock market had risen in anticipation of a military coup d'etat during the Kornilov crisis . Shares declined in response to the crisis, leading to the collapse of the market .
 Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries walked out of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets to protest the Bolshevik insurrection . Most Menshevik and many Socialist Revolutionists walked out .
 The Central Committee of the Congress of Soviets, all Bolshevik except some leftist Socialist Revolutionaries, now ran the government . Lenin's government was replaced by the Central Committee .
 In Moscow, Russia's second city, the insurrection began after the first reports from Petrograd arrived . In Petrograd, the uprising began after reports from the city of Petrograd began .
 After a week of fighting, the forces of the provisional government surrender surrender . The government forces are now in control of the country .
 In the vast reaches of the former Russian Empire, a “revolution by telegraph” took place . In the past, a revolution by telegram took place in Russia's vast reaches .
 In industrial regions, where the Bolsheviks already dominated some soviets, it was easy enough to establish a military revolutionary committee to assume local power . The Bolsheviks were able to take control of some of the country's industrial regions .
 In the countryside, the Bolsheviks cultivated support among the poorest peasants . In the 1930s, the Bolshevik Party was in touch with the poor in Russia .
 Socialist Revolutionaries believed that they could coexist with the new Bolshevik-dominated government . They believed they could be co-existing with the Bolshevik government .
 The Bolsheviks manipulated ethnic, social, and political tensions in Russia . They purged soviets of non-Bolsheviks and pushed aside institutions of self-rule that had spontaneously sprung up after the February Revolution .
 In Ukraine, the situation remained calm at least partially because the Bolsheviks had early in the Revolution made an agreement with Ukrainian nationalists . The Bolsheviks agreed to the deal with nationalists in the revolution's early stages .
 In the distant borderlands where ethnic Russians were a minority, strong anti-Russian national feeling often made it extremely difficult for the Bolsheviks to take control of the region .
 The Bolsheviks were a small minority in Russia at the time of the October Revolution . They were a minority of the population in Russia .
 Sites of strikes, uprisings, and army and navy mutinies during the Russian Revolution . Sites include cities in which soviets were established by the revolutionaries .
 Russia's Samara Kaluga emporium is based in Samara, Russia, in the 1930s and 1940s . It was the first Russian city in the Soviet Union to be incorporated into the republic .
 Yenakiyevo Yekatennoslavoslav* •MakeyevkaA* ° Yuzovka* <y • Rostov UKRAINE A$ * Nikolayeyeyey.
 "It rapidly proliferated into a large organization with virtually unlimited power," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In elections for the Constituent Assembly, the Bolsheviks were supported only by the left wing of the Socialist Revolutionaries . The Bolsheviks supported only the left-wing of the socialist Revolutionaries in the elections .
 The Bolsheviks won just 29 percent of the vote, compared with 58 percent for the Socialist Revolutionaries . The Socialist Revolutionists won just 58 percent of vote .
 When elected deputies arrived early in January 1918, the Bolsheviks forced the assembly to adjourn the next day . The assembly was adjourned early in the morning of the first day .
 Russia’s interests, even under Bolshevik communism, remained paramount . But, as in the Russian Empire, Russia's interests remained paramount, even in the Soviet Union .
 The Peace of Brest-Litovsk was signed early in December 1917 . After the Bolsheviks took power, Trotsky, now “People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs,” offered Germany an armistice .
 Trotsky broke off negotiations for a permanent peace agreement because of draconian German demands . Trotsky was forced to break off negotiations with Germany in order to reach a permanent agreement .
 In mid-February, German troops captured Kiev and much of Ukraine and Crimea, as well as some of the Caucasus region . The region was captured by German troops in February .
 On March 3, 1918, the Bolshevik government signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany . The Treaty gave up one-fourth of the area of what had been imperial European Russia . The area contained some of its most fertile land .
 The Bolsheviks also agreed to German occupation of Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia . They agreed to pull Russian troops out of Ukraine and Finland and pull them from Finland .
 Socialist Revolutionaries ended their cooperation with the Bolsheviks . Angered by the treaty, they demanded rapid attention to the agrarian question . The treaty led to an end of cooperation between Bolsheviks and Socialist Revolutionists .
 The Germans then occupied all of Finland and Ukraine, setting up puppet regimes in both states . The Germans occupied both countries in the 1930s .
 The White armies held Central Asia and Siberia, . territory east of Moscow, and the Caucasus Mountains .
 The White army played upon anti-Semitism by denouncing Trotsky and other Bolshevik leaders because they were Jews . Trotsky was assassinated by the White Army because he was Jewish .
 More than 2 million people fled abroad to escape the Russian Revolution and the ensuing Civil War . The revolution was the result of the Civil War and the death of 2 million Russians .
 Boundaries of areas controlled by the Whites and the Reds during the Russian Civil War . Areas controlled by both sides during the war included areas of Russia and Russia .
 Entente fleet Murmansk 'Canadians wHtrt. . , SEA / ^Helsinki Tsaritsyn ' '(Volgograd •AMr ikr in (BULGARIA 'REACK^*SEA Entente Russian Empire 1914
 March 1917 Russian territory occupied by Central Powers after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk . March 1917 Russia occupied by the Central Powers . The Treaty was signed by the Russian Empire in 1917 .
 A huge peasant army led by the anarchist Nestor Makhno allied with the Bolsheviks and controlled parts of Ukraine after the Germans had fallen back . Nestor's army was led by an anarchist who allied with Bolsheviks .
 In Siberia, General Alexander Kolchak established a dictatorship that claimed to be the new government of Russia . The dictatorship was backed by Britain and France and backed by the West .
 In February 1918, the Soviet government proclaimed the nationalization of all land . The land was nationalized in February 1918 .
 The state appropriated heavy industries and gradually put an end to private trade . Private trade was largely cut off from private trade in the 1930s .
 Before the October Revolution the Bolsheviks had loudly proclaimed their support for immediate land reform . Peasants from whom grain was being taken sometimes reacted with shock .
 War Communism may have saved the Revolution, but it took a terrible toll on industrial production . War Communism led to a dramatic decline in industrial production in Russia .
 Bolshevik guards moved Nicholas II and his family to Ekaterinburg, a town in the Ural Mountains . Rumors spread that the Czech legion or monarchist generals were planning to rescue them .
 Lenin addressing the troops leaving for the front during the Civil War, 1920 . Lenin spoke to the troops on July 17, 1918 . Lenin addressed the troops .
 Trotsky was removed from the famous photo on Stalin’s order after he was purged . Trotsky is in uniform standing to the right of the podium, and was later removed from this famous photo .
 Allies, particularly Britain, provided supplies to the White armies . The Allies provided supplies for the White Army .
 In August, British, American, and Canadian soldiers landed in the northern port of Murmansk . They claimed that such measures were necessary to prevent Russia’s northern ports from falling to the Germans .
 Allied suspicion of the new Bolshevik government strengthened their decision to intervene . Allied suspicion that the new government of Russia was behind the intervention .
 British troops attacked Soviet forces, and American troops landed at the icy northern port of Archangel . British troops arrived at the Arctic port in the winter of 1941 .
 Japanese troops moved into Siberia, where the Bolsheviks had little effective control, remaining there until 1922 . Japanese troops remained in Siberia until 1922.
 Allied intervention helped rally popular opinion against the Whites, whose wanton brutality, including routine rape and murder, exceeded that of the Bolsheviks . Allied intervention .
 Whites had no monopoly on savagery, as in some places Red forces massacred peasants and Cossacks . However, the Whites were not the only ones to be savagaries .
 In Finland, after a bitter civil war between local Reds and Whites, the ‘White Terror’ took 80,000 victims among those who had supported the Revolution . The 'White Terror' was the result of a bloody civil war in Finland between the Reds and the Whites .
 The Russian nationalist calls of White leaders for an ‘indivisible” Russia alienated other national groups, aiding the Bolsheviks, who falsely promised to respect the rights of non-Russian nationalities . Moreover, the White leaders' calls of an 'indevisible' Russia alienated
 The ‘Red Terror’ began in September 1918 . Following attempts on the lives of several Bolshevik leaders, including Lenin, the ‘red Terror” began in 1918 .
 Government decrees gave the Cheka almost unlimited authority . The Cheka set up forced labor camps to incarcerate those considered enemies . Forced labor camps were set up by the government in the 1930s .
 Many of the victims were Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries, or others who held political beliefs that displeased the Bolsheviks . Many victims were indeed working for the overthrow of the regime, many others were simply .
 The Red Army defeated the largest White army in Ukraine during the summer of 1919 . It turned back a final march on Moscow in October in October .
 The Civil War continued in 1920, and in the Pacific region fighting lasted into 1922 . In the Pacific, fighting in the 1920s and 1920s, fighting continued until 1922 .
 In 1920, Jozef Pilsudski sought to take advantage of apparent Soviet weakness in the wake of the Civil War . He created a federation of independent states, including Lithuania, Ukraine and Belarus, under Polish leadership .
 Lenin planned a Soviet attack on Poland after defeating the White armies . Lenin planned to attack Poland with the help of Soviet troops .
 The Polish army invaded Ukraine, until the Red Army repelled the attack and pushed Polish forces back into Poland . The Red Army pushed the Polish army back into Ukraine, ending the invasion .
 Pilsudski’s forces surrounded the Soviet army on the edge of Warsaw in August 1920 . The “miracle of the Vistula” River was the ‘miracle’ of the .
 The Treaty of Riga in March 1921 ended hostilities between Poland and the new Soviet government . It had been largely at the expense of Ukraine . The treaty ended the hostilities between the two countries .
 While much of Ukraine was left within the Soviet Union, 5 million Ukrainians now found themselves living in Poland .
 The Revolution seemed to offer peasants in Russia hope . The Soviet Union was a Soviet state of hope .
 After destroying the authority of the imperial regime in the countryside, they then broke the power of the landlords . After destroying authority of imperial regime, they destroyed the . power of landlords, the . peasants .
 Many peasants feared the Whites, and they therefore went along with the demands of the Soviet regime, hoping that ‘peace and land’ would follow . Many peasants were afraid of the Whites and hoped for peace and land to follow .
 Bolsheviks were able to install a centralized state authority to mobilize the countryside against the counter-revolution . The Bolsheviks installed a central state authority .
 The Bolsheviks mistrusted the peasants, their notions of family and village ownership of land, their sense of collective responsibility, and their eagerness to market what they produced . Like the old imperial elites, the Bolsheviks were wary of peasants .
 Civil War established a precedent for the use of mass terror to enforce the party’s will in rural areas . The Civil War was the first time mass terror was used to enforce a party's will .
 Bolshevik commissars reestablished Bolshevik authority over Ukraine and border lands such as Georgia and Turkistan .
 A constitution promised freedom of speech and assembly, as well as the separation of church and state . A constitution was promulgated in July 1918 promised freedom and assembly .
 Marxist theory promised the ‘withering of the state’ once socialism had been constructed . Lenin himself warned against the growing power of the bureaucracy, which he had helped create .
 Lenin’s concept originally called for open and free discussion and debate on policy issues . But once party leaders made a decision all dissent had to end and all party members were to unite around the party line . Lenin's concept called for free discussion of policy issues and free debate .
 The structure suffocated the democratic apparatus on the local level, which henceforth received orders that flowed downward and outward from the central party apparatus in the name of the state . The state's power now dictates how the state can exert its influence on the political sphere .
 The Communist government did not tolerate workers’ self-management, a goal of many people who had helped overthrow the tsarist autocracy . Many people who helped overthrow Russia's autocracy had helped .
 A group called the Left Communists had opposed signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany . They argued that Russia should lead a revolutionary war against capitalism .
 Lenin acidly denounced “Left Infantilism and the Petty Bourgeois Spirit” in the summer of 1918 . Lenin was responding to those who criticized the abandonment of the principles of workers’ self-management . Lenin: “I am not a socialist, but a
 Bolsheviks nationalized most of the large-scale industries in June 1919 . In June 1919, the Bolsheviks took over most of Russia's largest-scale industrial estates .
 In early 1921, at the end of the Civil War, worker discontent erupted in strikes and demonstrations in some industrial centers . In 1921, workers began to strike and demonstrate against the establishment of capitalism .
 In March 1921, the Red Army crushed a revolt at the Kronstadt naval base, where sailors demanded freely elected soviets . The Red Army defeated the revolt in March 1921 . The revolt was a revolt against the Soviet Union .
 Massive strikes rocked Petrograd after Bolshevik authorities rebuffed workers’ demands for better working conditions and more control over their shops and factories . Workers were rebuffed by Bolshevik authorities after they rebuffed their demands .
 The new Soviet government had to repair the massive disruption done to the economy by the Great War and subsequent Civil War . New Soviet government must repair the damage done by the war and Civil War.
 More than 7 million people died of starvation and sickness during a famine in 1921 — 1922 . The famine was the worst famine in the history of the Great Depression .
 The war against Poland and the loss of territory also accentuated the gravity of the economic situation . Moreover, the war against . Poland also accentuates the gravity .
 Lenin recognized that communist ideology, which called for the abolition of private ownership, for the moment would have to be sacrificed . With the economy in near total collapse, Lenin realized that . Lenin recognized the idea that . private ownership would have been sacrificed .
 War Communism collapsed because of the resistance, active and passive, of peasants and workers . War Communism had collapsed due to the resistance of peasants, workers and peasants .
 The cities and army had only been fed because the state had been able to requisition or commandeer supplies in the vast countryside . The towns and cities were only fed by requisitioning or commandeering supplies from the countryside .
 At a time of severe famine, the government needed to feed the population and build up a surplus of raw materials and food supplies . At the time of famine, it was necessary for the country to feed its population .
 After the threat from the White armies had ended, peasants violently resisted grain requisitioning . peasants had violently resisted requisitioned grain .
 The NEP allowed peasants to use the land as if it were their own and allowed trade of produce at market prices . The state retained control of heavy industries, although the state maintained control over heavy industries . Although the NEP maintained control of the economy, the state allowed trade at market
 The goal was, above all, to encourage peasants to bring their crops to market . The goal of the project was to help peasants bring their crop to market.
 Some merchants whose stores had been nationalized during the Civil War were now allowed to manage them again . The government permitted small-scale, privately owned manufacturing .
 Lenin invited foreign investment in mining and other development projects . Lenin even invited foreign investments in mining projects .
 The amount of land under cultivation and industrial production gradually began to reach pre-war levels . Land under cultivation began to be under-cultivated in the 1950s .
 In towns, small businesses run by “nepmen’s” prospered, and kulaks gained . In towns of Kyrgyms, "nepman" ran small businesses, "kulaks" gained. In towns run by 'nep
 If the NEP brought economic concessions, there were virtually none in the political realm . But if it brought economic benefits, there would be no political concessions . The NEP is the largest single-country economic initiative in the U.S.
 The Bolsheviks further consolidated their hold over most government functions . Claimed to be serving the interests of the working class by protecting them against Western Allies .
 Lenin claimed that this ban would be only a temporary measure, like the NEP itself . They declared all other political parties illegal, although Lenin claimed this ban was only temporary . Lenin declared that all political parties were illegal .
 The Bolsheviks continued the campaign against Socialist Revolutionaries, as well as Mensheviks . The Menshevik continued to fight against the Socialist Revolutionists .
 In 1924, the state limited the entrepreneurship of “nepmen’s” and, three years later, of kulaks . The state also limited the entrepreneurs of ‘nepman’ and ‘kulaks’ in 1924 . In 1924
 Joseph Stalin emerged as an important figure in the Soviet hierarchy . In the meantime, he emerged as a key figure in Stalin's regime .
 Stalin was born Joseph Dzhugashvili in Georgia, beyond the Caucasus Mountains . Stalin is an alias taken from the Russian word for “steel” Stalin .
 The young Stalin entered an Orthodox seminary in 1894 in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi . Stalin entered the seminary at the age of 1894 . He was a member of the Communist Party of Soviet Russia .
 In the seminary, Stalin learned Russian, secretly read Marxist tracts, and joined a radical study circle, for which he was expelled . Stalin was expelled from the study circle for his part in the circle, which he later joined .
 Stalin escaped from Siberia and returned to Georgia in 1902 . Arrested in 1902 and exiled to Siberia the next year, he was exiled to Georgia .
 The Bolsheviks’ hardened secrecy appealed to the young Georgian’s acerbic personality . The young Georgian was inspired by the Bolsheviks' hardened secrecy . The film was shot in 1918 at the hands of Vladimir Putin .
 More arrests, jail terms, exile to Siberia, and escapes followed in rapid succession over the next seven years . More arrests and jail terms were followed by prison terms and exile .
 Lenin drafted the “Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia” which promised the peoples of the former Russian Empire self-determination . He managed to return to Petrograd and, after the October Revolution, helped Lenin draft the Declaration .
 During the Civil War, he served on the military revolutionary council and quarreled with Trotsky over military strategy . He served in Russia during the Second World War .
 Trotsky had surprisingly little talent for the ruthless political infighting that was as natural to Stalin as breathing . Stalin was ruthless and ruthless in the ruthless way he dealt with the infighting . Trotsky was the only person in the world to have a talent for infighting in Russia .
 Stalin remained suspicious of “cosmopolitan’s” intellectuals such as Trotsky . Trotsky was often an anti-Semitic code word for Jewish . Stalin was suspicious of "cosmopolitan" intellectuals like Trotsky .
 Trotsky believed that socialism in the Soviet Union could only be victorious following world revolution . He believed that the capitalist nations of the West were ripe to be overthrown by proletarian revolutions .
 Communist International was founded in 1919 to help organize and assist revolutionary Communist parties in other countries . The Communist International had been founded to help with revolutionary Communist Party parties .
 Lenin believed workers would overthrow one Western state after another . Lenin had believed that workers would overth overthrow Western states . Lenin believed that the revolution would take place in the West .
 The International promised to help colonial people win independence from imperialist domination . The International also promised to support colonial people .
 Lenin’s support for national self-determination had been intended to undermine the provisional government and win the support of non-Russian nationalities . Lenin's support was intended to win support from non-Russians, according to the historian .
 The Soviet Union wanted to give the impression that the various peoples enjoyed a degree of sovereignty, he said . Furthermore, concerned with the Soviet Union’s image in the colonial world, he wanted to .
 He still believed that national differences posed a threat to the revolution and that they would become irrelevant in the communist state . National differences would be irrelevant in communist state, he said .
 Stalin wanted peoples of the old imperial state incorporated into the existing Russian state . Stalin, who served as commissar for nationalities , wanted the people of the former imperial state into the new state .
 During the Civil War, he had crushed what he called “the hydra of nationalism” in his native Georgia . He had crushed ‘the hydra” of nationalism in Georgia, Georgia .
 Russian interests prevailed within the party, and thus within the government . Russian interests prevail within the Russian party, according to the Russian government .
 Official line was that communism had brought stability by eliminating ethnic tensions . Official line said that nationalism would disappear in the new socialist world .
 Soviet policies encouraged the survival of some local languages . One reason was to ensure that state bureaucratic directives could be read by Soviet citizens .
 The Constitution of 1924 would declare the states of the Soviet Union equal, but the reality was completely otherwise . The Soviet Union was declared equal in 1924 .
 His illness set off a struggle of succession infused with personal as well as ideological rivalries . The former president's illness was followed by a struggle for succession .
 Stalin demonstrated forceful independence while remaining loyal to the party, and a capacity for organization . Stalin had demonstrated . independence . Stalin demonstrated . forceful independence .
 Stalin was named to the recently created post of general secretary . The post allows him to appoint allies to various important posts and to repress dissent within the party . The previous month, the Central Committee had named Stalin to the new post .
 He placed his own men on the Central Committee and made party appointments throughout the Soviet state . He placed himself on the party's Central Committee . He also made appointments to the Communist Party .
 Under Stalin, the Soviet Union became even more of a totalitarian regime . The Soviet Union was even more totalitarian than any other state .
 Mann sets up a parallel between a Swiss sanatorium and European civilization . Mann: "The sanatorium is a Swiss hospital, a Swiss institution, a sanatorium" Mann: The sanatorium was created in Switzerland in the early 1900s .
 The Great War swept away the empires of Germany, Austria-Hungary, Turkey, Turkey and even before the end of the war, Russia .
 The Treaty of Versailles was signed in 1919 by a frail new German Republic . It did not resolve national rivalries in Europe . It was signed by the Allies and Germany’s wartime partners .
 Dark clouds of economic turmoil, political instability, and international tension descended on Europe in the two decades that followed the war .
 The specter of revolution frightened Europe’s business and political leaders . Europe's business, political leaders were frightened by the prospect of a revolution .
 Communist parties sprung up in one country after another, even though outside of the Soviet Union . Bolshevism only triumphed briefly in Hungary and Bavaria .
 Europe experienced a brief return to relative prosperity after 1924 . Wall Street Crash of 1929 ended that short period of hope . Europe experienced brief period of relative prosperity and political calm .
 The search for "normalcy" proved elusive, if not impossible, in the 1920s . Warren G Harding called it 'normalcy' in the U.S. Harding called the search for normalcy impossible .
 Vittorio Orlando of Italy, David Lloyd George of Great Britain, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Woodrow Wilson of the U.S. governments .
 Fascist and other extreme nationalist groups carried their violence into the streets . Fascist groups were intolerant of those considered outsiders and committed to aggressive territorial expansion .
 Many members of these organizations were former soldiers who vowed to replace democracies and republics with dictatorships . Many of these groups were former members of the U.S. armed forces .
 In Eastern Europe and the Balkans, parliamentary rule survived only in Czechoslovakia . Parliamentary rule only survived in the Balkans and Eastern Europe .
 Ethnic rivalries within nations, many inflamed by the Treaty of Versailles, intensified social and political conflict . The Treaty was signed in 1918 .
 The post-war treaties could not create new states that satisfied all nationalities . The treaties were unable to find a state that satisfied nationalities.
 The German and Austro-Hungarian Empires had collapsed, rocked by revolutions . Even before Versailles in 1919, the German and Austrian Empires had been rocked by revolts .
 Leaders of the great powers set out to reestablish peace in Europe . Amid social and political turmoil, the leaders of Europe set out for peace .
 The Treaty of Versailles reflected the determination of Great Britain and France to punish Germany for its role in unleashing the conflict .
 Representatives of the new German Republic were forced to sign a clause essentially accepting full blame for the outbreak of the war, and to agree to pay an enormous sum in war reparations to the Allies . The amount and schedule of German payments was established in 1921 .
 Several nationalities, notably Hungarians, were dissatisfied with the establishment of new states constituted out of the old empires . The newly drawn borders often left them on the wrong side of frontiers .
 Nationalists were determined to revise or abrogate the post-war peace settlements . Nationalists in Germany, above all, but also those in some other countries, were determined .
 The end of the war brought political crises in Germany and Hungary . Revolution in Hungary and Germany was the end of WWII .
 In late October 1918, German sailors mutinied at two Baltic naval bases, demanding peace and the kaiser’s abdication . The mutinies were held at two German naval bases in the Baltic .
 In southern Germany, socialists led by Kurt Eisner proclaimed a Bavarian socialist republic in early November . In November, the Bavarian Socialist Republic was proclaimed in southern Germany .
 Prince Max von Baden has called on William II to abdicate . Socialists threatened to leave emergency coalition cabinet if he did not do so . Prince Max calls on Prince William to step down as the new chancellor .
 That same day, a German commission met with Allied representatives to begin drawing up terms for an armistice . The German and Allied teams met to draw up plans for the end of World War II .
 On November 9, 1918, another Social Democrat, Philip Scheidemann, proclaimed the German Republic . The German Republic was founded by a Social Democrat fearing that radical revolutionaries would declare a socialist state .
 On November 11, 1918, Germany signed the armistice with the Allies, ending the war . Germany's victory in the war was the result of a German victory over the Allies .
 From its very beginning, the new German Republic was under siege from left and right . From the very beginning of the new Germany Republic, the country has been under siege . The German Republic is under attack from both sides of the aisle .
 Workers began to set up “workers’ and soldiers’ councils’s councils” and demanded higher wages and better working conditions . Inspired by the success of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, workers set up councils .
 Workers angered army by calling for dismissal of right-wing General Paul von Hindenburg from military high command . Workers also called for the abolition of special military schools for officers that sustained Prussian militarism .
 The right posed a more serious threat to the fledgling republic, a threat the Treaty of Versailles would strengthen . The treaty would strengthen the Republic of France .
 Ominously, a veteran wrote that he believed the Great War of 1914-1918 was “not the end, but the chord that heralds new power.” The Great War was the “chord that heralded new power,” he wrote .
 It is the anvil on which the world will be hammered into new boundaries and new communities . It is anvil of the world's anvil, it is an 'anvil' on which it is hammered into .
 Ebert accepted and, in doing so, made the new republic virtually a prisoner of the army . The new republic was made a prisoner by Ebert .
 Social Democrats and Independent Social Democrats wanted immediate assistance for workers . They wanted the government to organize a militia loyal to the republic . Within the new government, a rift developed between the two parties .
 Independent Socialist Democrats left the governing coalition, weakening the shaky government . Ebert refused to leave the government when he was forced to do so .
 The new minister of defense turned over security operations to the army . The Free Corps continues to encourage the Free Corps .
 Workers in Berlin mounted huge demonstrations against the security police . Workers mounted huge protests against security police in Berlin . Security police have been accused of carrying out the attacks .
 In January 1919, police and soldiers put down an uprising by the Spartacists . The Spartacists were a group of far-left revolutionaries who took their name from the leader of a revolt by Roman slaves .
 The Reichstag elected Ebert president, and he appointed Scheidemann to be the first premier of the Weimar Republic . Ebert was the first Weimar premier of Weimar republic .
 The Reichstag met in Weimar, a small, centrally located town chosen to counter the Prussian aristocratic and militaristic traditions identified with the old imperial capital of Berlin . Weimar was chosen as a counter to the aristocratic, militaristic tradition identified with Berlin .
 Hungary soon became a battleground between the competing ideologies of the post-war period . Hungary also soon became an ideological battleground . Hungary was also a battleground for the rival ideologies .
 Demobilized soldiers and former imperial officials were among those stirring up trouble . Former imperial officials and former soldiers were among the those stirring trouble .
 Hungarian nationalists feared, with good reason, that the victorious Allies would award disputed territories from pre-war Hungary to Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia .
 Count Mihaly Karolyi led an unopposed revolution of liberals and socialists that proclaimed Hungarian independence in 1918 . The revolution was the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 Karolyi favored a republic and initiated a program of land reform by turning over his own estate to peasants . He turned his estate over to peasants in return for his own life .
 Some wealthy landowners prepared to defend their vast estates against land-hungry peasants . Other wealthy landowners, however, prepared to fight back .
 He announced a more extensive land-reform policy, established collective farms and labor camps, and nationalized banks, insurance companies, and large industries . He also set up collective farms .
 Hungary's currency lost 90 percent of its value in the 1930s . Inflation and food rationing soared and the Hungarians were rationed out of food .
 In July 1919, Kun attacked Romania, with the goal of retaking territory with a large Hungarian population . Kun attacked Romania with the help of the Hungarians . Kun was the first to attack Romania .
 His forces invaded Slovakia and proclaimed a brief Soviet republic there . His forces also invaded Slovakia, which he declared a Soviet republic .
 Romanian army drove Kun’s forces back, invading Hungary and marching to Budapest to help overthrow him . The Romanian army then marched to Budapest and helped overthrow Kun's forces .
 Admiral Miklos Horthy seized power in 1920, with the title of regent and head of state . Horthy was a former Habsburg naval officer, with not much to do as Hungary would lose its access to the sea .
 He encouraged attacks against Jews, claiming that they were Bolsheviks . He also ordered the execution of thousands of workers and Communists .
 Hungarian leader declares he wants Hungary to maintain its borders . Backed by the Hungarian upper classes, he declared his determination to see Hungary maintain its previous borders . He declared that he was determined to see the borders of Hungary maintain .
 As they convened in January 1919, the representatives of the “Big Four” agreed that Germany should assume the financial burden of putting Europe back together again . Germany, the nation they believed responsible for the war, should assume responsibility for it .
 The "Big Four" powers went to Versailles with different demands and expectations . Beyond this area of agreement, the ‘Big Four’s powers had different expectations and expectations.
 France demanded a harsh settlement that would eliminate Germany as a potential military threat . France had suffered far greater losses than Britain, Italy, or the U.S.
 The diminutive, elderly, and thoroughly vindictive Clemenceau, a combative loner nicknamed “the Tiger,” realized the dangers of a punitive peace settlement . The combative and vindictive loner was nicknamed ‘the Tiger” Clemencesau
 The quest for security against Germany dominated French foreign relations and weighed heavily upon domestic politics . But he was also mindful that he was mindful that the quest for German security also weighed heavily on French politics .
 Defeated Germany was still potentially a stronger state because of its economic capacity and larger population . Germany's economic capacity was still potential to be stronger because of the size of Germany's population .
 France seemed a country of crippled or traumatized veterans, widows dressed in mourning black, and hundreds of thousands of children left without fathers, for whom pensions would have to be paid . France seemed to seem to be a nation of crippled veterans and traumatized .
 Much of the north and northeast of the country lay in ruins . factories and railways had been destroyed in a region that contained 70 percent of country’s coal . The region was once a major source of coal .
 The state had to borrow money from its wartime allies and from its citizens at high interest rates to pay off those who had purchased war bonds . The state was forced to borrow from allies and citizens to pay for the bonds .
 Clemenceau demanded that Germany’s military arsenal be drastically reduced and that French troops occupy the Rhineland until Germany had paid its reparations to the Allies . Clemencesau also demanded that German forces occupy the region until Germany paid reparations .
 These payments would be based on a rough estimate of damages caused to the victorious powers by the war . The payments are expected to be made in the form of compensation payments .
 Many in France wanted to go further, demanding annexation of the left bank of the Rhine River . Others wanted to create an independent Rhineland state that would serve as a buffer against German aggression .
 The British, represented by the Liberal Lloyd George, came to Versailles with more flexible views than the French . The British were represented by Lloyd George .
 Britain spared almost all the physical devastation suffered by its cross-Channel allies . Britain had been spared all the damage suffered by their cross-channel allies .
 The British suffered horrific loss of life, but they had borne more than their share of the war’s financial costs . Still, the British had suffered horrific losses, and they had suffered more than .
 The British government supported France’s position that Germany had to be contained in the future . The French government thus supported the British government .
 The slogan “Squeeze the German lemon ’til the pip squeaks” was current . The slogan was current.
 Lloyd George concluded it was in Europe’s interest to restore the fledgling German Republic to reasonable economic strength . Lloyd George now concluded that it was . in Europe's interest . However, Lloyd George decided that it . was in the German Republic's interest to regain economic strength in Europe .
 Britian was wary of a possible increase in French power that could upset the future balance of power in Europe . Britian also was wary that a French increase in power could upset balance of Europe .
 Lloyd George reasoned that Germany could emerge as a force for European stability . Lloyd George believed that Germany would emerge as an force for stability in Europe .
 Italy entered the war in part with the goal of generating Italian nationalism, and its allies arguably considered Italy’s war effort to have been lamentable .
 President Wilson found acceptable Italian annexation of the first two . Trieste, which had sizable—although, except in the case of Trieste not majority— populations .
 Italy extended its frontiers to the Brenner Pass and to Trieste . As a result of the action, Italy extended the frontiers .
 Wilson opposed Italian demands for Istria, northern Dalmatia, and the strategically important Adriatic port of Rijeka . Italy omitted from its demands in 1915, but now claimed that it had omitted from their demands .
 Italian nationalists denounced the ‘mutilated peace’ of Saint-Germain that had not allowed annexation of all of the territories the Italian government had anticipated receiving . Italian nationalists denounce the “mutilation peace” of the peace .
 Wilson's position on Italy's territorial demands reflected one of the broad principles he brought with him to Versailles as representative of the United States . Wilson’s position was one of a broad principles this high-minded son of a Presbyterian minister brought .
 President hoped diplomacy would henceforth be carried out through “open covenants of peace,” not secret treaties . He held secret treaties responsible for the Great War . The U.S. president hoped that diplomacy would now carry out through open covenants .
 Wilson believed that if the victorious powers applied “the principle of justice to all peoples and nationalities . . Whether they he strong or weak,” Europe would enter an era of enduring stability, Wilson said . Wilson believed if the victors applied ‘the principle . to all
 The U.S. president’s main concern at Versailles was with the creation of the League of Nations, which began in 1920, to arbitrate subsequent international disputes .
 Wilson’s opinion, the Great War had been fought largely over the competing claims of national groups, thus it was not right to separate Rhineland Germans from Germany . Wilson's opinion, in his opinion, was that the war should not be fought over national groups .
 Wilson believed that the diplomatic concept of a “balance of power” by which the predominant strength of one power was balanced by alliances between several other powers, was unequal to the task of maintaining peace . Wilson believed the outbreak of the Great War had demonstrated that the idea of a balance
 Wilson wanted the United States to assume an international role . Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan were permanent members of the League of Nation’s Council . Wilson wanted to join Great Britain and France as permanent members .
 The League would stand for collective security against any power that would threaten the peace, says the League . League would "stand for collective peace" against any threat to the peace . The League is based in the United States and Canada .
 Wilson’s idealism contrasted with the determined realism of Lloyd George and Clemenceau . Wilson's idealism contrasts with the realism of Clemencyau .
 Territories lost by Germany, Bulgaria, Austria-Hungary, and Russia as a result of the treaties ending the Great War . Territorial Settlements after World War I territories lost .
 Lloyd George and Clemenceau, unlike Wilson, enjoyed the full support of their constituents . Lloyd George enjoyed the support of his constituents, according to the historian .
 Many Germans were outraged in April 1919 when they learned of the treaty that Germany had to accept . Germany was forced to accept the treaty . The treaty was signed in 1919 .
 The Allies seemed to be punishing the new German Republic for the acts of the old imperial regime, which arguably had, with Austria-Hungary, done more to start the war than the other powers .
 The next Social Democratic government signed it a week later, on June 28, 1919, but only after the Allies had threatened to invade Germany . It was signed by the next government a week after it was signed .
 French troops would occupy the parts of Germany that stood on the left, or western, bank of the Rhine River . They would occupy for fifteen years a strategically critical strip of land along its right bank . French troops occupied the left and right banks of Germany .
 In the east, Germany lost territory to Poland, which became independent for the first time since 1795 . Poland became independent in 1795, becoming the first country to become independent since 1796 .
 Poles had been forced to fight in the armies of the German, Austro-Hungarian, and Russian Empires during the war . The Poles were pitted against each other in the battle .
 During the war, both Russia and Germany had promised Poland independence . Poland was promised independence by both countries .
 Central Powers reestablished the Polish kingdom in November 1916 . Central Powers had reestablished Polish kingdom as a potential buffer against Russia .
 In September 1917 they appointed a ‘Regency Council’ with no real power but with the goal of representing Polish Society, with an eye toward Polish autonomy, in the quest for Polish support . The council was appointed in September 1917 .
 Polish nationalists campaigned for support for Polish independence in Britain, France, and the U.S. In the meantime, Polish nationalists fought for independence in France and the United States .
 Areas Of French And German Disputes, 1920s Border areas, including the Rhineland and the Saar Basin, were occupied by Allied troops or were part of a demilitarized zone after the Great War .
 One of Wilson’s Fourteen Points was an independent Poland . In January 1918, one of Wilson's Fourteen points was the independence of Poland .
 The Treaty of Versailles awarded Poland much of Pomerania, constituting what the Germans would call the “Polish Corridor” The Corridor was the "Polish corridor” that led to the Baltic Sea . It divided East Prussia, which remained German, from
 The port city of Danzig became a free city under the protection of the League of Nations . Danzig was a German port city under protection from the League . The city became a symbol of freedom in the wake of World War II .
 Poland’s new frontiers were settled in 1921 and accepted by the League of Nations two years later . Poland was the last nation to settle over its borders in the early 1920s .
 The German navy, now blockaded by the British fleet, would be limited to twelve warships, with no submarines . No submarines would be allowed into the German navy .
 The Weimar Republic would be required to turn over to the Allies much of its merchant fleet and part of its fishing fleet and railroad stocks . Among other payments would be the surrender of its shipping and fishing fleets .
 The German Baltic shipyards were to build ships at no cost to the Allies . The Allies did not pay any of the cost of building the ships .
 Each year, Germany was to give the Allies more than one-fourth of its extracted coal as compensation . Germany was also to give more than a fourth of its coal extracted as further compensation .
 German industrialists opposed new taxes on capital or business . Tax revenues were low because the economy was so weak, and powerful industrialists oppose new taxes .
 A German woman using worthless paper money to light her stove during the runaway inflation of 1923 . Government photo shows her using worthless currency to light the stove .
 The English economist John Maynard Keynes left the British delegation to Versailles in protest of what seemed to be the draconian treatment afforded Germany . Keynes was protesting the treatment of Germany by the French .
 In particular he denounced reparations payments in his book The Economic Consequences of the Peace . He prophesied accurately the failure of the Versailles settlement .
 The Allies counted on German payments to help them remedy their own daunting economic problems . The Allies relied heavily on the German money to help with their own economic woes .
 The promise of German reparations enabled the British and French governments to accede to conservative demands that taxes not be raised or levies imposed on capital .
 Germany received more in loans from the other powers than it ever returned in reparations . Germany paid only a small portion of the reparations, but received more than it returned in loans than it did in reparation .
 Germany received three times as much in loans from the Allies than it paid out . Germany paid out three times more in loans than it actually received in return for the loans .
 Reparations did not ruin the German economy, but their psychological impact in Germany damaged the very republic the Allies wanted to stabilize . Reparations didn't ruin Germany's economy but damaged the nation's very republic .
 The bitter resentment harbored by German right-wing parties toward reparations compromised the Weimar Republic's ability to survive . Right-wingers had bitter resentment toward the reparations . Reparations contributed to the downfall of Weimar .
 France wanted the League of Nations to enforce the Treaty of Versailles and to ensure German payment of reparations . France also wanted to ensure Germany paid reparations in the Treaty .
 Without an army, the League had no way of enforcing its decisions against member states . The League had to rely on its army to enforce its principles or decisions .
 President Wilson returned to the United States to fight for Senate ratification of the treaty . Wilson spent six months at Versailles . Wilson fought for ratification of treaty .
 Wilson’s Republican opponents had control of the Senate in 1918 . But the elections of November 1918 had given Wilson's Republican opponents control of Senate .
 A majority of senators opposed U.S. membership in the League of Nations . They feared it would commit the nation to entanglements in Europe . The treaty was ratified in 1945 .
 Some senators believed the treaty to be too harsh on Germany, insufficiently generous to Italy, and irrelevant to Irish demands for independence from Britain .
 The United States refused to participate in the various international organizations set up to enforce the treaty and to air economic and security concerns .
 In November 1919, the United States Senate refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles . The treaty was signed in 1919, but the U.S. Senate refused it .
 The absence of both the United States and the Soviet Union from the League doomed it to failure . Both the U.S. and Soviet Union failed to join the League .
 Even among the victorious powers, the treaty generated some apprehension . The treaty created some apprehension among the victors .
 Keynes recalled, “Paris was a nightmare, and every one there was morbid.” Keynes said . Keynes recalled that Paris was a “nightmare’s nightmare”
 Bulgaria lost territory on the Aegean coast, ceded to Greece by virtue of the Treaty of Neuilly . Ceded to Romania and parts of Thrace that had been won in the Balkan Wars . Bulgaria allied in the war with Germany and Austria-Hungary .
 Vienna was reduced to being the oversized capital of a small country, Austria . The Treaty of SaintGermain reduced Vienna to the capital of Austria . Vienna is now the largest city in the world .
 By the Treaty of Trianon, Hungary lost two-thirds of its territory, 60 percent of its total population, and 25 percent of the ethnic Hungarians . Hungary lost 60% of its population, 60% its population and 25% its ethnic Hungarian .
 Romania received more Hungarian territory than was left to Hungary . One-third of Romania's population now consisted of Hungarians, Germans, Ukrainians, and Jews . Romania was one of the last countries to leave Hungary .
 The treaty left 3. million Hungarians living beyond the borders of Hungary, hardly Wilsonianism in action . The treaty was signed in 1918, leaving 3.6 million living in Hungary .
 16 percent of Bulgaria's population now lives outside of Bulgaria . 1 million Bulgarians now live in Bulgaria . 16 percent now live abroad .
 The Treaty of Sevres dismembered the Turkish Ottoman Empire . The treaty was the most harsh of the treaties with Germany’s wartime allies .
 Britain, France, Italy, Greece, and Greece all coveted parts of the old Ottoman Empire that had stretched through much of the Middle East . The Ottoman Empire was ruled by the British, French, Italian, and French .
 Italian troops occupied Turkish territory even as the peace conference was proceeding . Greek forces moved into Smyrna and into Thrace . Italian troops moved into Turkish territory .
 Mustafa Kemal Pasha —known as Atatiirk —organized armed resistance against the foreign incursions . Mustafa Pasha organized armed resistance to the foreign invasions .
 Turkish forces pushed Greek units out of Smyrna in 1922 and threatened a neutral zone occupied by British troops . Turkish forces also pushed Greek forces out of the neutral zone in 1922 .
 When the British government prepared to intervene, an exchange of populations was arranged . The British government was prepared to take control of the population .
 Treaty of Lausanne of 1923 recognized Turkey’s independence . Treaty ended European role in administering the country's international debts . Treaty also recognized Turkey's independence from the European Union .
 Turkey was left with a little territory on the European side of the Bosporus, as well as the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles strait . Turkey was also declared open to all nations in the World War II .
 Greece had to withdraw from the Anatolian peninsula, and at least 1 million Greek refugees moved from Turkey to Greece . Greece withdrew from Turkey after it was forced to withdraw .
 Turks now comprise about 1 percent of the population of Greece . Only about 3,000 Greeks remained in Turkey in a population of 70 million people . Turks now comprised about 1 per cent of Greece's population .
 The Kurds, an ethnic minority within Turkey and Iraq, were still without an independent state . The Kurds are still without a state .
 Atatiirk established his capital at Ankara in the interior of the Anatolian peninsula . He became president of the Republic of Turkey, establishing his capital in Ankara .
 President Wilson’s espousal of ethnicity as the chief determinant of national boundaries had unleashed hope among almost all the Eastern European peoples for independent states based on ethnic identities . President Wilson had encouraged the creation of independent states .
 The Treaty of Versailles accentuated the role of nationalism as a factor for political instability in Europe after the Great War .
 The failure of the peacemakers at Versailles to address the demands of peoples colonized by the European powers left a legacy of mistrust . At the same time, the failure to address demands of the . peoples colonizing by the . European powers has left a . legacy of distrust
 The Treaty of Versailles acknowledged the existence of ‘successor’ states out of the ruins of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the defunct Russian Empire . Germany and Russia had been defeated by the Austra-Hungarians .
 The Treaty of Versailles in theory followed the principle of nationalism, that ethnicity should be the chief determinant of national boundaries, which had helped cause the Great War . The creation of these new states by the treaty in theory was based on the idea of nationalism . The treaty of Vers
 In the north Finland finally gained its independence after having been for centuries subject to Swedish and, since the beginning of the nineteenth century, Russian rule .
 Yugoslavia in the Balkans and Czechoslovakia and Poland in Central Europe . The largest successor states were Yugoslavia in Yugoslavia and Czechsoslovakia in the Czech Republic .
 The creation of smaller national states added to the number of independent states in Europe . Smaller national states were largely determined by ethnicity .
 This number had decreased since 1500 as absolute monarchies had expanded their territories . This number decreased with German and Italian unification in the nineteenth century .
 In 1914, there had been fourteen currencies in Europe; in 1919, there were twenty-seven . In 1914 there were fourteen currencies . In 1919 there were twenty-seven currencies in Europe .
 The signatories at Versailles also had the strategic containment of communism in mind when they recognized the existence of the new nationstates as buffers . Clemenceau called a “cordon sanitaire” that would help contain the spread of Bolshevism from the Soviet Union
 The Allies allowed German armies to remain inside Russia, Ukraine, and Poland to prevent the Red Army from carrying the Russian Revolution into Central Europe . After the armistice, the Allies allowed the Germans to remain in Russia and Ukraine .
 German troops held railway lines in the Baltic states in order to thwart any attempted Bolshevik takeover there . The Baltic states were occupied by the Bolsheviks .
 Three nations of Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia formed the Little Entente by signing alliances in 1920 and 1921 . Seeking collective security against Hungary, which demanded revision of the Treaty of Versailles in order to win back territory lost .
 All three states depended on a series of defensive alliances that each had signed with France . Czechoslovakia in 1924, Romania in 1926, and Yugoslavia the following year . Yugoslavia in 1926 and Yugoslavia in 1927 signed defensive alliances with France.
 The French government viewed such alliances with Eastern European states as a means of countering a revival of German power, as well as a check on the Soviet Union . France viewed the alliance as a way of countering German power .
 In 1934, Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, Greece and Turkey signed a Balkan Entente . The Entente was intended to counter any revisionist territorial claims by Bulgaria . Romania and Yugoslavia signed an agreement in 1934 .
 Allies applied Wilson’s idealized formula of “one people, one nation” unequally when it came to those states that had fought against them in the war . The Allies applied the formula unequally to states that fought for the Allies .
 The ‘Polish Corridor’ dividing East Prussia from the rest of Germany contained a sizable—but not majority—German population . The “Polish corridor’s” population was a sizable, but not majority, German population .
 In parts of Austria, where German-speaking majorities might have wanted to join Germany, the Allies disallowed plebiscites . The Allies specifically disallowed the vote in parts of the country .
 Yugoslavia was the most ambitious attempt to resolve the national question through the creation of a multinational state . Yugoslavia included part of the old Habsburg Balkan domains as well as the kingdoms of Serbia and Montenegro . Yugoslavia was called the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes until
 Serb government and a Yugoslav Committee made up of Croat and Slovene leaders in exile had agreed to form a new South Slav state when the war was concluded in 1917 . After complicated negotiations in 1917, the Serbs government and the Committee agreed to a new state .
 They set up a provisional government even before an armistice had been signed . The government was set up by the British government before the end of World War One .
 The new parliamentary monarchy would include Serbia, Montenegro, Croatia, Croatia and Slovenia . Bosnia-Herzegovina and the smaller territory of Kosovo, two regions in which majority of the population converted to Islam during centuries of Turkish rule .
 Yugoslavia also absorbed part of Macedonia, which was populated by Bulgarians, Greeks, and Macedonians . Part of Macedonia was also part of Yugoslavia .
 From its beginning, Yugoslavia was caught in a conflict between the "Greater Serb’s" vision of Yugoslavia, in which Serbia would dominate, and a federalist structure in which all nationalities and religions would play equal, or at least proportional, roles .
 Serbs, who are Orthodox Christians, were the largest ethnic group in Yugoslavia . They still only made up 43 percent of the total Yugoslav population . Catholic Croats accounting for about 23 percent . Serbs were the biggest ethnic group .
 Middle-class Serbs held almost all of the key administrative, judicial, and military positions . Serbs hold almost all the key positions in the Serb state .
 Concentrations of Serbs lived in Croatia, and Croats in Serbia, further complicating the rivalry between the two major peoples of the new state . Serbs spoke essentially the same language, although the Serbs use the Cyrillic alphabet .
 Other major ethnic groups within Yugoslavia included Hungarians, Romanians, Bulgarians, Greeks, Germans, and gypsies .
 League of Nations signed so-called national minority treaties with Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia . They agreed in principle to assure the protection of ethnic minorities . The treaties were signed in 1919 .
 Poland included about 1. million Belorussians and 4 million Ukrainians, who, unlike the Catholic Poles, were largely Orthodox Christians . For example, Poland included . about 1 million Belorsussians .
 1 million Germans, overwhelmingly Protestant, now live in Poland . About 1 million people now live there .
 In 1916, a National Council, made up of both Czechs and Slovaks, became a provisional government . The council became a government of both the Czech and Slovak people .
 Toma§ Masaryk became the president of the new Czechoslovakia in 1918 . He had spent the war years making contacts in London in the hope of advancing the cause of an independent state in the Czech Republic .
 Czechs and Slovaks together made up only 65 percent of the population of the new country . Czechs, Slovaks and Czechs made up just 65% of the Czech-Sludak population . Slovaks made up 65% in the new nation .
 Three million Germans living in the Sudetenland found themselves included within the borders of Czechoslovakia . 750,000 Hungarians were included in the borders, as did three million Germans .
 Slovaks complained that promises of administrative and cultural autonomy within the Czechoslovak state were never implemented . Slovaks also complained of promises of administrative and cultural autonomy from Czechoslovakia .
 Facing similar economic, social, and political tensions, Poland became a dictatorship . Poland faced similar economic and social tensions in the 1930s and 1940s .
 He commanded the Polish army that defeated in August 1920 the Soviet force that had reached the suburbs of Warsaw . The Polish army was defeated by the Soviet forces in August .
 Pilsudski pursued the policy of building a Federation of Poland and Ukraine, as well as Belarus and the Baltic states . The region had been conquered by the Russian Empire and would form a bloc of nations .
 No rail links between Warsaw and other major cities survived the war . Tracks from Germany and Austria simply stopped at the Polish border at the border .
 The new Polish government faced the challenge of unifying the three parts of the country that had been part of three different empires . Poland was part of the Polish Empire, but was ruled by three separate empires .
 Deep divisions endured between nobles and peasants, who demanded land reform, and peasants who demanded reform .
 In the 1922 parliament, there were eighteen different political parties . In 1922 parliament there were 18 different parties in parliament .
 As no party ever enjoyed a solid parliamentary majority, governments fell on an average of almost two a year . No party ever had a majority of parliamentary majorities .
 Many peasants did receive land after World War I, although the process went increasingly slowly . Many peasants received land after the war but the process was slow to reach them .
 Pilsudski refused to stand for election for president in 1922 on the grounds that the constitution would not grant him sufficient executive authority . He refused to run for president because of his lack of authority .
 Although not by instinct a man of the right, he saw himself above political parties . He saw himself as a 'man of the left' and 'above political parties'
 He allied with leading conservatives and criticized the parliamentary regime . He called for a “moral regeneration” of Polish life . However, he allied with conservatives and called for the parliamentary reform .
 In 1926, Pilsudski, backed by the army and supported by the Socialists, overthrew Poland’s parliamentary government . In 1926 the army overthrew the parliamentary government in a coup d'decision .
 The Polish president imposed authoritarian rule after saying he would have to wait to see if Poland could be governed “without a whip” Political parties in principle continued to function and the press was relatively free .
 In 1930 Pilsudski arrested leaders of a center-left opposition group who demanded his resignation and the restoration of parliamentary government . A new constitution followed in 1935, providing for stronger executive authority .
 After Pilsudski’s death a month after the promulgation of the constitution, authority passed to a group of army officers .
 The post-war period brought considerable instability to Greece and the Balkans . Post-World War II was a period of instability in the Balkans, especially in Greece .
 King Alexander died in 1920, after being bitten by his pet monkey . Greece had only come into the war in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, and Russia .
 When parliament deposed his successor, Greek political life lurched into uncertainty accentuated by the arrival of 1. million Greeks expelled from Turkey and Bulgaria . Greece's political life has been plunged into uncertainty .
 Albania is an isolated Muslim state on the coast of the Adriatic Sea . Moderate reformers battled proponents of the old ways against a backdrop of Italian territorial claims and bullying .
 Harvard-educated Ahmed Zogu, fearing for his life, fled to Yugoslavia in 1924 . The Prime Minister fled to the country fearing his life .
 He signed the Treaty of Neuilly to try to prevent Macedonian nationalists from using Macedonian territory to organize attacks inside Greece . The treaty was signed in 1883 .
 Army officers helped engineer a coup d’etat in 1923, with the support of the king . The coup d'etat took place in 1923 with the help of the army .
 Stamboliski fell into the hands of Macedonian nationalists who cut off his right arm, which had signed the Treaty of Neuilly, then stabbed him sixty times, decapitating him for good measure .
 Peace treaties failed to address the rights of people living in the colonies of the European powers . People living in colonies of European powers were not included in the treaties . Colonial and national questions remain unanswered .
 The Allies refused to allow Ho Chi Minh to read a petition that asked that the Rights of Man and Citizen be applied to the French colonies . The petition was read by a young Vietnamese, who was in the French colony at the time of the war .
 Only the representatives of Zionist groups and their anti-Zionist Jewish rivals ever made it into the conference halls . Only those who wanted the creation of a Jewish national state in Palestine never made it .
 Women’s groups, too, in vain sent representatives who hoped to be heard at Versailles . Women's groups also sent representatives to the palace .
 Britain refused to accept President Wilson’s plan that the League of Nations or some other international board arbitrate the future of colonies . Britain, still the world's largest colonial power, is still the biggest colonial power .
 The British government refused to recognize the right of self-determination . The UK refused to acknowledge the right to selfdetermination .
 War had altered relationship between Britain and its colonies, as well as that between France and its empire . Still, the war had altered the relationship between the two countries .
 The dramatic contraction of world trade during the postwar era, and above all during the Great Depression that began in 1929 (see Chapter 25) provided impetus to emerging independence movements .
 Imperial governments have long proclaimed that empire brought economic benefits to colonial peoples . Imperial governments had long claimed that empire was beneficial to colonial people . But the British Empire has been in decline for decades .
 The Dominions (Britain’s original ‘settlement colonies’ of Canada, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand) had borne a great financial and material burden in the Great War .
 Each country had signed the Treaty of Versailles, and had become a member of the League of Nations . While not fully independent, each had a government responsible to its own citizens . Each had signed a treaty signed by a delegation .
 In this union of Britain and the Dominions, each state would be independent and not subordinate to Britain but united by common allegiance to the crown . The union would see the UK and Dominions join forces together in a union .
 The powers created the ‘mandate system’ to deal with Germany’s colonies . Germany's colonies were created in the early 1900s .
 The colonies were placed under the nominal authority of the League of Nations but were actually administered by Allied powers . Allied powers administered the colonies .
 In Palestine, both Arabs and Jews had reason to be disappointed by the settlement . The settlement was the largest settlement settlement in the region .
 British and French governments had secretly drawn up plans to divide the Middle East into two spheres of influence . A year later, the British government planned to split the region into two zones of influence.
 Britain established mandates over Trans-Jordan (which would later become Jordan) and Iraq (which became nominally independent in 1932) each was ruled by a viceroy responsible to the colonial office in London .
 Britain maintained informal control over Egypt through the sultan and Egyptian ministers and the Suez Canal even after nominal Egyptian independence in 1922 . Britain kept informal control of Egypt through sultan, Egyptian ministers .
 French also established a mandate over Lebanon and Syria, where troops put down a revolt in 19251927 . Troops put down an uprising in Syria in 1925 .
 The British government could no longer put aside the challenge of the Irish movement for independence . But the British government was forced to accept the challenge, the government said .
 In a mood of mounting crisis, British Liberals want to begin negotiations as soon as possible .
 In 1918 elections to the House of Commons, Irish voters elected a majority of members of Sinn Fein . Sinn Fein is the Irish Republican political organization . The election was held in 1918 in Ireland .
 Sinn Fein members refused to take their seats in Parliament and then unilaterally declared a republic . The republic was declared by Sinn Fein after members of the party refused to sit in Parliament .
 Parliament finally passed the Government of Ireland Act in 1920 . The Act divided Ireland into two districts . It was passed by Parliament in 1922 .
 The Catholic district in the south, most of the island, was to become a crown colony . Most of the province's Catholic district was to be to become the crown colony of the south .
 Most Catholic Irish, however, wanted nothing less than complete independence . Most of the Irish wanted an independent state of Ireland .
 The British government kept about 50,000 troops and 10,000 police in Ireland . The “Black and Tans’s” special police force terrorized the Irish population supporting the Irish Republicans .
 More than a thousand people were killed in fighting during 1921, half of whom were British policemen or soldiers ambushed by the Irish Republican Army .
 Continuing sporadic sectarian violence in Ulster proved that tensions between the Protestant majority and Catholic minority, which did not accept British rule, would not subside .
 The Great War accentuated other nationalist movements for independence in Scotland .
 Total war had brought the mobilization of men and resources from the colonies . Total war was brought in by the end of the war, with the help of the British .
 In Egypt, following the arrest of an Egyptian nationalist, more than a thousand people were killed in the repression that followed an uprising . The repression followed the death of more than 1,000 people following an uprising in Egypt .
 In India, the British viewed as the key to sustaining the Empire (providing a vast reservoir of soldiers for the army), a growing Indian national movement developed . The British viewed the movement as an attempt to maintain the Empire .
 Mahatma Gandhi merged Hindu religion and culture with peaceful political resistance . Gandhi merged religion and politics with peaceful resistance .
 Gandhi adapted Western-style propaganda techniques to the Indian struggle . Gandhi's propaganda techniques were adapted to India's struggle . He was inspired by Gandhi's success in India .
 Unlike the Indian National Congress, Gandhi and his followers sought outright independence for India . Unlike the 1880s, Gandhi sought greater autonomy for India within the British Empire .
 Following riots in 1919, Indians held a protest in Amritsar in Punjab against the Rowlatt Acts, which allowed the government to forgo juries in political trials . Following riots, Indians protested against the acts in 1919 .
 Like the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, the incident exacerbated the mutual suspicion and mistrust that had existed between the Indians and British for decades . The incident was the first of its kind in India and the second in 1857 .
 France confronted and repressed revolutionary nationalist move ments in its colonies of Indochina, Tunisia, Morocco, Morocco and Madagascar . France did moderate groups asking only for the extension ol political rights .
 During and following World War I most of the nationalist movements in the French colonies sought reforrr from within the colonial framework . Not outright independence through revolution through revolution, not outright independence . During and after WWI most of these movements sought reforsrr .
 Japan strengthened its position as the only Asian great power and grow ing empire . The country's first great power is now the world's only Asian empire .
 Japanese armies already taking advantage of the turmoi that followed the Russian Revolution to grab land from the old Russiar Empire in Asia .
 When the Allies agreed to Japanese claims, demonstrations erupted in China . Demonstrations and riots erupted when the Allies publicly agreed to Japan's claims .
 May 4 is the day of the first major demonstrations in Beijing against the Treaty of Versailles . May 4 accentuated the development of Chinese nationalism and resentment against foreign domination .
 The United States agreed to join the Washington treaties of 1921-1922 . The U.S. was eager to protect its interests in Asia and wary of alliance between Japan and Britain .
 France, Russia and China have been involved in the Middle East for decades . France and the other powers called for ‘consultations’ between the three powers, as well as France, when events in Asia required them .
 A subsequent Nine-Power Treaty that included Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Italy, as well as China, guaranteed China’s independence and territorial integrity . The treaty was a result of a treaty signed by Belgium and the Netherlands .
 Europeans thrilled to quest for record speeds or landmark travel by air and automobile . Europeans thrilled with quest for world record speeds . Europeans also thrilled with quests for record speed .
 They gathered around radios, lined up to attend movies, dressed in more casual clothing styles than ever before . Crowded cabarets and clubs, and danced late into the night .
 The two decades following the Great War were marked by tremendous economic and social instability . However, the two decades after the war were above all marked by enormous social and economic instability .
 The continent was wracked by inflation and unemployment, factors that exacerbated international tensions and rivalries and poisoned domestic political life . Inflation and unemployment were factors that contributed to international tensions .
 In Western Europe, after the long, bloody war finally ended and with the Russian Revolution fresh in mind, workers put forward demands for better living conditions . Workers (and some women’s groups as well) put forward .
 Economic and social elites were determined to overcome the challenge to their power launched by organized labor and the political parties of the left . At the same time, economic and social . elites were trying to overcome . the challenge .
 The parties of the political left want states to increase the services they provide their citizens . But one of the results of the long ordeal of a war that had necessitated the mobilization of virtually all of the economic resources of the combatant powers was a growing determination .
 The origins of the welfare state may in part be traced to the immediate post-war period . The welfare state was created in the aftermath of World War II .
 The staggering economic disruption caused by the war contributed to the international disorder that ensued at its end . Social turmoil was the result of the World War II .
 Soaring inflation and unemployment destabilized European political life . Soaring unemployment and inflation destabilized Europe's political life.
 Manufacturing and agricultural productivity fell dramatically during the conflict in Afghanistan . Manufacturing and agriculture productivity fell during the war .
 Only countries far from the battlefields experienced economic growth, such as the United States, Canada, India, and Australia . Only countries such as Canada, Australia, India and Canada experienced growth .
 High inflation and unemployment when the war ended meant high unemployment and high inflation . But they, too, could not escape high inflation or unemployment .
 European states had borrowed vast sums of money to pay for the war; governments now began to print money to repay it back . European states began printing money in response to the debt they had borrowed .
 Prices were three times higher in 1920 in Britain than before the war, five times in Germany and 14,000 times in Austria . Prices were also three times more in Germany than before war, and 23,000 more in Hungary . Austria and Hungary also saw a spike in prices in 1920
 British press carried stories about well-placed entrepreneurs who had amassed fortunes selling war materials to the government . Living it up while others died for their country and everyone else tightened their belts .
 French steel magnates and German arms producers emerged from the war with huge profits . The war was a major source of profits for many of the war's biggest manufacturers .
 These were enhanced by cartel arrangements within their industries that allowed them to monopolize production and set prices . This was enhanced by cartels in their industries, allowing them to set prices, experts say .
 War production had benefited large companies more than small ones, as in Germany . War Raw Materials Corporations provided essential materials to large enterprises .
 Farben was formed in Germany by joining together a number of smaller firms . Farben had been formed by joining up with smaller German firms .
 Industrialists enjoyed greater prestige and political influence than ever before . Industrialists had greater prestige, political influence before the war .
 Fewer people now embraced the old classic liberal principle of laissezfaire . Governments playing the leading role in establishing economic priorities, allocating resources, and recruiting labor during the war .
 They hoped that corporate entities could be established in each major industry to coordinate production, ending competition between companies . They hoped to establish corporate entities that coordinate production .
 Such cartel arrangements might reduce or even eliminate social tensions inherent in capitalist economies by forging an organized alliance of interests, including those of the state, big business, and labor . The cartel arrangement might well reduce or eliminate the social and political tensions inherent .
 Europe’s business elite greeted the post-war era with some anxiety . However, Europe's business elite welcomed the new era of prosperity .
 For more than a half century, European economic elites had worked to preserve their power against the mounting challenge of organized labor and the political parties of the left . The European economic elite had worked hard to preserve power against organized labor .
 They did so by trying to maintain the elite character of higher education, government intervention in factory conditions, or limiting the right to strike . They also sought to maintain high tariff barriers at the expense of consumers .
 People of means wanted to keep their countries from adopting universal male suffrage or becoming democracies . Above all, many people of means had wanted to stop their countries becoming democracies, they said .
 The role of parliamentary bodies had expanded in every Western country during the last decades before the war . Universal male suffrage had come to France, Italy, Belgium, Norway, Sweden and even imperial Germany .
 Women's movements were one of the forces for democratization that gained considerably during the war . Women’s movements were a force for democracy in America .
 Women's groups demanded recognition for their wartime contributions . They had taken the place of conscripts in factories and fields . Women’s groups now demanded recognition .
 After the war, women won the right to vote in Germany, Sweden, and several other countries in Western Europe . Women won the vote in the newly created Eastern European states of Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Hungary .
 Women voted for the first time in the British elections of December 1918 . The first woman was elected to the House of Commons soon after . Women were allowed to vote in the first British election in 1918 .
 Sex Disqualification Act of 1919 opened the way for women to enter professions from which they had previously been excluded . The act opened the door to women entering professions previously excluded from the professions .
 Women who had taken men’s jobs during the war gradually lost or abandoned their employment . Many returned to domestic service, many returning to men's work .
 During the 1920s, the percentage of British working women declined for the first time in many decades . The percentage of working women in Britain declined for first time since the 1930s .
 In France, the General Confederation of Labor reached 2 million members in 1920 . The proportion of unionized workers in France remained small when compared to the proportion in Britain .
 In Italy, more than 3 million workers joined unions in the first two years of peace . In Italy's first two decades of peace, 3 million people joined unions .
 Unions mounted massive campaigns to make the economy more democratic . The goal that was more revolutionary than bread-and-butter issues like hours, wages, and working conditions .
 Some Britons began to think that their nation, unlike its continental rivals, might now be vulnerable to an uprising by dissatisfied workers influenced by the Bolsheviks .
 In Glasgow, workers demanding a forty-hour workweek raised the Communist red flag on the town hall . In Glasgow workers demanded a 40-hour week raise the Communist flag .
 If anything, the mobilization of workers in defense of their interests contributed to conservative victories in the post-war elections . Workers mobilized to defend their interests in the interests of the U.S. Workers mobilized in the 1930s and '40s,’s War War .
 Business interests helped bring conservatives to power in Germany, Italy, and France in post-war elections . The influence of business interests also helped bring Conservatives to power .
 The French Employers Association printed thousands of posters showing a Bolshevik with a blood-stained knife between his teeth . Thousands of posters were printed showing a bloody Bolshevik .
 The “National Block” drew upon a wave of patriotism following the victory of the blue-clad French soldiers, in 1919 . In 1919, the National Block brought a strongly nationalist majority to the “horizon blue” Chamber of Deputies .
 Before the war, many French conservatives dreamed of a monarchical restoration or the overthrow of the republic by a military man . Many French conservatives now supported the republic, as long as it was a conservative republic .
 Union efforts failed to obtain nationalization of key industries, such as French railroads, or German and British coal mines . Union efforts to nationalize key industries failed to get nationalization .
 Factory councils, which workers hoped would meet with employers to set production targets, wages, and conditions, had been eliminated in Germany and Italy . Factory councils never got off the ground in France, and were quickly banned in Italy .
 In Britain, an attempt to call a general strike, organized by the “triple alliance” of railway workers, miners, and dockworkers, fizzled completely on April 15, 1921, “Black Friday” for British workers .
 Employers still called the shots with the notable exception of those in the Soviet Union, where the state exercised increasing control . Employers were still called by the state in the USSR .
 The German Social Democrats and the socialist parties of France, Italy, and Belgium had rallied to the war effort of their respective countries . Despite opposition to what they saw as a war between capitalists, they rallied behind the war .
 The unexpected victory of the Bolsheviks in Russia suggested to some that socialists could come to power through a tightly organized, hierarchical party structure . The Bolsheviks' unexpected victory in Russia in 1918 suggested that a tightly-organized party structure would be needed .
 A Jew born into comfortable circumstances in Paris, Blum was a literary critic and intellectual . Blum took a law degree and became a civil servant . He was a lawyer and intellectual who became a public servant .
 Blum was an idealist for whom socialism followed philosophically from what he considered the humanism of the French Revolution . Like his hero Jean Jaures, the French socialist leader was assassinated in 1914 on the eve of the war, he was idealist .
 Blum remained convinced that socialism would be achieved through the electoral process . Blum was convinced that the process would be used to achieve socialism .
 For Communists, the economic malaise of the 1920s seemed proof that capitalism’s defeat was near . Communists believed capitalism was about to be on the wane of capitalism .
 In 1922, on orders from Moscow, the party purged intellectuals from its membership . The party was purged from its members in 1922, but it has since survived .
 Communist-dominated municipalities provided social services, such as unemployment relief, as well as light and drinking water for residents living in hastily constructed, insalubrious dwellings . Communist- dominated municipalities .
 All three parties depended, to a large extent, on the support of the reformist labor movements in their respective countries . All parties depended on their support of reformists labor movements .
 In some ways, unions had become interest groups like any other, bargaining with governments and employers . Unions are now an interest group in bargaining with government and employers, union leaders say .
 Communist critics of union reformism may have been correct when they warned that reformism served to integrate workers into the structure of the capitalist state . To this extent, the Communist critics were correct .
 The emerging outlines of the welfare state in the 1920s reflected the pressure of the parties of the left and of trade unions . The welfare state was the result of pressure from the parties and unions to build up the state .
 Communist parties of Europe espoused, at least in principle, working-class revolution . Most union members demanded that states provide minimum protection for workers . Communists and most union members were socialists .
 Scandinavia, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway evolved into social democracies, implementing pathbreaking social services . Scandinavia became social democracies in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The socialist municipal government of Vienna constructed an attractive working-class apartment complex . The complex provided communal facilities such as laundries, bathhouses and kindergartens .
 This eliminated some slum overcrowding and provided many working-class families with centralized heating and bathrooms . It also provided many families with central heating and bathroom facilities .
 Within old city limits, ‘council’ flats paid for by town councils provided more modest lodgings for some of the poorest workers . ‘Council flats’ were paid by councils to provide accommodation for the poorest .
 In 1920, the British government expanded unemployment insurance coverage to include most industrial workers . In 1925, Parliament granted pensions to war widows and orphans, major steps in the emergence of the British welfare state .
 In 1930, the Chamber of Deputies in France provided insurance for 10 million workers . In France, the chamber of deputies in 1930 provided insurance to 10 million .
 The Weimar Republic sought to steer an even course between threats from the left and the right . The economic crisis that followed the war and the political instability it helped engender were nowhere clearer than in Germany .
 Britain and France, states with established parliamentary governments, the subsequent division between left and right was also bitter .
 Civil strife in which the Weimar Republic made its start influenced its constitution . The constitution was approved by the Reichstag in July 1919 . It was the first constitution to be approved of the republic .
 The constitution left the German president, who was to be popularly elected, with considerable powers . The constitution was designed to give the president a popular vote .
 He could dissolve the Reichstag and call for new elections . Germany's president is serving a term of seven years .
 The president retained the power to suspend the constitution to restore order and to rule by decree . The republic was left vulnerable to the president’s authority, leaving the republic vulnerable .
 Bavarian leftists rose up again in Munich in April to proclaim a Soviet-style republic . Following Eisner’s murder by a rightist gunman in February 1919, Bavarians rose up in Munich .
 When a general strike paralyzed Berlin in early March, members of the Free Corps and regular German soldiers from Prussia gunned down several thousand workers and socialists . Several thousand people were gunned down during the strike in Berlin .
 Many members of several key social groups, including bureaucrats and university professors, were against the republic from the beginning . But many members of the empire's bureaucracy were against it from the start .
 Magistrates handed down absurdly light sentences to members of the Free Corps arrested for murder . Magistrates also handed down light sentences for members of Free .
 Groups of army officers began to plot against the republic during the summer of 1919 . The plot was started by army officers who wanted to overthrow the republic .
 Conservative politicians and businessmen attempted a coup d’etat, or “putsch,” led by Wolfgang Kapp . Kapp, a former Prussian imperial bureaucrat, was a key figure in the attempted coup .
 The conservative parties proclaimed their support for the new government . Conservative parties proclaimed support for new government in New Zealand .
 In Bavaria, right-wingers seized power after forcing the resignation of the socialist government that had come to power the previous April . Right-winger seized power in Bavaria in 2010 .
 They responded by launching a general strike that shut down much of the country . The general strike was the response to the government's failure to respond to the crisis .
 As Germany’s economy floundered in ruinous inflation, political instability and violence mounted . As Germany's economy struggled, violence and political instability mounted .
 New foreign minister Walther Rathenau determined to negotiate reparations issue with British and French governments .
 Rathenau shocked Britain and France by signing a statement of mutual friendship with the Soviet Union . He signed the Rapallo Treaty in the hope of countering Western pressure . The treaty was the result of a joint statement of friendship with Russia .
 The Soviet Union received technical assistance from German technical assistance . It paid for by helping Germany evade some of the military stipulations of the Treaty of Versailles .
 German officers provided technical assistance to the Soviet army . Subsequently, German officers were involved in providing technical assistance .
 The Soviets renounced any future war reparations from Germany . The Soviets, winning diplomatic recognition and German acquiescence to its repudiation of debts contracted under tsarist rule .
 The Weimar government informed the Allies that it could not meet the schedule of reparations payments in gold or cash, but that it would continue payments of coal and other natural resources . The government told the Allies it would not be able to meet the payments in cash or gold .
 U.S. pressured Britain and France to repay their war debts, the Allies grew all the more determined that Germany pay up .
 France’s new prime minister, Raymond Poincare (18601934) threatened a military occupation of the Ruhr Valley industrial district if Germany failed to meet the reparations schedule . Germany failed in the war of the Second World War .
 He accused Germany of deliberately withholding payments and trying to force the Allies to make concessions by ruining its own currency . He said Germany deliberately withheld payments and tried to force Allied concessions .
 French refused a German request for a moratorium on reparations payments so that the German currency could be stabilized . The French refused to accept a moratorium .
 Poincare’s contention that Germany was sabotaging repayment of its war debts . This seemed to confirm his contention that the war debts were being sabotaged by Germany .
 On January 11, 1923, against the advice of the British government, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr . The occupation took place against British advice .
 In 1923, Germans wheeled shopping carts filled with literally trillions of marks down the street to pay for a single loaf of bread . Germans wheeling shopping carts down the streets to buy a single bread .
 Employees asked to be paid their wages each morning so that they could shop at noon before merchants posted the afternoon price rises . Employees asked for the time of the day to shop in the morning so they could avoid the price rise .
 Spiraling inflation wiped out people with fixed incomes and small savings they had put aside for retirement . People with small savings had small savings put aside to retirement .
 Many of those who believed that they had done their patriotic duty by buying war bonds during the war now blamed the Weimar Republic when those bonds became worthless . Those who bought war bonds now blamed Weimar republic for the loss of war bonds .
 The poor found staples and other goods not only ridiculously expensive but often unavailable at the market as farmers hoarded produce . Farmers hoarded their produce and hoarded it in a bid to sell it to the poor .
 People who were able to pay off bank loans with wildly inflated currency or to invest in property did well . Nonetheless, those people who were . able to . pay off . bank loans or invest in the currency did well, according to experts .
 In August 1923, Ebert turned to Gustav Stresemann to form a government . Ebert's government was formed in August 1923 . Streseman was the first government to be formed in Germany .
 Stresemann, a former monarchist converted by rightwing violence to the republic, governed by decree with the support of the Social Democrats . Streseman ruled by decree after a revolt against the monarchy .
 He convinced miners to go back to work and cease their passive resistance in the Ruhr Valley . He persuaded miners to stop passive resistance and work in the area .
 France and Belgium ended the occupation after a nine-month period that had been as financially damaging to those nations as it was ruinous to Germany . The occupation had been financially devastating to those countries as well .
 Government printing presses stopped cranking out billion-mark notes and issued a new mark . The new mark is the first time the U.S. currency has been changed .
 He hoped that this might clear the way for future Allied concessions, namely on Germany’s disputed eastern frontier with Poland .
 Stresemann convinced both Britain and France to provide loans to help Germany emerge from the economic crisis . Streseman convinced both countries to give Germany loans to support its recovery .
 In 1924, a League of Nations commission extended the schedule for payment of German reparations . In 1924 a commission, chaired by an American banker, Charles G Dawes, extended the payments .
 The Dawes Plan left the Reichsbank partially under the direction of an American commissioner who was to oversee German payments . It did not lower the amount Germany was expected to pay, but it did not reduce the amount it would pay .
 The Dawes Plan improved relations between the Allies and Germany and, with the revival of the European economy beginning in 1924, the reparations issue receded in importance .
 The Weimar Republic seemed to find stability as the economy finally began to improve . The republic was founded in the 1920s .
 German industries became more competitive, and unemployment began to decline . Unemployment rates began to rise in Germany in 2003 .
 Stresemann’s discreet and effective diplomacy, now as foreign minister, paid off . Streseman's discreet diplomacy paid off. Now, he is in charge of Germany's foreign policy .
 The Treaty of Locarno, signed in 1925, guaranteed Germany’s western borders as settled at the end of the war . Signatories pledged to settle all future controversies peacefully and guaranteed Germany's western borders .
 At Locarno, France also signed security treaties with Czechoslovakia and Poland to offset to some extent that Germany’s eastern borders were not guaranteed, which the German government refused to include in the agreement .
 European leaders began to use the phrase ‘the spirit of Locarno’ to refer to a mood of increasing international cooperation . European leaders and newspapers now began using the phrase .
 The following year, Germany became a council member of the League of Nations in return for agreeing that it would not seek to alter its western boundaries with France and Belgium . Germany became the council member in exchange for agreeing not to alter the western boundaries .
 German right-wing parties could never forgive Stresemann for collaborating with the socialists . Nonetheless, German right wing parties never forgive him for his work .
 The opponents of the republic seemed almost more vehement in their denunciations of Weimar when it succeeded than when it failed, for success might generate stability and survival . Weimar's opponents were almost more vocal in denouncing the republic when it was successful .
 General Hindenburg was elected president upon Ebert’s death in 1925 . Even after what appeared to be a diplomatic victory for Weimar, German elections reflected the renewed strength of the right .
 Britain and France were, to be sure, not immune from the political tensions of the post-war period .
 Nowhere in Europe was the concentration of wealth so marked as in Britain . Nowhere was the country's wealth more concentrated than in Britain's .
 The top 1 percent of the population possessed two-thirds of the national wealth . One-tenth of 1 percent owned a third of the land in England . The top 10 percent owned three-quarters of the country's land .
 The distance between the elegant country gentleman and the Yorkshire factory worker, or the top-hatted London banker and the clothcapped London banker remained as great as in the eighteenth century .
 James Ramsay MacDonald formed the first Labour government in 1924 . He was a skilled orator who moved in the most elegant social circles .
 The fall of MacDonald’s government after several months demonstrated the resilience of British Conservatives, assisted by a widespread fear in Britain of communism . However, the fall of the MacDonald government demonstrated the strength of the Conservatives .
 Conservatives denounced MacDonald after his government became the first to accord official recognition to the Soviet Union . Conservatives had denounced his government after he became first to give official recognition .
 The press fanned the flames of a “red scare,’’ similar to a similar to one then sweeping the United States . The press was responsible for spreading the "red scare" in the 1980s .
 A newspaper published a letter it claimed had been written by Grigory Zinoviev, the head of the Communist International . The letter detailed for British Communists ways of destabilizing the government, it said .
 In fact, the letter was a forgery, the work of a Polish anti-Bolshevik . The letter was forged by an anti-Russian anti-Polish anti-war activist .
 Conservatives were determined to restore financial stability and to reject working-class demands . Conservatives were also determined to return to power and reject working class demands .
 The government put Britain back on the gold standard in 1925, which meant that pounds sterling could be exchanged for gold according to a fixed rate of exchange .
 This depleted the amount of gold reserves available to back the British currency . It led to the pound’s overvaluation, leading to the fall in value of the pound .
 British products became more expensive on the international market, particularly when the other European powers stabilized their own currencies at lower rates .
 British manufacturing, the key to prosperity for more than a century, remained sluggish . Its markets increasingly challenged by goods from the U.S. and Japan .
 In Britain, tensions between industrialists and workers came to the fore in 1926 . In 1926, a war of war broke out between industrial and workers in Britain .
 After the war, mining companies had reduced wages and lengthened the workday . The mining industry had also reduced wages .
 Government commission in March 1926 recommended that firms implement safer working conditions, but that miners accept lower wages . Commission recommended firms implement safety measures but lower wages for miners .
 The Trade Union Council launched a general strike of miners in defense of the unions in May 1926 . The general strike was the first general strike in the history of mining .
 The vast majority of unionized workers in Britain went out in solidarity in solidarity . "The vast majority" went out of solidarity .
 The strike enraged the upper and middle classes, inconvenienced by the shutdown of all public transportation . The strike is expected to be the biggest in the country's history . It was the first strike since the start of the strike in 2009 .
 Winston Churchill castigated the strikers as “the enemy,” demanding their “unconditional surrender” as if he were talking about a German bunker in the war . Winston Churchill called the strikers “The enemy’s enemy” and demanded their ‘
 After two weeks, most workers returned to their jobs, although the miners remained on strike for seven months . Most workers were able to return to work after two weeks . The strike lasted seven months, with most workers returning to work .
 Parliament passed the Trade Disputes Act, which forbade ‘sympathy strikes’ in support of striking workers by those in other industries . A year later, Parliament passed an act forbidding “sympathetic strikes,” walkouts . Parliament passed a similar act
 When the French franc collapsed in value in a financial panic in 1924, the rightist government in France collapsed with it . The French franc was long considered invulnerable to economic shocks .
 Radicals and Socialists, sharing little more than anticlericalism, formed a left-center government . Radicals, Socialists and Radicals formed a coalition of anti-communist coalitions .
 This alliance broke apart when the Socialists suggested a sizable tax on capital as a solution to the economic crisis . The Socialists and the Socialist Party split over the idea of a sizable capital tax . The Socialist Party has been in power for more than a decade .
 He raised taxes on consumption, which the wealthy preferred to levies on capital, because the burden did not fall on them . The wealthy preferred the tax on consumption because it did not burden them on consumption .
 The franc stabilized, as wealthy Frenchmen brought assets back from abroad and began to buy francs, which then rose rapidly in value . The franc rose rapidly, as well as the value of the franc .
 French President Nicolas Sarkozy's idea that political consensus existed in France was an illusion . But his belief that France was the most powerful country in Europe was only an illusion, he says .
 Many ordinary French men and women believed that a ‘wall of money’ still held the country hostage . The wall of money, along with an entrenched bureaucracy, prevented social reform, they said .
 With an institutionally weak presidency, the Chamber of Deputies increasingly came to be seen as a debating chamber . A barricade during the London General Strike, 1926 .
 The effects of the Great War could also be clearly seen in European intellectual and artistic life . Writers and painters wrestled with the consequences of a devastating struggle that stood as a great divide .
 The resulting cultural uncertainty reflected the economic, social, and political chaos of the period . It reflected the social, political, and economic chaos of that period .
 The defiant modernism of artists and intellectuals in the wake of the war was part of a revolt against traditional cultural conventions within the arts and against the strictures of bourgeois society .
 In Britain, people still read Victorian novels and romantic poetry, but such texts seemed to offer no explanation for what had gone wrong in Europe . In the UK, such texts offered no explanation of what had happened in Europe, says historian .
 Many artists and writers rejected the social conventions that had inculcated the values of nationalism and blind obedience .
 War destroyed many of the signposts by which artists and writers defined reality . The war had destroyed millions of lives but also many signposts of art and culture .
 In a 1922 lecture, the French poet Paul Valery said, “The storm has died away and still we are restless, uneasy, as if the storm were about to break .” among all these injured things is the mind. “Among all the injured things are the
 Eliot reflected the disintegrating impact that the war had on Europe . Eliot's book, The War of Europe, was published in New York, New York and London . Eliot reflected on the disintegration of the war in Europe .
 The Dadaists were the first to rebel against the absurdity of the slaughter of 1914—1918 by rejecting all artistic convention . The group of artists and writers who had gathered in Zurich in 1916 gathered in Switzerland in 1916 .
 They penned and painted nonsense; some wrote poems that consisted of words gathered from newspapers . Some wrote poems based on newspapers . Others painted nonsense .
 The artists and writers of the post-war generation stressed the primacy of subjectivism . Post-WWII artists stressed subjectivism in their work .
 Like soldiers emerging from the ghastly trenches, they looked into themselves in their quest to comprehend what seemed incomprehensible . They looked at themselves in the quest to understand what seemed inconceivable . The world's most recent war hero, George W. Bush, was assassinated in 1968 .
 Their subjectivism unleashed an imaginativeness that defined much of the new art . Their subjectivist unleashed an imagination that defined many of their works .
 Piet Mondrian thumbed their noses at classical rules about painting, and even about what constituted art . The painters Mondrian, Paul Klee and Max Beckmann thumbed noses at traditional rules .
 Mondrian, a French Dadaist painter, sat on his “Dada’s” horse among friends . Picabia was a member of the Dada .
 Expressionist poets rejected linguistic conventions in an attempt to communicate the emotion buried beneath the human exterior . Poems rejected linguistic convention to communicate with emotion hidden beneath the exterior .
 Expressionist playwrights ignored long-established conventions of plot, character, and dialogue to represent what they considered to be unseen reality . Playwrights ignore conventions to represent the unseen reality of the play .
 James Joyce (18821941) abandoned long-accepted stylistic and narrative conventions to present the chaotic and seemingly unconnected—at least at first glance— “stream of consciousness” dialogue of three main characters . Through this dialogue, Joyce revealed all their sensations and feelings
 The novel’s eroticism led it to be banned in Britain and in the U.S. until 1934 . It was banned in the United States and Britain until 1934.
 In it they rejected ‘traditional humanism’ and the respect for reason that seemed to have so manifestly betrayed mankind . In it, they rejected traditional humanism . In the book, they reject “traditional humanist’s” and “respect for reason
 They were not interested in rationality, which seemed defunct, but in what lay beneath it . They were interested in what appeared to be rationality, but what was beneath it, they said .
 Surrealists obsessed with crater-pocked landscape of churned earth, tree stumps, and twisted rubble in northern France and Belgium .
 They sought to shock audiences and viewers by expressing themselves in a way that was spontaneous and deeply personal, but still realistic . They sought the shock of audiences by expressing their feelings in the way that they did .
 Breton's work sometimes defies interpretation because none was intended . Breton’s work defies interpretations because none of his was intended.
 Artist's 1933 painting Europe after the Rain depicts with oil and plaster what appears to be a distorted, disfigured, and unsettling aerial relief map of Europe .
 It suggests the mutilation of the continent, which appears to be slowly swallowing itself . The continent appears to have been mutilated by the European Union .
 The surrealists were militant leftists, and they opposed colonial domination . They were also among the minority of Europeans who opposed colonial dominance .
 Sigmund Freud, founding father of psychoanalysis, believed that the war demonstrated the irrational nature of mankind . For his part, the Viennese doctor believed that war demonstrated that mankind was irrational .
 Freud’s scientific analysis of the unconscious, translated into many languages during the 1920s, had begun to influence sociologists, political scientists, and cultural anthropologists . Freud's theory of unconsciousness was published in the 1930s and 1940s, and was translated in many languages
 They applied ideas drawn from psychoanalysis to try to understand group behavior and social conflict . The team applied ideas to try and understand social conflict and group behavior .
 Freud influenced surrealists such as Breton, who drew images and words from his dreams . Freud also greatly influenced surrealist surrealists like Breton .
 Freud’s early ruminations about the role of the unconscious in art were based on the haunting experience of seeing shell-shocked soldiers . Some of Freud's early ideas about the unconscious are based on a haunting experience .
 Erich Maria Remarque published All Quiet on the Western Front, a pacifist novel about the trenches . It quickly became a classic and became a worldwide sensation .
 In 1929, Robert Graves published his memoirs, focused on his experiences in the Great War . Graves died in 1918 at the hands of a British soldier .
 The problem was that Europe could not say “goodbye to all that” and put the war behind it. Europe was not ready to say ‘goodbye’ and put it behind it, he says . The problem is that Europe couldn't say "goodbye"
 One European dictator after another ended parliamentary democracy, imposed authoritarian rule, and suppressed political opposition . Amid economic chaos and social and political turmoil in the two decades following the end of the war, one European dictator ended democracy .
 Fascist states poisoned international relations with nationalist bullying, making grandiose claims on the territories of other states . Nazi Germany poisoned relations with other states, particularly Nazi Germany, with claims on territories .
 At the same time, in the Communist Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin consolidated his power . At the time, the Soviet Union was at the center of its power .
 In what has been called the “Europe of Extremes, Europe entered an even more dangerous period in which it became increasingly clear that Woodrow Wilson’s description of the Great War as the ‘war to end all wars” was meaningless in the Europe of economic Depression
 By the end of 1925, fascist parties demanding the imposition of dictatorships had sprung up in many other nations . Fascism was a form of dictatorship in many nations .
 Other more traditional right-wing authoritarian movements, too, are on the rise . Other traditional right wing authoritarian movements are also gaining popularity .
 In Portugal, junior army officers had overthrown the monarchy in 1910 and declared a republic . Right-wing military officers staged a coup d etat in 1926 .
 All of the Eastern European and Balkan states became dictatorships in the 1920s and 1930s, with the exception of Czechoslovakia . The Balkan and Eastern European states were ruled by dictatorships .
 In the meantime, Joseph Stalin transformed the Soviet Union into a totalitarian state . The Soviet Union became a state of Soviet Russia .
 Europe entered an even more dangerous period of instability during the Great Depression that began in 1929 .
 The rightwing nationalist revolt against the republic of Spain began in 1936, starting a civil war that ended in 1939 . General Francisco Franco’s right-wing nationalist forces won the war in 1939 with the victory .
 Britain and France were the only major powers in which parliamentary government was strong enough to resist the authoritarian tide . France and Britain were the last major powers to resist authoritarianism .
 Democracy also survived in the smaller states of Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Denmark, and Sweden, despite the existence of small fascist movements in each .
 The global economic Depression that began in October 1929 had dramatic political consequences in Europe . The global recession began in 1929 and lasted for nearly three decades .
 Jews, Socialists, Communists, ethnic minorities and other nationalities, big business. Jews, socialists and Communists. Big business. Business.com.com .
 Many people were convinced that parliamentary government itself was to blame and that nationalistic dictatorships were the solution . Under such circumstances, many people could be convinced that the government itself is to blame .
 Amid plunging confidence and general bewilderment, international cooperation became more difficult, particularly as the powers began to blame each other for adopting policies that adversely affected them .
 Germans castigated their wartime enemies for assessing massive, seemingly unjust reparations . People in Britain and France blamed Germany for not paying all the reparations; many Americans blamed their own former allies for paying back loans .
 By 1924, prosperity seemed to have returned to much of post-war Europe, at least in the Western states . The Great Depression was the worst of the Great Depression in history .
 The increasingly interdependent world economy had not recovered from the war . But beneath the surface, the world economy was not recovering from the crash .
 The wartime inflation greatly increased during the years that followed the armistice . The inflation increased in the years following the war .
 Iron and steel prices fell sharply after the war when demand plunged for tanks, artillery pieces, and munitions . At the same time, steel and iron prices dropped sharply .
 Overproduction and the increasing use of hydroelectricity and oil caused the price of coal to fall rapidly . Overproduction led to the fall in coal prices .
 European agriculture, particularly in Eastern Europe, was in a depressed state well before the Crash of 1929 . Eastern Europe was in an agricultural depressed state before the crash .
 More grain, meats, and other food sup. The Wall Street Crash, October 1929, was the Wall Street crash of 1929 .
 Lower farm incomes, aggravated by the burden of taxation, in turn reduced demand for manufactured goods . Farm incomes are aggravated by tax burden, which has led to lower demand for manufacturing goods .
 European states erecting tariff barriers to protect their internal markets for domestic agricultural products . European states reacted by erecting tariffs to try to protect internal markets .
 Bulgaria's agricultural exports saw their foreign markets dry up, or they received less for what they sold . Bulgaria is one of several countries that saw its agricultural exports dry up .
 Eastern European and Balkan nations could not repay their wartime debts . With less income and less Western investment, Eastern European nations were unable to repay their debts .
 Germany’s defeat, the dismemberment of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and the Russian Revolution significantly weakened the region's three largest pre-war trading partners . The region was one of the three largest trading partners in the world before the war .
 The contraction of demand and price deflation probably would not have been enough to generate full-fledged economic disaster . The collapse of demand would have not have led to a recession, the economist says .
 Unrestrained financial speculation also undercut the world economy . But unrestrained financial speculations undercut the global economy .
 In Germany, high interest rates attracted considerable foreign investment following the 1924 economic recovery . High interest rates in Germany attracted foreign investment in the 1920s .
 Credit was easily available, and companies issued huge amounts of stock shares based upon insufficient real assets . Companies issued large amounts of shares based on lack of real assets, resulting in huge losses .
 In the United States, a sizable reduction in demand for goods was already apparent by 1927 . In the U.S. it was already obvious by 1927.
 Wartime loans and post-war debts made the finances of the larger powers more interdependent . They helped destabilize the international economy .
 German reparations also adversely affected the world economy because, ironically, they accentuated the flow of capital into Germany . The reparations were also affected by the influx of German capital .
 Germany borrowed $110 million from U.S. banks to meet its reduced reparations payments to the Allies, rather than paying them out of current income through higher taxes . Following the Dawes Plan in 1924 extended the schedule of reparations, Germany borrowed money from the United States .
 Reparation loans diverted investment away from industry and ignited further foreign lending . Like bonds and speculative investments, reparation loans diverged investment from industry to foreign investment .
 Besides loans to pay reparations, other loans also poured into Germany . Germany was heavily indebted to Germany in the 1930s .
 Most of this debt was short term rather than long term, which made Germany even more vulnerable to a sudden calling in of those loans . Most of Germany's debt is short-term rather than longer-term, making it vulnerable to the call-in .
 In 1928, U.S. banks refused to issue more loans to Germany, investing available funds instead in the Wall Street stock market, further undercutting German banks . In 1928 the United States banks invested available funds in Wall Street .
 Thousands of large and small investors were ruined as stocks lost most of their value . Thousands of people were ruined by the collapse of the markets .
 American and British investors with assets still tied up in Germany now began to pull their money out of Germany as quickly as possible . Investors with assets tied to Germany began pulling their money from Germany .
 German banks owed far more money to creditors than they had assets . German gold reserves were depleted, as banks owed more than they did assets .
 Indices of Industrial Production Year Germany United States France Britain 1925 79.7% . Germany, France, Germany, Germany and France were all at the top of the world's industrial output .
 David E Sumler, A History of Europe in the Twentieth Century (Homewood, Dorsey Press, 1973), 145 . Sumler's book is published by the same publisher as the American Historical Society .
 Jobs disappeared and families were compelled to spend savings they had so painstakingly amassed over the previous five years . Manufacturing and agricultural prices continued to fall because of the dramatic contraction of demand .
 British government officials and economists debated strategies that might revive their floundering economies . Unemployment approaching 20 percent of the workforce in Britain has been hit hard .
 The economic orthodoxy of the day held that the way out of the crisis was to reduce public expenditures . The crisis was not solved by reducing public expenditures, but by cutting public spending, it was being cut .
 The inflation of the immediate post-war period, particularly the hyperinflation that had ravaged Germany in 1922 and 1923, frightened statesmen and economists away from even limited financial or fiscal expansion . Inflation of the 1930s and 1930s was the worst in the world .
 National policy options, too, were further constrained by the interdependence of the international economy, especially under the gold standard, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: National policy .
 James Ramsay MacDonald’s British Labour government reacted to the Wall Street crash by increasing unemployment benefits and funding more public works while raising taxes .
 These expenditures further increased the government deficit, already soaring because of reduced tax revenue . The government deficit is already soaring due to increased tax revenue, which has been reduced .
 The international monetary system collapsed as the world economy plunged into dark Depression . The international Monetary System collapsed during the Depression .
 The failure of the largest Austrian bank in May 1931 immediately brought the collapse of several German banks to which it owed money . Already reeling from the agricultural Depression in Eastern Europe, Eastern Europe was reeling from agricultural Depression .
 President Herbert Hoover suggested a moratorium on the repayment of all reparations and war debts . Herbert Hoover hoped that confidence and the end of the cycle of defaults would follow .
 As the British economy floundered because of the decline in world trade, European bankers intensified the run on the pound .
 Britain’s gold reserves were dangerously reduced during the summer of 1930 . They exchanged their holdings of British pounds sterling for gold, 2. million pounds’ worth per day .
 McDonald was forced to negotiate with the other parties in order to reduce the budget . Labour not having a majority in the House of Commons, McDonald negotiated with other parties . But the latter insisted on reducing the budget, including cutting unemployment benefits .
 Instead of resigning as everyone expected, McDonald formed a ‘National Government’ of members from the three parties . Most Labour leaders declined to join him .
 Worsening conditions forced the National Government to take Britain off the gold standard in September 1931 .
 The Bank of England would no longer remit gold in exchange for pounds . This meant that the bank would not be able to remit the money in return for gold .
 International trade declined even more steeply, but it did permit some domestic recovery . This further discouraged business, and international trade also declined .
 In Britain, the Conservatives’ deflationary measures sought to reduce expenditures, seemed to be the only way out of the crisis . In Britain voters seemed to think it was the best way to deal with the crisis.
 Tories won an overwhelming majority of seats in the House of Commons in October 1931 .
 Neville Chamberlain (1869— 1940) became chancellor of the Exchequer . Neville Chamberlain now became chancellor . Chamberlain was the prime minister of the Great Depression .
 Chamberlain promised a ‘doctor’s mandate’ to extract Britain from the economic crisis . Chamberlain promised to extract the UK from the crisis by extracting Britain from financial crisis .
 Government imposed higher tariffs, further reducing consumer spending . The government imposed higher tariff measures, which will hit consumers .
 Labour’s campaign ran headlong into traditional Conservative opposition and middle-class fear of socialism, as well as the orthodoxy of deflationary economic policies . But Labour's campaign ran headlonged into traditional Tory opposition and middle-classes fear of socialism .
 France also had considerable gold reserves, which helped maintain business and consumer confidence . France's gold reserves helped keep consumer spending at relatively high level .
 The run on the British pound and the German mark, too, at first aided France . Gold exchanged by investors ended up in Paris, as investors exchanged it .
 The franc initially remained stable, and undervalued, encouraging the purchase of French goods . The franc is now worth $1.5 billion .
 French prices also fell and unemployment rose, again revealing the interdependence of the global economy . But gradually French unemployment also rose .
 French exports declined with the contraction of the world market, particularly because the franc, which had not plunged like the pound, was now overvalued, making French goods expensive abroad .
 French government ignored demands for active state intervention to stimulate economy . Right-wing corporatists sought support for cartels and left-wing socialists called for nationalization of crucial industries and more unemployment benefits . France stuck to classical economic remedies .
 In the rest of Europe, government leaders debated strategies that they hoped would pull their countries out of the Depression . In the 1930s, Europe was in the throes of a Depression .
 The major powers acted in their own interests, establishing high tariffs and devaluing their currencies, without prior consultation with other governments . The U.S. has been accused of acting in its own interests without consultation .
 The United States government, like that of Britain, followed contemporary economic orthodoxy . The U.S. government, both sides of the debate, followed modern economic orthodoxy.
 Both sharply reduced government spending, cutting unemployment benefits and restricting credit . Both sharply cut government spending and cut unemployment benefits .
 Keynes argued that deflationary measures, such as cutting government spending, reducing unemployment benefits, or encouraging companies to limit production and thus keep prices artificially high, were counterproductive . Keynes argues that such measures are counterproductive .
 With one-quarter of the labor force out of work early in 1933 and wages falling, there was insufficient demand to generate a manufacturing upswing in Great Britain, the United States, or anywhere else .
 Keynes stood virtually alone, and most of what he had written was then still unknown . Keynes' most of his work was still largely unknown, but Keynes' work was published in 1925 .
 Only very gradually did the Depression begin to recede in the industrialized countries . The Depression was only very gradually receding in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Conservatives had counted on a dramatic improvement in British international trade . But it was not due to the dramatic improvement of British trade upon which the Conservatives counted .
 The subsidized construction of more houses pumped money into the economy, helping to increase consumer confidence . Subsidized construction of houses is helping to boost consumer confidence in the economy .
 While some inefficient steel and textile manufacturers went under, others consolidated and became more efficient, perhaps benefiting from the imposition of higher tariffs .
 As industry and agriculture gradually returned to prosperity, unemployment began to fall . Unemployment began to rise as the economy began to recover .
 After Hitler came to power in 1933, rearmament created many jobs in Germany . The German economy also slowly improved, at least in part because of the rearmarmament .
 In 1930, the Young Plan extended the date by which Germany was to have paid all reparations to 1988 . The Young Plan, named after its American originator, had extended Germany's reparations until 1988 . Germany had to pay the reparations in 1988 .
 Lausanne Conference of 1932 declared the end of reparations payments . Reparations payments were declared an end at the end in 1932 .
 In France, the Depression lingered longer than in any other European industrialized power . The Depression was the longest in Europe, lasting longer than any other country .
 The government, constrained by weak executive authority, failed to act decisively until 1935 . It lowered taxes to encourage consumption, after trying to protect France with a wall of protectionism and quotas .
 When other countries devalued their currencies, France’s comparative advantage disappeared . Demand for exports trailed off after the devaluation of the French currency led to a drop in demand .
 France’s low birthrate, combined with the horrific loss of life during the war, reduced demand . The war also reduced demand, resulting in a low birth rate .
 It facilitated loans that saved banks, provided relief for the unemployed through public works programs . It also provided relief to farmers and businesses, and provided assistance to farmers .
 The president's low-key “fireside chats’ by radio to the American people, improved the economy . Gradually, a return of consumer confidence, boosted by the president’s ‘fireside chat’ with the public, improved economy .
 Only with the entry of the Second World War in 1941, the Depression finally ended its grip on the U.S. It was only with the massive mobilization of economic resources in the production of war materials .
 Fascist parties developed in the 1920s as political movements seeking mass mobilization but not political participation . Fascism parties developed as political parties looking for mass mobilization, but not participation . Party parties were formed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Several factors contributed to the rise of the extreme right, with none serving as a single explanation . None of these factors served as one explanation for the rise in extreme right .
 If in the nineteenth century the middle class had stood as a bulwark of liberal values in Europe, this was no longer the case in the post-war climate . The middle class no longer has a role in Europe's liberal values .
 In Germany, Italy, and Austria, fascists found disproportionate support among the middle class . The middle class had been ravaged by years of economic crisis . Fascism was particularly popular among middle class in Germany, Austria and Italy .
 Middle-class families watched in horror as their pensions and modest savings disappeared . Families watched as their savings and pensions and savings disappeared in the wake of the crash .
 They feared union leaders, Socialists, and Communists, who all demanded extension of public programs to aid unemployed workers . They all demanded an extension of the public programs .
 Many in the middle class feared such reforms would come at their expense . Many middle-class people feared they would be at risk of losing them .
 Big business in Italy and Germany, particular, turned against parliamentary rule . Big business turned against the idea of parliamentary rule in Italy .
 Middle-class frustrations do not provide a sufficient explanation for the rise of authoritarian movements in Eastern Europe and the Balkans . The middle classes were extremely small in the Balkans, where the middle classes are extremely small . But middle-class frustration does not explain the rise in authoritarian movements .
 Middle classes in Britain and France endured many of the same economic frustrations, but only in France did a minority turn to authoritarian political movements . Only in France, a minority of the French middle classes turned to authoritarian movements .
 Fascists, Nazis, and other authoritarian right-wing groups blamed parliamentary government itself for the weaknesses and failures of their states in the post-war years . Fascists and Nazis blamed parliamentary . government itself .
 Dictatorships in Europe, 1932-1937: States ruled by dictators before 1932; states that became dictatorships after 1932; remaining democracies in 1937 . sions. sions .
 The states in which authoritarian dictators came to power lacked strong traditions of parliamentary democracy, say experts . The states where authoritarian dictators come to power lack strong democratic traditions, they say .
 Frenzied crowds, with arms raised in fascist salutes, greeted their authoritarian leaders as heroes . The authoritarian leaders were greeted as heroes by crowds who raised arms in fascist salute .
 The irony was, of course, that fascist gangs themselves were largely responsible for creating the political turmoil that ultimately led to the destruction of parliamentary governments . The irony is that the fascist gangs were responsible for the chaos that ultimately ended up destroying parliamentary governments.
 Fascists most often defined themselves by denouncing who and what they were against, such as parliamentary democracy . Fascists often denounced what and what was against, rather than w hat they were for, in the 1930s and 1940s .
 They saw themselves as building a new social and political order based upon service to the nation . They saw them as building an order based on service to their nation .
 This idea of creating a new elite also distinguished fascist from authoritarian movements in Spain and Portugal, where nationalists tried to affirm the domination of traditional elites .
 Fascist movements opposed trade unions, Socialists, and Communists . Fascist movement emphasized class differences they believed were endemic in capitalist society . All three espoused working-class internationalism .
 Fascists viewed economic and social tensions as irrelevant, arguing that all people shared a common national identity . Fascists argued that national community meant more than economic disparities between social classes .
 Mussolini and Hitler covered up the brutal realities of their rule by promising with vague rhetoric that the needs of the “national economic community” would be fulfilled . Mussolini’s brutal rule was covered up by vague rhetoric . Hitler and Mussolini covered up their brutal reality by
 Mussolini had added ‘international finance capital’ to his list of enemies in the early 1920s . Mussolini was a socialist before the war, trying to convince workers that he spoke for their interests, too .
 Like Mussolini, dictators Engelbert Dollfuss in Austria and Portugal also added ‘corporatism’ to their list of promises .
 fascist states remained capitalistic in nature, w'ith big business accruing great profits and workers lagging far behind . But fascist states remain capitalistic, with workers being left out of pocket .
 There was no single fascist ideology, and not all of the right-w'ing authoritarian movements in Europe in the 1920s and 1930s can be qualified as fascist . Not all of Europe's right-wing authoritarian movements were fascist .
 In Spain, Francisco Franco imposed a military dictatorship like that of Salazar in neighboring Portugal . Both were predicated upon the influence of traditional elites, the Catholic Church, and the army .
 Neither the Spanish nor Portuguese dictators shared the expansionist ideology of those regimes, and both distrusted the kind of mass movement that helped sweep the Italian fascists and German Nazis to power .
 The agrarian populist authoritarian regimes of Eastern Europe may also be described as fascist states, or at least “para-fascist” dictatorships . Eastern Europe's authoritarian regimes may be called fascist states or “pioneering’s fascist states .
 Some of these were aggressive, nationalist mass movements built upon anti-communism, antiSemitism, anti-Semitism, and fierce opposition to parliamentary rule . Some of the movements were built on anticommunism and anti-secularism .
 Italian fascism inspired in some ways by Italian fascism and German National Socialism . Yet they had no illusions about expanding their states beyond what each claimed as the ‘historic’ limits of their nationality .
 The Dy namics of Fascism 1003 . Stalin s Soviet Union, too, had become a state dictatorship, but one organized at least on Communist rhetoric .
 The Soviet Union was also a totalitarian state, with centralized control of all political functions by a dictator ruling through terror in the name of a single party .
 Socialists, Communists, and Jews helped give fascism an international character . Hatred of parliamentary and democratic rule, Socialists and Communists, gave fascism a global character . Fascism was born in Italy, Italy, Germany, France, Italy and Germany .
 In 1935, there was even a short-lived attempt to create a fascist international, similar to the Communist International on the other end of the political spectrum .
 Mussolini contributed funds to the Belgian, Austrian, and British fascist movements . Mussolini helped fund the Belgian and Austrian fascist movements in the 1930s .
 The stridently nationalist aspect of fascism worked against fascist internationalism . But the stridently nationalistic aspect of the fascist movement worked against internationalistism .
 fascist and right-wing authoritarian states found ready allies among similar regimes . Joint Cerman and Italian assistance to the nationalist rebellion during the Spanish Civil War solidified the alliance between Hitler and Mussolini .
 Middle-class economic frustration, anti-parliamentarianism, and anti-Semitism were all present in European society before the Great War .
 For many veterans of the trenches, the experience of the war had made them increasingly indifferent to brutality and human suffering . For many of the soldiers, the war made them indifferent to the brutality and suffering of human suffering.
 To an extent, nationalism represented a continuation of the Great War . The camaraderie of the trenches was transformed into a race war against those considered internal or external enemies .
 In Germany, right-wing movements attracted demobilized soldiers, who had returned home with weapons, habits of military order, and experience with violence . In particular, right wing movements attracted Demobilized German soldiers who had weapons and habits of violence .
 Demobilized troops found not a significantly better life to repay them for their sacrifices, but hard times driven by inflation . Fortunate enough to have returned home from the war at all, demobilized soldiers found not significantly better .
 The Free Corps in Germany, the Home Guard in Austria, and the Cross of Fire in France denounced the “decadence’s and “softness” of parliamentary regimes . The Free . Corps in . Germany, Austria, France, France and Germany denounced the
 They wanted continuation of war, the dominant experience in their lives, not peace, they said . They said. They said: 'They wanted continuation . of war'
 From the beginning, Hitler’s National Socialism espoused German racial supremacy . From the start of the Nazi regime, Hitler's National Socialist Party espoused racial supremacy. From the end of the 1930s, National Socialism was a German state of Germany .
 Nazism manifested an unparalleled capacity for violence and destruction based upon the assumption that Nazis could assume the authority to determine who could live and who could die . Nazism was based on the belief that Nazis had the power to kill and kill .
 This carried Nazi ideology and practice beyond other violent nationalist right-wing regimes . The Nazi ideology was carried out by the Nazis in Nazi Germany . This is not the only example of a violent nationalist nationalist regime .
 Germans were not alone in believing spurious literature proclaiming the superiority of their race and the degeneration of other races . Germans believed they were superior to other races, according to the book .
 Eastern European dictators denounced other ethnic groups and nations, which could be blamed for practically anything . Eastern Europe dictators denounced ethnic groups as a scapegoat for anything .
 Anti-Semitism also characterized authoritarian movements in Austria, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia, as well as in France and Belgium . Anti-Semitic movements also characterized .
 Mussolini also added anti-Semitism to his nationalist ravings in 1938 . Inspired by Hitler, Mussolini added the anti-Semitic language to his nationalistic rhetoric .
 Fascism borrowed some symbols and rites that represented spiritual revolution from Christianity, replacing the latter with nationalism . Fascism borrows some symbols from Christianity to replace nationalism with nationalism .
 In a totalitarian way, fascism sought to eliminate the distinction between private and public life . Fascism sought to remove distinction between public and private life, historian says .
 Fascists sought to create the ‘new man’ who would serve the nation and a new elite defined by service to the state . Fascists wanted to create a new man who would service the nation . The new elite was defined as an elite defined as a new citizen defined by
 Fascists emphasized youth and youthful energy, contrasting the ‘new men’ with what they considered the old, failed political systems . Fascists emphasize youth and youth and energy, contrasting the old political systems with failed political institutions .
 Fascists trumpeted the historical rights of, and duties to, the nation, which they believed outweighed any other rights . Lining up behind authoritarian dictators whom they believed to be natural, aggressive leaders who incarnated their national destiny .
 They believed that this gave them the right to expand their national frontiers toward what they considered their proper ‘historical” limits .
 They placed such struggles in the context of what they conceived of as a Darwinian struggle of the fittest that they would win, and celebrated what they considered to be the beauty of violence . They considered such struggles to be seen as an example of violence, they said .
 When the film version of Erich Maria Remarque’s All Quiet on The Western Front appeared in 1930, Nazis marched in protest and shut down some theaters . Some theaters were shut down .
 Fascists did more than rule through terror -- their dictatorships were also built upon popular consensus . Fascists ruled through terror but also built on popular consensus, writes Julian Zelizer . Fascism is a form of democracy, says Zelizer. Fascists rule through popular consensus.
 Fascism created what has been called a “magnetic field’ in Europe in the 1920s . Fascism was created in Europe as a result of the rise of fascism in Europe .
 Extreme right-wing movements won widespread support among millions of ordinary people in many corners of Europe, beginning in Italy . Extreme right wing movements have been seen as a major factor in Europe's rise .
 The economic and social tensions of the immediate post-war period destabilized Italy’s liberal government . Mussolini and Fascism in Italy were the prime minister of the 1930s and early 1940s .
 The dissatisfaction of Italian nationalists with the Treaty of Versailles accentuated a political crisis . Italian nationalists were unhappy with the treaty, which was signed in 1914 . The Treaty was signed by Napoleon Napoleon in 1918 .
 Gabriele D’Annunzio had in 1914 described war as perfect hygiene for the modern world . War was the work of a decadent poet .
 Having proclaimed, “I am not, and do not wish to be, a mere poet,” he took matters into his own hands. He took matters in his own hand .
 D’Annunzio planted the Italian flag, forcing the Italian government to begin negotiations with the new Yugoslav state, which also claimed the Adriatic port . The Italian government began negotiations with new Yugoslavia, forcing negotiations with Italy .
 Most of Istria and northern Dalmatia would remain in Yugoslavia, as the Treaty of Versailles had specified . Both countries agreed that Fiume would be independent, but that most of  Istria and Northern Dalmatia remain
 D’Annunzio’s little republic lasted sixteen months, until Italian ships lobbed shells in the general direction of the city and sent the poet packing .
 His father, a blacksmith, was something of a revolutionary . He had taught himself to read from socialist tracts and named his son after the Mexican revolutionary Benito Juarez .
 Mussolini was a schoolyard bully quick to raise fists and pull a knife, once stabbing a girlfriend . Mussolini once stabbed a girlfriend in the face with a knife . The Italian dictator was a bully in the 1930s and '50s .
 He had no close friends and was proud of it --“Keep your heart a desert,” he once advised . He had been proud of his lack of friends .
 Mussolini read Karl Marx and Friedrich Nietzsche, whose espousal of daring revolt and the “will to power” intrigued him . Mussolini was fascinated by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche and Karl Marx .
 Mussolini proclaimed himself a socialist and anti-militarist and became a journalist . After a stint in the army, Mussolini became a political journalist . He proclaimed himself as a socialist .
 Fascists took the name “fascists” from the Latin word^ascto, meaning “a bundle of sticks,” or, by extension, an association . The name ‘fascist’ means “bundle of sticks”
 Mussolini led the chorus of nationalist demands for a peace settlement favorable to Italian interests . At the war’s end, Mussolini was the leader of the nationalist movement .
 Governments formed and fell in quick succession after the armistice . Severe economic difficulties followed the war's end .
 Hundreds of thousands of demobilized troops joined the ranks of the unemployed . Hundreds of millions of people have been left unemployed .
 Inflation soared, eroding middle-class savings and undercutting the already low standard of living of workers and landless peasants . The rise in inflation erodes middle-classes savings and erodes the already poor standard-living of workers .
 Workers flocked to organized labor in Italy, and waves of strikes spread in 1919 and 1920 . As in Britain, France, and Germany, workers flocked .
 In the south, thousands of poor families had begun to occupy some of the vast, often uncultivated holdings belonging to wealthy landowners . In the southern part of the South, poor families began to occupy vast landings .
 During these ‘red years’ of 1920-1922, many landowners and businessmen turned against parliamentary rule . During these 'red years' of 1920s-20s, many businesses and landowners turned against Parliamentary rule .
 The Liberal government alienated the wealthy by proposing a progressive tax on income and a high imposition on war profits . It outraged them by legalizing peasant land seizures and legalizing land seizures . The government had alienated them by proposing progressive taxes on income .
 In The Dynamics of Fascism 1007 the north, ship owners and iron and mining magnates provided funds for Mussolini's fascists . Wealthy landowners and ship owners also provided funds .
 Uniformed squads of fascists wearing black shirts intervened on behalf of big landowners and businessmen, attacking Socialists, Communists, and union members . Fascists wore black shirts .
 Laborers and sharecroppers fought back against the fascists, but had little chance because of the landowners supplied the squadri with weapons . The landowners supplied them with weapons.
 Mussolini praised the “bath of blood"" that swept parts of Italy . Mussolini, now boasting a private army and a sizable claque, or “applause squad,"" of paid supporters .
 He reveled in rumors of a coup d’etat associated with his name, cranking out violent articles denouncing parliamentary government . He revels in rumors that he was involved in a coup .
 In 1921, the Liberals offered the fascists qualified support and accepted them as electoral allies . Liberals hoped to find a parliamentary mandate to impose order, offered them qualified support .
 Mussolini and several dozen other fascists were elected to the Italian Parliament . Mussolini was one of several fascists elected to Italy's Parliament . The fascist government was elected to power in Italy .
 The fascist leader now has an ideal soapbox for his flamboyant oratory, as well as immunity from prosecution . He now has the right to use his oratory as a platform for his speeches .
 The Liberal government of Giovanni Giolitti resigned, succeeded by another coalition government . The government was succeeded by a coalition government of coalition members .
 The fascists were now a powerful political movement with prominent allies, money, newspapers, and hundreds of thousands of party members . The fascists had now become powerful political movements, with money and newspapers .
 They disrupted local political life, shattering the organization and support for the traditional parties . They shattered the organization, shattering traditional parties' support for each other . They also disrupted local politics, shattering support for traditional parties.
 Fascists enjoyed the tacit support of many state and police officials, and fascist violence went unpunished . Fascists were able to enjoy tacit support from the state, and police were complicit in their crimes .
 Mussolini's fascism was an ideology of violent confrontation, a means of winning and maintaining political power, more than a coherent doctrine of political philosophy . For Mussolini, fascism was meant to win and maintain power more than philosophy .
 Italian fascists advocated a strong, virulently nationalist, militarized state . Fascism was an early form of fascism that emerged in Italy in the 1930s .
 He pressured indecisive King Victor Emmanuel III to name him and several other fascists to cabinet posts . He was a shy man who loved to hunt, wear military uniforms and collect coins .
 The king remained out of Rome for weeks at a time as the crisis built, hoping that it would simply go away . The king stayed out of the city during the crisis, hoping it would just go away, but it didn't .
 Even as he planned a coup d’etat, Mussolini charmed members of the royal family . Mussolini’s plans to overthrow the Italian government were never fully realized .
 The prime minister asked the king to declare martial law and use the army to restore order by suppressing the fascists, who had seized control of several towns . The king declared martial law in response to a request from the prime minister .
 The king declared a state of emergency and then changed his mind even as thousands of black-shirted fascists surged toward Rome on the night of 1008 Ch. Ch. The king declares a state-of-emergency and then changes his mind .
 When one politician refused the kings request to form a government, Victor Emmanuel turned to Mussolini . Mussolini turned to the Italian dictator after a politician refused his request .
 Fascists celebrated in the streets by beating up political enemies and shutting down left-wing newspapers . Fascists beat up political opponents and shut down newspapers in the wake of the attacks .
 Mussolini convinced both chambers to grant him full powers to rule by decree for a year . Mussolini's party held a small proportion of the seats in the chamber and could not claim the party allegiance of a single senator .
 Many mainstream politicians endorsed him because he promised to restore social order . But mainstream politicians backed him because of the promise of social order, he says .
 Mussolini could not long survive once brought into respectable political life . Mussolini's supporters assumed that he would not survive once he was brought to respectable life . They also assumed that Mussolini would not live long enough if he was re-elected .
 Mussolini’s shrewd management of fascist newspapers and his ability to plant favorable articles in other papers through cajoling and bribery helped win further support . Mussolini managed to win support for fascist newspapers .
 Mussolini developed an almost cult-like following in Italy . Despite a major political crisis in 1924 that followed his implication in the murder of a Socialist deputy, Mussolini became a cult of his .
 The Duce encouraged the phrase “Mussolini is always right” and managed to convince millions of people that this was indeed the case . He encouraged people to believe that he was always right .
 He was the first politician of the twentieth century to make use of modern communication techniques . He was first politician to use modern communications techniques .
 Mussolini subsidized several films about his accomplishments . His rambling speeches, voluminous tomes, an autobiography, and several authorized biographies were sold in glossy editions . Mussolini subsidized several films .
 By the 1930s, Italian journalists were required to capitalize He, Him, and His when referring to the Duce, as they did when mentioning God or Jesus Christ .
 In Vienna, Sigmund Freud at first praised him . Ezra Pound remained an admirer of his work .
 The United States ambassador saluted “a fine young revolution,” and Time magazine put him on its cover eight times . The U.S. ambassador was put on the cover of Time magazine eight times.
 Mussolini’s fascism seemed to offer a third way between unchecked capitalism and socialism and communism . To some foreign visitors, Mussolini's fascism offered a third-way, corporatism .
 The Duce became known abroad as the genius who managed to make Italian trains run on time . Such a description applied only to those carrying tourists to the ski resorts in the Alps .
 Not long after Mussolini took power, French newspapers began to describe him as Carnival Caesar . Mussolini was described as a Carnival Caesar by French newspapers .
 The Duce strutted about, boasting egregiously, his eyes rolling and his chin jutting out as he piled falsehood upon exaggeration . His eyes rolled and his jaw jutted out, the Duce's chin juts out, he boasted .
 He insisted officials and assistants sprint to his desk, and ordered photographers to take pictures of him fencing, playing tennis, or jogging by troops he was reviewing .
 Despite his insistence that he be portrayed as dynamic, he was rather lazy . But despite his insistence he was . rather lazy, he is rather lazy. He was rather .
 The Dynamics of Fascism 1009 Italian dictator was an actor, and the balconies from which he thundered speeches were his stage . To some extent, the dictator was . an actor .
 Despite the dictator’s attempt to project an image of fascism that emphasized physical vigor, relatively little military training actually took place in Italy .
 The Italian army remained beset by inadequate command structures and poor training . The army was plagued by poor training and poor command structures .
 The Duce took over the most important operations of the state and was like an orchestra conductor trying to play all of the instruments at once . "The Duce is a very powerful man," says Gov. Larry Brown .
 Mussolini's assessment of Italy’s military strength and reality widened . The gap between Mussolini and Italy's military strength widened . Mussolini’ assessment of Italian military strength has widened .
 Mussolini's rule was farcical, but in Italy, as in other fascist states, there was nothing comical about the brutality of the police or about his provocative foreign policy . Mussolini made Europe an increasingly dangerous place, which made Europe increasingly dangerous .
 Mussolini made peace with the Catholic Church in order to placate a potentially powerful source of opposition . The Catholic Church had previously denounced the regime after fascist squads smashed Catholic workers’ cooperatives along with similar Socialist organizations .
 In 1929, the Duce signed the Lateran Pacts with the Church, a concordat that left the Vatican an independent papal enclave within Rome . The Vatican is now an independent Papal enclave .
 In exchange, the papacy for the first time officially recognized Italy’s existence . The papacy in exchange for the existence of Italy, Italy was officially recognized .
 The Italian dictator returned religious instruction to all schools, and banned freemasonry, literature that the Church considered obscene, the sale of contraceptives, and swearing in public . The dictator also banned fremasonry and banned the use of contraceptives .
 Mussolini won further Church support with his pro-natal campaign . Pro-natal campaigns included measures limiting Protestant publications, and fulminations against women playing sports .
 The Duce now had his grown children baptized and his marriage recognized by the Church . Ten years after his civil marriage to a wife with whom he no longer lived, the Duce had his children baptized . He now has grown children baptised .
 Mussolini sought to eliminate the boundary between private and public life . Like Hitler and Stalin, Mussolini wanted to eliminate boundary between public and private life . Mussolini tried to end the separation between public life and private .
 He wanted the ‘new Italian woman’ to espouse the values of, and serve, the nationalist state . The new Italian woman would espouse values of the nationalist state .
 With the fascist motto, “Everything within the state, nothing outside the State,” he viewed the family as an essential component of fascism . He viewed family as a vital component of the fascist state .
 ‘Civic discipline begins with family discipline,’ says Italian children’s book . Italian children's book: Civic discipline starts with discipline .
 Fascism could never overcome the inevitable tensions between family obligations and what fascists considered national duties . Fascism failed to overcome the tension between family duties and national duties, says the author of the book .
 The idea of women serving the nation-state was very new, but the idea of female paramilitary squads was new . For example, the attempt to create mass fascist organizations of women ranging from after-work recreational clubs to paramilitary squads is new .
 The Duce disliked the fact that women had obtained the right to vote in Great Britain, Germany, and several other countries, and that more Italian women were going to work . Women were allowed to vote and work in Italy .
 In Italy’s fascist state, the place of women was, in principle, in the home, obeying their husbands and having babies . In Italy's fascist state—as in Hitler's Germany—the place of . women was in principle in the . home . The place of
 Mussolini viewed corporatism as a possible remedy to the economic problems that beset Italy . Mussolini wanted corporatism to be a remedy to Italy's economic problems .
 The Duce created twenty-two corporations, or assemblies, overseen, at least in theory, by a National Council of Corporations . The councils will be overseen by the Duce .
 Its chief practical consequence, at least until the early 1930s, was to swell the number of state bureaucrats hired to supervise creaky, inefficient, and largely superfluous organizations . State bureaucrats were hired in the 1930s to oversee creaky and inefficient organizations .
 Mussolini considered industries crucial to the colonial and European wars he was planning . State agencies invested in industries he considered crucial to his plans . Mussolini's government invested heavily in the industries he planned to use .
 By 1935, no other European state, except Stalin’s Soviet Union, controlled such a large portion of industry, with major shares in industries such as steelworks and shipbuilding .
 Italian industry still depended on raw materials imported from abroad, including copper, rubber, and coal . Hydroelectricity and automobile manufacturing developed in Italy .
 The Duce’s pet program generated unemployment and reduced pasture and fruit-growing lands and the number of farm animals . But wheat production was uneconomical in many regions; by converting from labor-intensive crops to wheat, it generated unemployment .
 Mussolini’s speeches celebrated “blood and soil” (a constant refrain on the fascist and authoritarian right in inter-war Europe), the number of Italian peasant proprietors declined .
 The failures of Mussolini’s economic policies were compounded by the demands of military spending . Military spending absorbed a full third of Italian income by the mid-1930s .
 Italy’s per capita income remained about that of Britain and the U.S. in the early nineteenth century .
 Under fascism, the gap between the more industrialized north and the poor south continued to grow . The gap between industrialized northern and poor south grew under fascism .
 The paradox of Italian corporatism was revealed in Mussolini’s rhetoric that there were no social classes in Italy, only Italians . Mussolini's rhetoric was revealed that there was no social class in Italy . The paradox is that there are no social classes in Italy .
 The Ducey declared the end of class struggle and bragged that he had done more for workers than any other leader . He bragged of doing more for the workers than anyone else .
 Italian women with gas masks line up for the Duce as part of a parade of 70,000 fascist women and girls in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of fascism in 1939 . Most workers remained skeptical about Mussolini .
 The fascist government did limit the workday in 1923, and in 1935 it introduced a five-day workweek . In 1923, the government introduced a limit on workdays .
 The conditions of life for sharecroppers and other landless laborers worsened in the 1930s . Sharecroppers were forced to live in a state of poverty for decades .
 In the south, peasants resented and resisted the state, the Mafia provided an alternative allegiance, a parallel underworld government . The Mafia provided the alternative allegiance to peasants in the south .
 Mussolini failed to destroy the power of the Neapolitan and Sicilian Mafias, even though the number of Mafia-related killings fell dramatically . Mussolini's death toll fell dramatically, but he failed to stop the Mafia .
 The Church remained at least an alternative source of influence to fascism . The Church also remained an alternative to fascism. The Church was at least at the center of fascism.
 A Catholic revival, which included a rapid rise in the number of priests and nuns, was independent of fascism . A rapid rise of priests, nuns and nuns was seen in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Few Italians paid attention to the Duce’s attempts to convince Italians to stop singing in the streets, or his insistence that they dress babies in fascist black shirts . Few Italians pay attention to his attempts to persuade them to stop doing so .
 Mussolini called for more baby soldiers and ban on sale of birth-control devices . Birthrate fell from 147. births per 1,000 in 1911 to 102. in 1936, despite the call of the Duce .
 Massive emigration out of Italy continued throughout the 1920s and 1930s . Massive emigrants from Italy continued to leave Italy in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Overall, most Italians still supported Mussolini, if only passively . However, overall, most Italian still supported him .
 Hitler was born in the small Austrian town of Braunau, on the border with Bavaria . Hitler was also born in Braunau .
 As a boy, Hitler was “notoriously cantankerous, willful, arrogant, and bad-tempered,” a teacher remembered . Hitler lacked discipline and was, as a teacher said, “willacious, willful and arrogant” Hitler . Hitler was a
 He lived in a hostel with little money and few friends in Vienna . Turned down for admission to the School of Painting at the Academy of Fine Arts .
 Hitler had himself listed as “painter and architect” in the 1914 city directory . His painting amounted to earning a little money painting postcards for tourists . In the 1914 directory, Hitler was listed as a painter and architect .
 Hitler was of average height with a large head, dark hair, broad cheekbones, and an unusually high forehead . Hitler had an unusually large forehead and dark hair . Hitler was born in 1941 .
 Wearing baggy clothes and sporting a trimmed mustache, he was not an impressive-looking man . He was wearing baggy clothing and sporting his characteristic trimmed mustache .
 Hitler was compulsive about daily routines, did not drink coffee or smoke, was a vegetarian, and took only an occasional drink . Hitler did not smoke or smoke and was vegetarian .
 During this time in Vienna, Hitler expressed great hatred for the Social Democrats, not Jews, despite Vienna’s rampant anti-Semitism . Hitler expressed hatred for Social Democrats not Jews but for Jews .
 He moved to Munich and, as a German nationalist, cheered the proclamation of war . As a German national, he cheered the declaration of war against Germany .
 He joined the German army and was wounded in the leg in 1916 . He was gassed in a British attack just before the end of the war, and decorated on three occasions for bravery .
 Hitler was found unfit for promotion to the officer corps, believing that he lacked leadership qualities . Hitler's superiors found him unfit for a promotion . Hitler died in the Battle of the Second World War .
 He claimed to have warned fellow soldiers that “in spite of our big guns victory would be denied” to Germany because of “the invisible foes of the German people,” Marxists and Jews, he said .
 The war accentuated Hitler’s fanatical German nationalism and transformed him into a raging anti-Semite . Hitler became an anti-Semitic Nazi after the war .
 Oswald Spengler published the first volume of The Decline of the West, published in 1918 . In 1918, he published a volume of the book, "The Decline Of the West"
 Spengler believed that the German race would emerge victorious in a biological struggle against its competitors . Spenglers believed that Germany would win in biological struggle .
 German culture would be embodied in a new' state in which the individual would be subsumed in the racial nation . Individual would be subumed in a racial nation, the author says .
 Hitler had constructed a view of the world that was strikingly similar to that of Spengler . The Dynamics of Fascism 1013 is published by The History of Fascisms, published by David Frum .
 It was composed of anti-Semitism, anti-communism, and aggressive nationalism, it was said . It was also composed of racism and anti-Communism, it said .
 He believed Germans were “Aryans, descended from a superior Caucasian people . He believed that Germans were "Aryan," descended from superior Caucasians .
 Some Nazis now refer to Hitler as the “Fuhrer, or “leader,” as Mussolini was the Duce in Italy . Some Nazis have since called Hitler the Fuhrer or "leader"
 Like the Free Corps, the S.A. offered comradeship and an outlet for violence to frustrated right-wing war veterans . The Free Corps was founded by the Free Corp. in 1968 .
 To its members, Hitler appeared to be a man of action, a survivor of the trenches—one of them . Hitler was one of them, and Hitler was a survivor, of action .
 The Nazis marched out of a Munich beer hall on November 9, 1923, planning to seize power and then march on Berlin . Emboldened by their success at attracting adherents, the Nazis marched into power in Munich . The Nazis planned to seize the government and march to Berlin .
 Some of the first Nazi storm troopers in 1922, with swastikas on their arms and flag . The storm troopers were the first storm troopers to carry out the Nazi movement .
 He reiterated the claim, originally that of General Paul von Hindenburg, that Germany had been stabbed in the back by Jews and Communists during the war . The claim was originally believed by many Germans .
 It was easy to forget that the military front had collapsed before the home front, a convenient collective amnesia . The military front collapsed before that home front did .
 His identification of communism with Jews intensified his obsessive anti-Semitism, he said . The anti-Semitic leader was obsessed with anti-communist ideology .
 Hitler believed that people could only absorb a few ideas, which must be hammered in over and over again . Hitler never strayed from the most salient themes of his appeal, believing that people must only absorb one idea per day .
 Germany would rearm and then conquer “living space” at the expense of the “inferior” Slavic peoples . Germany would then conquer "living space" in order to conquer ‘living space,’ says historian .
 Many Germans believed that the problem was not that Germany had fought the war, but only that victory had been stolen from them . Many Germans now believed that they had been robbed of victory in the war .
 In these early days, the Nazis drew much of their support from the middle class . The middle class had been devastated by hyperinflation of the early 1920s and turned against the Weimar Republic itself .
 Small businessmen, shopkeepers, craftsmen, and clerks had to sell or pawn silver or other items of value that had been passed down in their families for generations . Pensioners struggled to make ends meet .
 They preferred more traditional authoritarian ideas that appealed to their sense of social exclusiveness, such as a monarchy backed by the armed forces in the Prussian tradition . They preferred to be more traditional .
 Middle-class businessmen of more modest means early on were more likely to back the Nazis . Middle-classes of modest means backed the Nazis early on .
 They looked to Hitler to protect them from ‘Bolsheviks’ and did not care how he did so . Hitler was the only man to protect the German people from the ‘bolshevik’
 Gustav Stresemann, Germany’s able and respected foreign minister, died in October 1929 . He was a powerful voice of support for the republic, gravely weakening the Weimar coalition in the Reichstag . The death in 1929 was the death of the able, respected foreign
 The American Wall Street Crash in October 1929 compounded social and political instability . The crash was the result of the collapse of the U.S. stock market .
 The economic hardship of the Great Depression swelled the ranks of parties committed to overthrowing parliamentary rule in Germany and other states . Germany and Germany were among the most successful parties in the country .
 In Eastern and Central Europe, parliamentary governments did not survive the instability wrought by the economic dislocation of the 1920s and 1930s, nor the bitter ethnic rivalries within these nations .
 Each of these multinational states had some sort of liberal constitution in the 1920s . Except for the kingdom of Yugoslavia, each of these countries had a liberal constitution .
 By the end of the 1930s, only Czechoslovakia had not become a dictatorship . Only Czechsoslovakia was the only country not to be ruled out of dictatorship .
 With the exception of Czechoslovakia, all of these countries were heavily agricultural, poor, and had high percentages of illiteracy . The Czech Republic was one of the most industrialized countries in the world .
 Eastern Europe had very small middle classes, except Czech Bohemia, parts of Serbia, and major cities like Budapest . When compared with the countries of Western Europe, countries of Eastern Europe have small middle class .
 A daunting variety of conflicting economic interests could be found among the people of Eastern Europe . From those of wealthy Hungarian landowners to Bosnian mountain dwellers scratching out a meager living from thankless land .
 In Eastern Europe, most peasants were not interested in politics and associated states with taxes . Most peasants did not want to be involved in politics, and were opposed to the state .
 They wanted land reform, and this demand brought them into the political process . But they also want land reform . The land reform is not a political issue .
 After the war, the governments of the Eastern European states did implement ambitious land reform programs that reduced the number and size of the large estates, adding to the ranks of small landholders .
 Agrarian parties vilified Jews as ethnic outsiders, mobilizing resentment against their economic roles as bankers, small businessmen, and shopkeepers . Jews were vilified as ethnic outsider .
 In Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria, wealthy landowners turned toward authoritarian rule . Wealthy landowners wanted to protect their estates against further land reform .
 As political parties and ultimately parliamentary rule failed amid agricultural Depression, nationalism filled the gap, becoming ever more strident and aggressive . The result of the Depression was the rise of nationalism in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The Yugoslav experiment in parliamentary rule ended abruptly in 1929, when King Alexander I dissolved the assembly and banned political parties . The experiment was the first of its kind in the country .
 In 1934, King Alexander was assassinated, with the help of Ustasa members . King Alexander died in 1934, along with his wife, Queen Victoria .
 Croatia won status as an ‘autonomous’ region with its own assembly, but this did not reduce Serb domination of the multinational state . Five years later, Croatia was declared an “autonomous region’s” region .
 In Yugoslavia, then, the principal battle was not between partisans of dictatorship 1016 Ch. 1016 . The main battle was between partisans and partisans .
 In Hungary, Admiral Miklos Horthy appointed a fascist prime minister in 1932 . Horthy repressed the extreme right-wing parties when they threatened to seize power for themselves . In Hungary the head of state since 1920, Horthy has been head since 1920 .
 Bulgaria's political life was marked by assassinations and coups d’etat followed by dictatorship in 1935 . The country was ruled by a dictatorship in the 1930s .
 In Greece, republicans, monarchists, and military officers battled it out . Republicans and monarchists fought it out in Greece in the 1930s .
 King Carol II established a dictatorship by suspending the constitution in 1938 . In 1938, Romanian king Carol II suspended the constitution by suspending it . Carol II became a dictator in Romania .
 He did so to protect his rule against a challenge from the fascist “Legion of the Archangel Michael” and particularly its murderous shock troops, the “Iron Guard,” a fanatically Orthodox religious group with strong anti-Semitic prejudices .
 Romanian fascists drew upon peasant discontent created by agricultural deflation . Romanian fascists were inspired by peasants' dissatisfaction with the state of agriculture .
 The king's bloody suppression of the Legion and the Iron Guard only postponed the victory of fascism in Romania . The king’s bloody suppression . only postpones the victory . of fascism .
 In Eastern Europe, only Czechoslovakia managed to achieve political stability as a parliamentary democracy, despite differences between Czechs and Slovaks . Czechs, Slovaks and Czechs were the only two countries to have achieved political stability in Eastern Europe .
 By the late 1930s, it was apparent that the greatest threat to parliamentary rule in Czechoslovakia would come from Nazi Germany . Hitler seized upon ethnic tensions in the Czech Sudetenland between the German-speaking population and Czechs .
 Even Central and Eastern Europe’s most stable country was not immune from destabilizing ethnic rivalries . Consequently, even Central and . Eastern Europe's most stable nation was not . immune to destabilizing . rivalries, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In Austria, the undersized, German-speaking remnant of the Habsburg Empire, fascism was closely tied to German nationalism and anti-Semitism . Fascism in Austria was closely associated with German nationalism, anti-Semiticism .
 Lying between Germany and Italy, Austria almost inevitably came under the influence of those states . Lying in the middle of the border, Austria became more and more dependent on Italy .
 During the 1930s, Mussolini wanted to absorb the Austrian Tyrol, although only the southern part was Italian speaking . Hitler wanted Germany to annex all of Austria, and Hitler wanted to annex Austria .
 Police killed a hundred striking workers during demonstrations in Vienna by Socialists protesting right-wing violence . The split between right and left in Austria led to “Bloody Friday,” July 15, 1927, when police killed 100 striking workers .
 Vienna's social democracy was rooted in areas of public housing on the edge of the city . Yet in Vienna social democracy is rooted in public housing .
 The contrast between the stately inner city and working-class housing could not be missed . Some of the old Habsburg nobles still lived in the city .
 Anti-Semitism had deep roots in Vienna and Vienna as well as in provincial Austria . Anti-Semitic anti-Semitism was widespread in Vienna, Vienna and provincial Austria.
 As everywhere, the Depression accentuated existing social and political tensions and violence . The Depression was a period of social tension and violence in the United States .
 The violent anti-parliamentary groups in neighboring Bavaria, where Hitler had got his start, served as a point of attraction for the Austrian Nazis . Hitler had started his career in the state of Bavaria .
 Austrian right-wing Home Guard wore traditional green woolen coats, lederhosen, and Alpine hats, but carried modern machine guns . Members of the Austrian Home Guard carried machine guns in the Home Guard's uniforms .
 Social Democrats formed their own guard, determined to protect their members . The Social Democrats are determined to ensure their members are protected .
 In 1933, Chancellor Dollfuss dissolved the Austrian Parliament because it stood in the way of an authoritarian state . He was a diminutive, awkward man who wore traditional Austrian peasant garb because he was proud of his provincial origins .
 Workers of Vienna, led by the Social Democrats, undertook a general strike . In February 1934, after Home Guard raids on workers’ organizations and newspapers, the workers of Vienna took part in the general strike against the Home Guard .
 Fighting erupted when Dollfuss unleashed the Home Guard and army against the left . Dollsfuss unleashed the army and Home Guard against the right .
 Army units attacked industrial suburbs with artillery fire, killing several hundred workers . Several hundred workers were killed during four days of fighting in industrial suburbs .
 Police closed down all Social Democratic organizations, tried and executed some of their leaders . Some of the leaders were executed by the police .
 Dollfuss then banned all political parties except the fascist Fatherland Front . Dollsfuss banned all parties except those belonging to the fascist Party of Germany . DollFuss banned most political parties in Germany .
 The Great War and the economic and social frustrations of the post-armistice period, as elsewhere, contributed to the rise of the far right .
 War veterans were prominent in the Faisceau movement and the Cross of Fire movement . War veterans emulated the newly created Italian fascist organization, and in Italy .
 French fascist leaders included two renowned producers of luxury products, the perfume magnate Francois Coty and the champagne baron Pierre Taittinger . French fascist leader included two of the most famous producers of champagne products .
 Patriotic Youth movement, founded in 1924, counted more than 100,000 members by the end of the decade . Patriotic youth movement was founded by the Patriotic Party in 1924 .
 Beginning in 1935, more people died in France each year than were born there, and its population grew only because of the arrival of immigrants . Italians, Poles, Spaniards, and Belgians, as well as Jews from Eastern Europe, arrived in France .
 About 7. percent of the French population in the late 1930s consisted of immigrants—the highest percentage in Europe . The highest percentage of immigrants in Europe was in France .
 French fascists decried the existence of the Third Republic, which seemed to them an anomaly in a continent of dictators . The Third Republic was the only country not to be ruled by a dictator .
 Political power in France lay not with a strong executive authority but with the Chamber of Deputies . Political power was in the chamber of deputies, not with the strong executive power .
 Governments came and went in turn, increasing rightist dissatisfaction . Governments come and go in turn to increase rightists dissatisfaction .
 In 1934, a seamy political scandal offered the extreme right an opening for action . The scandal was the result of an election scandal in 1934 that led to a split in the US Senate .
 The appearance of government complicity in a fraudulent bondselling scheme led to violent rightist demonstrations against the republic . Serge Stavisky, a Ukrainianborn Jew, engineered the scheme by a Ukrainian born Jew .
 On February 6, 1934, right-wing groups rioted, charging across the Seine River in Paris toward the Chamber of Deputies . Troops dispersed by troops, with casualties on both sides . Right-wing rioters charged across the river, charged toward the chamber .
 French right did not have a dominating figure capable of uniting opposition to parliamentary rule . But unlike the right in Germany, Italy, or Spain, the French right didn't have a dominant figure . The French right has not been able to un unite opposition to parliament .
 On February 12, millions of French men and women marched in support of the republic . Millions of people marched in France on February 12 .
 The formation of the Popular Front in France must be seen in the context of the threat posed by the right not only in France but throughout Europe . The Popular Front is an alliance between the Radical, Socialist, and Communist parties .
 Socialists and Communists had been at odds since the Congress of Tours in 1920 . Socialist and Communist parties were at odds at the time .
 The reality of the threat of the right to France overcame ideology in the 1930s, says French historian . The threat of a French revolution overcame ideology, he says . France's right to be a French nation was threatened by the Nazis, he adds .
 Stalin s fear of German rearmament led the Comintern to repudiate the “class versus class” strategy in June 1934 . Stalin feared of German rearmament and repudiated the ‘class vs. class’ strategy .
 The three parties prepared a compromise program incorporating tax reform, a shorter workweek, increased unemployment benefits, support for the League of Nations and international disarmament, and the dissolution of the fascist leagues . The Dynamics of Fascism 1019 is published by Fascism 1009 .
 Popular Front won a clear victory in the subsequent elections of May 1936 . The Popular Front was victorious in the elections of that year .
 The Communists refused to participate in the ensuing government, on orders from Moscow . The Communist Party was ordered to take control of the government .
 That the Socialist leader was Jewish intensified the rage of the extreme right . That the . Socialist leader . was Jewish .
 Unions encouraged by Popular Front’s pre-election promises, put forward demands for better work conditions . The largest strike wave in French history broke out across the country .
 Workers occupied plants, singing, putting on theatrical productions, and staging mock trials of bosses . For the first time, workers occupied plants and sang, sang and put on theatrical shows .
 The Communists tried to bring the strikes to a speedy conclusion, fearful that defeat might hurt their influence with workers or help the Socialists . The Communists were fearful of a defeat .
 Blum convinced employers and union representatives to sign the “Matignon Agreements’s” establishing a forty-hour workweek, pay raises, and paid vacations . Blum persuaded employers to sign ‘Matignan Agreements,’ establishing a 40-
 France's economy falter in the face of intransigent opposition from employers and wealthy families shipping assets out of France . But the economy continued to falter despite the government's intervention .
 Blum declared a “pause” in his reform program, and cut back social benefits and other state expenditures . Blum declares a ‘pause’ in the reform program .
 In March 1937, police fired on workers demonstrating against the rightist Cross of Fire group . Police fired on protesters against the group in March 1937 . Police shot at protesters in the face of the group's supporters .
 The Communists denounced the government, which they had helped bring to power but never joined . The Communists helped bring the government to power, but never officially joined .
 The government had to devalue the franc several times because of the flow of gold abroad . The franc had to be devalued several times due to the influx of gold .
 When the conservative-dominated Senate refused, he resigned in June 1937 . He resigned after the Senate refused to accept his resignation .
 A centrist government lurched on in France as the international situation worsened . The government has been in touch with a centrist government since 2009 .
 Fascism threatened even Belgium and the Netherlands, as well . Fascism in the Low Countries and Britain threatened even the Netherlands .
 In Belgium, the fascist party “Rex” led by Leon Degrelle drew on the frustrations of white-collar workers and shopkeepers . Victims of the Depression blamed competition from department stores and socialist consumer cooperatives .
 Economic malaise compounded tensions generated by the linguistic division between French-speaking Walloons and the Flemish speakers of Flanders . Some of the Walloons have demanded autonomy from Flanders, some of whom demanded autonomy .
 The majority of the middle class remained loyal to parliamentary government . Most of the country's middle class remain loyal to government .
 Banks and the Socialist and Catholic parties successfully pressured the government for action to assist the lower middle class . Banks increased credit available to small retailers and extended union rights to white-collar employees .
 The Catholic Church's condemnation of Rex in 1937 led many of the group’s members to return to moderate Catholic parties . Rex was a member of the moderate Catholic party in the 1930s . Rex's death in 1937 was the result of the church's condemnation .
 In the Netherlands, the Dutch National Socialist League emulated the Nazis, was condemned by both the Calvinist Reform Church and the Catholic Church . Similarly, in the Netherlands the Dutch national Socialist League was condemned as a result of the Nazis .
 In the depths of the Depression, a fascist movement developed even in Britain, the home of parliamentary government . Fascism was a movement even in the UK, the country's most powerful government .
 That there were fewer immigrants in Britain than, for example, France, probably limited the appeal of the nationalistic far-right parties . Fewer immigrants in the UK than France probably limited their appeal .
 Mussolini provided funds, as did Hitler, who served as best man at his second wedding . Hitler also provided funds for Mussolini's second wedding, and was best man .
 Political parties, labor unions, and voluntary associations crumbled before the Nazi onslaught . Political parties and labor unions collapsed before the Nazis onslaught .
 The Depression increased opposition to the Weimar Republic, particularly among the middle classes . The Depression led to the collapse of the government of Weimar Germany .
 The Nazis in 1929 were but one of a number of extreme right-wing groups determined to overthrow the republic . The Nazis were among those determined to topple the republic.
 The Depression also further eroded the centrist coalition within the Reichstag upon which the republic had depended from the beginning . The Depression eroded the centrists' centrist coalition in the Reichsag .
 In March 1930, the last remnants of the Weimar coalition came apart under the pressure of the economic turmoil . The government, led by the Social Democrats, resigned . The Third Reich 1021 1930 .
 The new elections held in September 1930 confirmed the erosion of the parliamentary center . The elections were held in 1930s .
 Hitler ran for president against Hindenburg in 1932, winning 13. million votes to the generals 19 million and the Communist candidate’s 4 million . Bolstered by rising numbers of supporters, in 1932 Hitler won 13 million .
 Traditional conservatives including military men, not the least of whom was Hindenburg, turned against the republic . Traditional conservatives, including military . men, such as Hindenburg . turned against republic .
 Franz von Papen (18791969) was power broker of the traditional anti-parliamentarian right . He became chancellor in June 1932 . He was the first chancellor of the 1930s .
 The Nazis and Communists had won more than half the votes cast in the Weimar Republic . Support for the Nazis had fallen by 2 million votes, but support for the Communists had increased .
 General Kurt von Schleicher wanted to form a parliamentary majority by wooing some Nazis and even trade unionists . He wanted to include some Nazis, but excluded Hitler and trade unionsists .
 When Schleicher’s government resigned, Papen proposed a coalition government that would include the Nazis, with Hitler as chancellor . Papen, intriguing with Hitler, proposed a government that included the Nazis .
 Papen believed that Hitler could serve his purposes if the Nazis received only three of twelve cabinet posts . Papen wanted to transform Germany from a republic into a military authoritarian regime .
 Once Hitler and the Nazis had helped assure the end of the Weimar Republic, they could be tossed aside . The Nazis were able to win back the title of "Hitler's Second Reich"
 In Italy, Giolitti’s Liberals had made the same fatal miscalculation in 1922 in dealings with Mussolini . In Italy it had made a fatal mistake in its dealings with the Italian leader .
 Papen convinced the president to appoint Hitler as chancellor, believing that he could control Hitler in his capacity as vice-chancellor . Papen was joined by members of Hindenburg’s family and staff .
 Adolf Hitler formed the seventeenth—and last—Weimar government in 1933 . On January 30, 1933, he formed the Weimar government . Adolf Hitler's government was the last of Weimar's government .
 To the former, he seemed a vulgar commoner, to the latter, a mere foot soldier who made boastful claims of military expertise . The former, however, seemed to be a mere commoner .
 Most wealthy businessmen still preferred more traditional nationalists like Hindenburg and Papen . Most worried about Hitler’s unpredictability and his early denunciations of capitalists and promises to create a new elite .
 Some big businessmen shared the Nazis’ virulent anti-Semitism, but were uneasy with the foreign condemnation it brought . They were concerned that it might one day undercut their markets abroad .
 Rhineland industrialists were no more in favor of parliamentary government than were Prussian Junkers . Most Rhinland industrialists supported a parliamentary government .
 Hitler flattered business leaders and promised public order, which was good for business, even if achieved at gunpoint . Hitler's promise of public order was good business for business . Hitler promised to make public order a good business model .
 Hitler’s appointment as chancellor sparked a wave of systematic and brutal Nazi attacks on union members, Socialists, Communists, Jews, and some Catholics who opposed Nazism . The Nazi State .
 Mussolini consolidated his power over the Italian state in about three years . Mussolini had consolidated his control of the Italian government over three years before his death .
 During the night of February 27, 1933, a fire caused considerable damage to the Reichstag building in Berlin . The fire was caused by a fire that destroyed the building's roof .
 The police arrested a deranged, homeless Dutch Communist, charging him with arson . He was charged with arson after he set himself alight in his home .
 Citing an imaginary Communist plot, Hindenburg issued an emergency decree suspending virtually all individual rights . Hindenburg's emergency decree was issued in response to the threat of a Communist Party plot .
 Penalties of imprisonment and even death could be imposed without due legal process as police arrested thousands of Communists . Thousands of Communists were arrested without legal process .
 Hermann Goring authorized a new auxiliary police force made up of members of the S.A. and other paramilitary groups . Goring is one of Hitler’s long-time disciples .
 Hitler promised he would hold the last parliamentary elections in Nazi Germany . But the election did not give Hitler the overwhelming majority he had anticipated . The Nazis emerged with 44 percent of the vote .
 On March 23, the cowed Reichstag approved an Enabling Act, which extended the unlimited ‘emergency’ powers of the Nazis . On March 25, Hitler's Nazis were given unlimited “emergency powers” on March 23 .
 It tripled in size, with 2. million members by the end of 1933, adding so many people that the ‘old fighters’ who had joined early in the 1920s began to grumble that the party was losing its elite character .
 In May 1933, they organized the state-controlled German Labor Front to replace the unions they had The Third Reich 1023 Communists under arrest after the Reichstag fire of 1933 decimated .
 Hitler dissolved the state parliaments and took away the remaining autonomy of the individual German states . He appointed Nazis to take over state governments . Hitler dissolved state parliamentarians and took over the German government .
 A new law empowered officials to dismiss subordinates whom they considered potentially disloyal to the Nazis . Officials could not prove that they were of pure “Aryan” racial stock .
 In October, the first concentration camp began operation at Dachau near Munich for the incarceration of political prisoners . First concentration camp opened in October 1944 .
 Hitler was far from envisioning social equality, which he associated with socialism and communism . Despite Nazi rhetoric about a racially pure community of Germans, Hitler was not interested in social equality .
 The Depression in particular drove desperate middle-class Germans into the Nazi fold . The Nazis drew support from all social classes in Germany .
 Many German officers were becoming increasingly wary of the S.A. It was now almost 3 million strong and seemed out of control . But many German officers became increasingly wary .
 Its members openly competed with Nazi officials for appointments and influence . Members of the Nazi National Socialist Party openly competed for appointments .
 Rohm announced that henceforth members of his force could not be tried by courts and that they were not subject to police authority . Rohm: Police officers will not be subject to authority and cannot be tried in court .
 He foolishly bragged that he would free Hitler from his “stupid and dangerous” advisers . Believing that Hitler would betray the party’s radicalism, he bragged about his plans .
 Hitler convinced President Hindenburg that the gory purge had saved the German Third Reich from a plot . Hitler convinced him that the purge was a plot to stop a plot in Germany .
 Hindenburg s death in August 1934 allowed Hitler to combine the titles of chancellor and Fiihrer . The title replaced that of “president,” a title that smacked of a republic . Hindenburg died in August 1944 .
 Ninety percent of those voting in a plebiscite approved Hitlers assumption of both functions . Hitlers assumed Hitler's role as Hitler .
 The Nazi program of “coordination” was applied to most aspects of civil society, such as organized groups and activities outside the family . The Nazis were able to control most of the country's civil society .
 The Nazis had already gradually taken over voluntary associations, such as professional associations and sports clubs . The Nazis were already gradually taking control of voluntary associations .
 Depoliticized, closely monitored voluntary associations and churches could remain centers of local public life without threatening Nazi domination . Churches and voluntary associations were closely monitored by the Nazis .
 New university chairs in “racial hygiene,” military history, and German prehistory reflected Nazi interests . University chairs in "racial hygiene" and "German prehistory" reflected Nazi interest .
 Pictures of Hitler went up in every classroom and radios broadcast his speeches . Hitler's speeches were broadcast on radios and television screens .
 The Nazis brought hundreds of thousands of active Germans into carefully controlled Nazi organizations . The goal of each was to “reach toward Hitler”—that is to share the racist, nationalist goals of the Fiihrer .
 Hitler Youth included almost half of all German boys between 10 and 14 years of age . League of German Girls also flourished in 1936 .
 Vicarious participation in Nazi ceremonies and rituals also helped augment a sense of national identity . The Nazi rituals were part of a national identity in Germany .
 He applied a strategy of ‘divide and rule’ to the higher echelons of government, such as the three chancelleries that replaced the cabinet . He applied the same strategy to the three Chancelleries .
 He tolerated open competition between his most trusted subordinates and between branches of government . He tolerated and even encouraged open competition among his subordinates .
 Those who enjoyed Hitler’s confidence ruthlessly and aggressively carved out personal fiefdoms. Those who enjoy Hitler's confidence carved out their own fiefdom. Hitler's ruthless ruthlessly carved out his own personal interests .
 Unlike Stalin, who watched over even the most minor details with obsessive care, the Fiihrer provided little supervision to government agencies . The FIIhrer had little supervision of government agencies.
 Hitler's frenzied activity would follow brief bursts of activity . Hitler would often catch up with something that caught his attention .
 He missed meetings, worked irregular hours, and was often disorganized . But he missed meetings and worked irregular work hours .
 The “doctrine of conflict” adversely affected the economic goals Hitler set for the state . Hitler's economic goals were set to be achieved by the end of his rule of conflict .
 The army and the air force quarreled over resources, the S.S. and the police over jurisdiction . The army, the police and the army quarrelled over resources .
 The Four-Year Plan launched in 1936 under Goring’s direction illustrated the functioning of the Nazi state . The plan was launched under the direction of Goring .
 Industrialists resisted state intervention in their businesses . Furthermore, industrialists resisted government intervention .
 Hitler correctly determined that the rapid rearmament of Germany would help create jobs . Although he knew or cared very little about economics, Hitler knew that he wanted to create jobs in Germany .
 Food shortages remained severe until 1936, but public works projects helped reduce unemployment and inflation . Food shortages continued to be severe until the end of that year .
 Big industrial concerns prospered, particularly those manufacturing war materials . War materials were used to make war materials, especially materials .
 The German gross national product rose by 81 percent, in part because of the state direction of the economy . The German economy rose by more than 80 percent in 2012 .
 More consumer goods, such as radios, reached the consumer market, contributing to a sense of optimism about material conditions of life .
 Some families of modest means who had never had the opportunity to travel took cruises in the Baltic Sea or even in the Mediterranean Sea .
 Hitler named this program “Strength Through Joy,” taking the idea from Mussolini’s after-work program of recreational trips in Italy . Hitler named it “strength Through Joy” Hitler named the program ‘Strength through Joy’
 Production of Hitler's planned low-cost “Volkswagen,” or “people’s car, was postponed because factories were needed for military production . Production of the “People's car” was postponed due to factories needed for the military .
 German industry depended on imports of iron ore, copper, oil, rubber, and bauxite . Industry depended heavily on imports from iron ore and copper .
 Many Germans found that their share in the ‘national community'’ was small . Many Germans find their share of the “national community’’ in Germany .
 Hitler liked to identify the German people with what he considered rural virtues . The number of small farms continued to decline in Germany .
 There was no marked return to the soil as Germany continued to urbanize . Instead, there was a marked increase in urbanization in Germany .
 Mussolini preached that a woman’s place was in the kitchen or in the delivery room . Like Mussolini, the Fiihrer preached that . A woman's place was not in the . kitchen or delivery room, he said .
 The state offered attractive financial benefits to families with children . The German birthrate continued to rise, bolstered by an improving economy .
 Hitler forced women to give up industrial jobs and excluded them from public service and teaching . Just months after becoming chancellor, he forced women out of industrial jobs . Hitler forced them out of work and excluded women from teaching and public service .
 Certain occupations were classified as “women’s work,” primarily those involving traditional textile or handicraft production or farm work . Certain occupations included those in traditional textile and handicraft work .
 Despite the slogan “Women at home, the reality in Nazi Germany, as in Mussolini’s Italy, was increasingly otherwise . The reality in Germany was that women were not at home .
 The campaign to remove women from paid employment ended in the late 1930s . Women were needed to replace men conscripted into the army, as women were needed .
 The number of women working in German industry rose by a third between 1933 and 1939 . Women working in Germany's factories rose by one third in a decade .
 After defeat in the Great War, humiliation by the Treaty of Versailles, Germans applauded as he dismantled the treaty piece by piece . Germans applauded when he dismantled it piece-by-piece .
 Most Germans approved of police action undertaken by the well-organized apparatus of the Nazi state . But most ordinary Germans also approved of Nazi state police action .
 Nazi state won approval with a harsh campaign against crime, which had increased during the Depression . The Nazi state of Germany won approval in 1938 .
 Most ordinary Germans approved of and indeed collaborated in the arrest and imprisonment of common criminals . Most Germans were proud of the arrests and imprisonment policies of the 1930s .
 The Gestapo and the “Kripo,” or criminal police, became ever more aggressive, arrested people considered ‘work shy,’ or others like gays . Others like gays who did not seem to fit in .
 Germans looked other way or were indifferent to the rounding up of political dissidents and Jews . Germans looked the other way, or indifferent, during the Nazi regime .
 Grimy corridors, offices furnished with Spartan simplicity, threats, kicks, troops chasing chained men up and down the reaches of the building . Gestapo agents asleep on tables .
 Thousands of Germans denounced neighbors to the Gestapo for being Jewish, Socialist, or Communist, and did so well aware of the consequences of their acts . Thousands of German Jews denounced neighbors for being Jews or Communists .
 By 1939, most Germans were fully aware of the existence of concentration camps, says historian .
 The Nazi government eagerly publicized the ‘trials’ and sentences that sent people to them . Indeed the Nazi government actively publicized the "trials" and sentences .
 Thomas Mann resigned from the prestigious Prussian Academy of Arts when called upon to pledge allegiance to Hitler . Thomas Mann had moved from being an angry conservative to a supporter of the republic .
 Hitler hauled out Heidegger on formal occasions to claim that Germany’s finest scholars had become Nazis . Hitler said that Germany's finest scholars were now Nazis .
 Storm troopers coordinated the burning of books by Jews, Communists, Socialists, and other disapproved authors . Storm troopers burned books by Communists, Jews and Communists in May 1933 . In May 1933 storm troopers coordinated burning of banned books .
 In 1937, posters in the municipal library of Essen boasted that in the four years that had elapsed since the book burnings, there had been a “healthy” decline in books borrowed and in the use of the reading room .
 Hitler railed against what he called ‘decadent’ art and its new experimental forms . Hitler ordered many works removed from museums, ordering many works taken from museums .
 In 1919, the architect Walter Gropius (18831969) had begun a school that combined art and applied arts in the town of Weimar . The architect had begun the school in Weimar, Germany .
 The Bauhaus—“House of Building”—set the architectural and decorative style of Weimar, stressing simplicity and beauty, expressing function through form, combining art .
 By using the most modern materials available in the quest for ‘total architecture,” Gropius hoped to reconcile art and industry . The most modern architecture was created in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Bauhaus’s modernism and the presence of foreign architects, artists, and designers made it suspect to Nazis . The Nazis were not interested in modern architecture and modernism .
 In 1937, the Nazis in Munich staged an “Exhibition of Degenerate Art,” including expressionist and dadaist paintings, among other modernist works . The Nazis staged an exhibition of modernist art in 1937 .
 A Great German Art Show opened at the same time, putting on view officially approved painting . A Great Germany Art Show also opened at same time as the event .
 Stalin’s preferred style of “socialist realism” emphasized work . Nazi art celebrated being German .
 Nazi artists offered sentimental portraits of German families tilling the land, blond blond 1028 Ch. 2 . Nazi artist offered sentimental portrait of families .
 The Nazis reserved particular vehemence for the works of Jewish composers . The late-nineteenthcentury compositions of the anti-Semitic Richard Wagner delighted Hitler .
 The theater, too, suffered from censorship, as well as from the departure of a number of Germany’s leading playwrights . The theater was also plagued by censorship, censorship and departures of leading German actors .
 Hitler himself preferred light plays, such as a rustic comedy that earned the Critic’s Prize in Berlin in 1934 . The leading character in the play was a pig .
 Anti-modernism could be seen in Nazi attacks on the supposed hedonism of the “roaring twenties,” which Nazis associated with licentiousness, homosexuality, neon lights, jazz, and modern dances . Nazis associated homosexuality, homosexuality and jazz, among other things .
 Joseph Goebbels was Hitler’s minister of propaganda . He orchestrated the cult of Hitler . He was Hitler's minister of . propaganda .
 The Fiihrer commissioned the popular filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl to produce Triumph of the Will . Leni's film Triumph of The Will was made in collaboration with the FIIhrer .
 The film depicts the carefully orchestrated Nuremberg rally of 1934 . 250,000 regimented, uniformed Germans with Nazi banners and flags saluted Hitler .
 The Nazis encouraged the production of a number of virulently anti-Semitic films . The few Suess is the story of an eighteenth-century The Third Reich 1029 Jewish financier who betrays a German state and is executed .
 Hitler made anti-Semitism a cornerstone of Nazi ideology and state policy . Hitler’s New Reich and the Jews were the focus of his anti-Semitic policies .
 In 1935, the Nuremberg Laws made the swastika the official symbol of Nazi Germany . Jews (defined by having had had one Jewish grandparent) of citizenship, deprived Jews of citizenship .
 Jews were forced to wear a yellow Star of David prominently on their clothing when they left their homes . Jews wore it prominently on the clothing they wore to leave their homes in the 1930s and 1940s . Jews were required to wear it prominently when leaving their homes.
 The laws forbade marriage or sex between non-Jewish Germans and Jews . In the quest for racial “purity,” the laws also forbade marriages between Jews and non-Jews .
 Some Jewish businesses, including banks, at first continued to operate, if only because Hitler feared the economic consequences if they were closed . Yet some Jewish businesses including banks at first operated .
 By July 1938, only 9,000 of the 50,000 businesses owned by Jews were still open . The Jewish community was wiped out of business by the Holocaust .
 Shortly thereafter, the German state forced Jewish families to list the value of what they owned and to turn over their assets to Gentile trustees, who could dispose of these estates as they wished . Shortly after, Jewish families were forced to list their assets .
 Decrees established a list of professions and occupations from which Jews were to be excluded . Jews were not allowed to be allowed into certain professions or occupations .
 When Hitler came to power, some Jews emigrated immediately, or made plans to do so . Some Jews were forced to leave the country . Some emigrated to Germany or planned to emigrate .
 More than 1,600 scholars and scientists have lost, resigned, or left their positions . More than a million people have been involved in the U.S. in the past year .
 Other intellectual exiles from Hitler’s Germany were not Jewish, among them the poet Stefan George, the writer Thomas Mann, and the painter Max Beckmann .
 Countries that had accepted Jewish refugees refused to do so . One by one, countries that accepted them refused to accept them . Countries that accepted Jews refused to .
 In 1938, the French government greatly tightened restrictions on the admission of refugees . The French government tightened restrictions in 1938 .
 Britain made it harder for Jews to get in, or to go to Palestine, which Britain controlled . Britain made Jews harder to get into or get in .
 Switzerland closed the door on Jews fleeing Germany or Austria in 1938 . Switzerland had been known as a haven for political exiles, but now closed the doors .
 The Swiss government suggested that German passport officials stamp “non-Aryan” on passports of Jews so that they could be easily identified and turned back at the frontier .
 The Swiss police hunted down refugees living in Switzerland whom they deemed illegal residents . They put them* across the German border, or other frontiers, to put them across the border .
 S.S. and other Nazi activists launched planned attacks on specific Jewish businesses and homes throughout Germany . The attacks were planned following the assassination of a German embassy official in Paris by a Polish Jew in 1938 .
 They destroyed stores, killed several hundred Jews, and beat up thousands of others . Thousands of others were beaten and killed by the Nazis in the Holocaust .
 The terrifying night became known as Kristallnacht . The sound of shattering glass windows resounded in German cities that night . The terrifying evening became known known as the Kristallenacht .
 Hitler had never concealed his goal of shattering the Treaty of Versailles . Hitler's goal was to shatter the Treaty .
 Hitler demanded the return of the Saar Basin, and the absorption of the Polish Corridor, which divided Prussia from East Prussia . He also demanded the remilitarization of the Rhineland, and of the . parts of Upper Silesia on the border of
 Hitler's long-term goals, which were far greater, were inseparable from his megalomaniacal determination to expand Germany by armed conquest . Hitler’s long term goals, however, were to be far greater than his own .
 Hitler’s foreign policy was predicated upon the German conquest of “living space” and his theory that the Aryan race was superior to any other . The Aryan had the right, indeed the obligation, to assert its will on the “inferior�
 Hitler told German generals of his plans to rearm Germany, conquer land for agricultural production, and establish German settlements in Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans . A week after becoming chancellor in January 1933, Hitler told Germans of plans to conquer land .
 The Slavic peoples of the Soviet Union, Poland, and Czechoslovakia would serve the German “master race” as slaves . The Slavs would serve as slaves to the German "master race"
 Once Hitler came to power, he was less open about his previously stated goals because Germany was then vulnerable to invasion, but these goals did not change . Hitler was less secretive about his goals because of his previous stated goals .
 Hitler had to move with particular caution to avoid confrontation with Britain and particularly, France . Hitler had been careful to avoid any confrontation with France .
 For the moment, Poland and Czechoslovakia each had a stronger army than Germany . The two countries each had stronger armies than Germany at the moment .
 Hitler had to carry The Third Reich 1031 out his foreign policy with patience with patience . Hitler had been carrying out the Third Reich with patience.
 He left in place the foreign minister and much of the old diplomatic corps, although he viewed them as weak and suspected their loyalty . He left them in place, but suspected they were weak .
 Four months after coming to power, he declared that he had no intention of rearming Germany and that he wanted only peace . Four months later he declared he wanted to rearm Germany and wanted peace .
 Hitler announced that Germany would walk out of the Geneva Disarmament Conference, which had begun the previous year, and that it would leave the League of Nations, to which it had been admitted in 1926 . That October, in a typical switch, Hitler said that Germany had walked out of
 In the meantime, Germany worked to extend its influence in Eastern Europe . In the 1980s, Germany was seen as a major player in the region .
 During the Depression, as France pulled back credits, German officials signed a series of economic agreements with Eastern European states . The agreements brought them into Germany’s economic orbit and increasing their dependency .
 Hitler’s policy of deficit spending was perceived in Eastern Europe as successful . Hitler spent heavily on Germany's armed forces despite the Treaty of Versailles . Hitler's policy was perceived as successful in eastern Europe .
 Hitler signed a nonaggression agreement with Poland in January 1934 . He assured his generals that he had no intention of respecting the agreement . Hitler signed the agreement in 1934 while assuring his generals he would not respect it .
 The GermanPolish pact was a blow to France's plans to maintain Germany’s diplomatic isolation by a collective treaty system directed against Hitler . The pact was the result of a pact between Germany and Poland .
 French military alliances with Eastern European states would have left Germany surrounded by potential enemies, albeit relatively small ones . Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia would have been left with potential enemies .
 Jozef Pilsudski believed he might be able to balance Poland’s strategic position between Germany and the Soviet Union . A possible German attack on Austria or Czechoslovakia could take advantage of a possible attack on either of those countries .
 The Soviet Union signed a defense treaty with France a year later and another with Czechoslovakia soon after . The treaty bound the Soviets to defend Czechs in case of a German attack, but only if France fulfilled treaty obligations .
 While France scurried to find allies, Germany for the moment had none . The Fiihrer and the Duce had no allies .
 Both had taken advantage of economic and social crisis to put themselves in a position of unchallenged authority . Both took advantage of social and economic crisis to gain unchrenged authority, they say .
 Hitler's territorial ambitions in Eastern Europe did not conflict with Mussolini's goal of empire-building in the Balkans and North Africa . Hitler’s territorial ambitions clashed with that of Mussolini, who wanted to expand his empire in Europe .
 Hitler's long-range intention to annex Austria and Mussolini’s claim of the Austrian Tyrol for Italy, some possible tension existed . But because of possible conflicting interests, there was some tension .
 fascist Italy and Nazi Germany seemed natural allies, sharing an 1032 Cn. Italy and Germany shared an Italian flag of honor . Yet fascist Italy seemed to have been at odds with Nazi Germany .
 Mussolini had reduced Albania, the small, impoverished nation across the Adriatic, to a virtual Italian protectorate, although it had almost no Italian population . Albania was a virtual protectorate of Italy, although there were almost no Italians in it .
 Mussolini ordered a policy of Italiani/ation, forbidding the use of the German and Slovene languages in schools . In the South Tyrol, he forbade use of German, Slovene and German languages in school .
 Somalia, the country at the horn of Africa that Italy had conquered before the war, turned into a military base from which new conquests could be launched . Somalia was one of Italy's most important conquests during the war .
 Italian forces routinely ordered the use of mustard gas and public hangings to solidify their control of Libya . In Libya, Italian forces regularly used mustard gas, hangings and mustard gas .
 Mussolini worked to increase international tensions in the hope of taking advantage of instability . Mussolini wanted to take advantage of international instability .
 The Duce signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact in 1928, in which the major powers renounced war as an instrument of national policy . He wanted Britain and France to treat Italy as a great power, not because he believed in its principles .
 Italy funneled secret arms to Germany and trained German pilots in violation of post-war treaties . Meanwhile, Italy funnelcd secret arms and trained pilots . Italy also funneled in secret weapons to Germany .
 In the Balkans, Italian agents provided financial support to right-wing terrorist groups . Ethnic Hungarians and Croats plotting against the Yugoslav government . Italian agents also provided financial help to right wing groups .
 Hitler’s plan to absorb Austria required Italian support, or at least neutrality, until Germany had been fully rearmed . The Italian government was neutralised until the end of World War II .
 Germany was still in no position to antagonize France . But for the moment, it was still no place to antagonise France .
 Austrian Nazis, backed by Hitler, assassinated Dollfuss during their badly organized coup attempt . The Nazis were backed by the Nazis in their failed coup attempt to take over Dollsfuss .
 Kurt von Schuschnigg replaced Dollfuss as leader of an authoritarian government . The steely Kurt von Schuss replica departure of Dollsfuss .
 Schuschnigg, like his predecessor, believed he could maintain right-wing rule in Austria without German help . He believed he was able to maintain his rule without help from Germany .
 The dual allegiances to Austrian independence and to an institutional role for the Catholic Church separated Austria’s authoritarian regime from its German counterpart . Austria's authoritarian regime was divided by its authoritarian regime .
 Hitler correctly assessed that it was unlikely that Britain, France, and Italy would mount an effective, concerted response to blatant German moves to overthrow the Austrian government . Germany was absorbed by planning an invasion of Ethiopia in East Africa, but was unlikely to do so .
 Each government limited itself to a protest against German meddling in Austrian internal politics . Each government expressed its interest in Austria’s independence .
 The British government was convinced that conciliatory moves toward Germany might keep Hitler in line . Many British conservatives believed that, as many as many conservatives believed, Hitler would be in line.
 Hitler wanted no more than to be recognized as a power and to be able to defend Germany’s borders . Hitler wanted to be a powerful enough to defend his country's borders, Hitler said .
 French government did no more than express irritation, as it was confronting a fascist threat at home . The French government was confronted by the threat of fascism at home, but did nothing more .
 Hitler’s foreign policy entered a new and more aggressive phase in 1935 . The Third Reich 1033 . Hitler's foreign policy became more aggressive in the 1930s .
 He defied the Versailles Treaty in March by announcing that Germany’s army would be increased to half a million men, that military service would become compulsory . The German air force had already been rebuilt, despite the prohibition of the peace agreement .
 British, French, and Italian representatives met in Stresa, Italy, in April 1935 to discuss Germany’s violation of the Treaty of Versailles . The League of Nations itself also met to reaffirm the 1925 Treaty of Locarno of 1925 to resolve future international disputes peacefully
 Hitler said he would sign bilateral agreements with any of the powers, uphold the Treaty of Locarno, and recognize the territorial integrity of Austria . Hitler then made the usual reassuring noises, stating that he would not sign any collective security agreements .
 The French government had not even been informed by Britain of the hasty negotiations that led to the agreement . This agreement, however, enraged the French government, which had not been told by Britain .
 France then signed a secret treaty with Italy, the goal of which was to assure Austrian independence . The treaty was signed between France and Italy to assure Austria's independence .
 In October 1935, Mussolini’s armies invaded Ethiopia, where Italian forces had suffered humiliating defeat in 1896 . The Italian government invaded Ethiopia .
 A quarter of a million Italian women fought the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 . They were determined to expand Italy’s fledgling empire .
 Mussolini correctly assessed that Britain and France would do little more than denounce the invasion because they still desired Mussolini’s support against Hitler . The Duce correctly assessed .
 Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie appealed to the League of Nations for help for his country . Ethiopia had been a member of the League since 1923 . Ethiopia was one of the most successful nations in Africa .
 The League imposed economic sanctions against Italy, but left them weak by excluding oil from the list of products affected . The League did not try to prevent passage of Italian ships through the Suez Canal on the way to Ethiopia .
 The British government placed an embargo against the sale of arms to Ethiopia . It considered the appeasement of Italy the only way to end the crisis . The embargo was placed in place in the wake of the crisis in Ethiopia .
 U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt offered Italy American loans in order to develop Ethiopia . President Roosevelt even offered Italian loans to develop the country .
 Italy lost only 5,000 soldiers, a number Mussolini decried as so small that it seemed to cheapen his victory . Italy's victory in Italy was the first Italian victory since the Second World War .
 League of Nations formally lifted all sanctions against Italy on July 15, 1936 . League lifted sanctions on Italy in 1936 . Italy was one of the most powerful nations in the world .
 The Stresa agreement, which had been made with the goal of containing Hitler, collapsed . The agreement was made to contain Hitler, but collapsed .
 On March 7, 1936, German troops moved into the Rhineland, which had been declared by the Treaty of Versailles to be a demilitarized zone . The Rhineeland was declared a "de-de-ordoned zone" by the treaty, but was
 Hitler secretly promised his anxious generals that he would order German forces to pull back if the French army intervened . Hitler had secretly promised to pull troops back if French forces intervened .
 Whether or not armed British and French response might have stopped Hitler has long debated .
 German ambassadors in European capitals claimed that the move had been necessitated by the destruction of the Locarno agreements by France’s pact with the Soviet Union . The move was then claimed to have been caused by France's pact with Russia .
 Joachim von Ribbentrop (1893-1946) failed to browbeat the British into an alliance with Germany . He had simply added the aristocratic ‘von’ to his name . The German ambassador to Britain failed to win the British vote .
 France pushed the British government to react sharply against Hitler’s brazen move, but would not act alone . France pushed Britain to act strongly against Hitler's brazen move .
 He had delivered as promised, facing down the powers that had imposed the Treaty of Versailles and destroying the Locarno Treaty . The Treaty was imposed by the powers who had imposed Versasilles and destroyed Locarnos .
 Hitler sped up the pace of German rearmament, particularly of the air force . Hitler now speeded up the . pace of the German air force, especially in the . warzone .
 By 1938, armament production absorbed 52 percent of state expenses and 17 percent of Germany’s gross national product . Armament production was the biggest source of German state expenses .
 Germany also had the advantage of rearming with the most up-to-date war materials, including glistening fighter planes of steel and bombers with four engines that increased their range . Germany rearmed with the best up-dated war materials .
 The Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin was transformed into a totalitarian Communist state . Under Joseph Stalin, the Soviet Union was transformed to a totalitarian state .
 Stalin assured his dictatorship by purging dissident groups within the Soviet Leadership . Stalin purged dissidents within the leadership of the Soviet Union . Stalin assured himself his dictatorship .
 The Left Opposition to Stalin was led by Leon Trotsky and Gregory Zinoviev . The humorless but scrupulous curly-haired party secretary of Leningrad was a former ally of Stalin . Leon Trotsky was the leader of the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union .
 The Left Opposition believed that the Soviet Union ought to support independent working-class organizations . Stalin criticized Stalin for abandoning Communist internationalism .
 Stalin argued that the Bolsheviks first had to build “socialism in one country” Stalin, in contrast, said that the Soviet Union had to be one country . Stalin, however, argued that that was not the case .
 Stalin isolated leaders of the left by assigning their allies to inconsequential posts in distant places . Between 1925 and 1927, Stalin isolated them by assigning them to distant posts . Stalin isolated the left from the left in order to keep them in power .
 In 1927 the Left Opposition demanded an immediate accelerated industrialization in the state sector and worker mobilization against ‘bourgeois” bureaucrats . In 1927, a severe shortage of grain that lasted two years, in . The Left Opposition called for an immediate acceleration of state industrialization .
 Wealthier peasant proprietors, the Left Opposition argued, could provide the surplus that would sustain gradual industrialization . Wealthier peasants could be forced to provide surplus to sustain industrialization, the opposition argued .
 If the state kept the prices of manufactured goods high, state revenue would increase, permitting further industrial development . The state, which controlled heavy industries, kept the price of manufacturing goods high .
 Stalin believed that socialism could not be fully implemented until the Soviet Union had a stronger industrial base . Stalin's Five-Year Plans were published in Stalin's first published book .
 An expanded proletariat would provide a larger base for Soviet Communism . Then an expanded proletariat could provide a bigger base for the Soviet Communist Party .
 After purging the Left Opposition, he then openly favored their plan of accelerated industrialization . He then openly supported their plan to accelerate industrialization.
 This would be paid for by extracting more resources from the peasantry . It would be funded through extracting more from the peasants .
 The Five-Year Plan marked a complete abandonment of Lenin’s New Economic Policy . Lenin's new economic policy was abandoned by the Soviet Union . The Five
 Nikolai Bukharin objected to a policy of renewed requisitioning and immediate collectivization on the grounds that it would greatly undermine peasant support for the regime .
 The result would ultimately be to slow down rather than speed up industrialization, the author says .
 In 1928, he became the leader of the Right Opposition, which disagreed with Stalin’s abandonment of the principle of collective leadership, thus fortifying Stalin's personal authority . The Right Opposition also disagreed with the principle that collective leadership was abandoned .
 By the end of 1930, Stalin had purged the Right Opposition from the party . Stalin purged them from the Communist Party . The Right Opposition was purged by Stalin in 1930 .
 With both the Left Opposition and the Right Opposition out of the way, the long dictatorship of Joseph Stalin really began . Stalin's dictatorship of the Soviet Union really began. Stalin's long dictatorship began .
 In formulating his Five-Year Plan, Stalin sought to take advantage of social tensions in Soviet society . Stalin's Five-year Plan was intended to exploit social tension in the Soviet Union . Stalin wanted to use social tensions as a means of easing tensions in society .
 He knew that workers believed that material progress was not coming fast enough and that they blamed peasants and smug bureaucrats for not getting fast enough . Workers believed that they were not getting material progress fast enough, he said .
 Stalin wanted to inspire workers to storm the “fortress” of remaining inequalities in Soviet society . Stalin wanted workers to fight back against the 'fortress' of remaining inequality in society . The Soviet Union was divided between Soviet society and Soviet capitalism .
 He used the rhetoric of class struggle as a means of mobilizing effort . He tried to turn workers against kulaks and ‘bourgeois’ managers and technical specialists .
 Hundreds of thousands of peasants who refused to turn over their harvests, animals, or farms were killed . Hundreds of millions of peasants were killed for refusing to hand over their crops or animals .
 I worked in the underground against the tsar and then I fought in the Civil War. I worked for the Tsar and fought for the Russian government in Russia . I worked underground against tsar, then fought in Civil War, he says .
 Peasants resisted with determination and resourcefulness the establishment of collective farms, the redistribution of land, or the introduction of new The Soviet Union under Stalin 1037 .
 Peasants slaughtered livestock rather than allowing them to be taken by the collective farm . Peasant slaughtered livestock instead of allowing it to go to a collective farm in order to save them .
 Number of horses fell from 36 million in 1929 to 15 million four years later . Number of cattle fell from 67 million to 34 million in the 1930s . Horse population fell from 37 million to 36 million .
 Peasants had to work a certain number of days each year for the collective farm . The state supplied machinery, seed, and clothing for the farmers . The collective farm was set up in 1903 .
 The free market disappeared and the state set production quotas and prices, the government set prices . The market was set up by the state, and prices were set by quotas and quotas . The state set prices and quotas for production and prices .
 One of the primary goals of the collectivization of agriculture was to force peasants into industrial labor . The peasants were forced to work in industrial agriculture .
 During the first Five-Year Plan, the Soviet Union’s industrial and urban populations doubled . 9 million peasants were conscripted to work in factories . The Soviet Union doubled in the first five-year plan .
 He announced that his Five-Year Plan was succeeding beyond his wildest expectations and that the time had come for a pause . President Obama announced that he was taking a pause for the Five-year Plan . Obama said that the plan is succeeding beyond expectations .
 In fact, forced collectivization had catastrophically reduced Soviet agricultural production . The Soviet Union had been forced to collectivize its agricultural output .
 Stalin ordered officials to return expropriated animals back to their owners . Stalin ordered the return of expropriation animals to owners .
 When the Five-Year Plan ended in 1932 after four years and three months, 62 percent of peasants now worked for the state on collective farms . When the plan began in 1932, 62 per cent of peasants were employed by the state .
 Peasants were allowed to retain small private plots . The vegetables and fruits that they grew provided almost half of the produce reaching markets . Peasant farmers were able to retain private plots to grow their produce .
 Hundreds of thousands of peasants had been killed, perhaps 2 million exiled to Siberia or other distant places under the sentence of hard labor . Perhaps 2 million people were exiled under the sentences of hard work .
 Around 7 million people died of hunger between 1930 and 1933 . 4 to 5 million people starved during 1932 and 1933, most in Ukraine . Most in Ukraine died of starvation .
 In Kazakhstan in Central Asia, about 2 million people died or were killed between 1926 and 1933 . In Kazakhstan, about one-tenth of the population was killed or killed .
 The campaign for heavy industrialization was successful, but only if the human cost was forgotten . The human cost of heavy industrialism is conveniently forgotten, says the author .
 Despite inaccurate and sometimes misleading Soviet data, the state did meet some ambitious production targets in heavy industry, fuel production, new industries and in the manufacture of tractors . The Soviet Union did not meet some of its ambitious targets .
 Between 1929 and 1934 the Soviet economy may have had an annual growth rate of 27 percent . While the Depression devastated Western economies, the economy grew 27 percent in the 1930s and 1930s .
 These successes occurred despite inefficiency due to inadequate planning and chaotic reporting of figures . Many of the most able technicians were replaced by semiliterate workers or peasants who sometimes mistook mud for oil .
 The Dnieper Dam and Magnitogorsk in the Ural Mountains attracted international attention . Giant show projects such as the Dniepe Dam and the new industrial city of Magnitogo were among the projects to be built .
 The second Five-Year Plan relied less on the shrill rhetoric of class warfare, despite ongoing collectivization . The second Plan relied on the rhetoric of 'class warfare' against the government .
 Stalin relaxed the ideologically charged campaign against ‘experts’ of bourgeois origins, and technocrats again appeared in factories . Stalin relaxed his ideological campaign against "experts" of bourgeois origin .
 4. million radios in the Soviet Union broadcast Stalin’s speeches in the 1930s . Even with most consumer goods still wanting, 4.million radios broadcast Stalin's speeches . The Soviet Union still had 4 million radios .
 The grandson of a Soviet minister recalled, “Stalin was like a God for us.” ‘Stalin’ was ‘like a God’ for us,’ the grandson of the Soviet minister said .
 It is Stalin, I shout, so the whole world will hear, Stalin, our Leader and Friend . Stalin, he shouts, "It is Stalin" Stalin . Stalin is Stalin's leader and friend .
 Many artists and writers were originally enthusiastic about the Russian Revolution, and a spirit of utopianism survived into the early 1920s .
 Communists wanted to build a unique culture based upon mass mobilization and commitment that would both reflect and accentuate the collectivization of life in the Soviet Union . The Communists built a culture based on mass mobilization, commitment .
 The culture of utopianism would be defiantly proletarian and egalitarian . It would be a culture of egalitarian and proletarian, the author says . The culture would have been defiant and egalitarian.
 The machine was a common motif in Soviet imagery in the inter-war period . In view of Stalin’s determination that the Soviet Union rapidly industrialize, the machine was often a motif .
 Soviet artists and writers believed that mechanization in the service of capitalists had further enslaved the masses . But that technology could be potentially liberating, they said .
 The state created art schools and provided assistance to struggling artists . The state hoped to enroll them in the service of the Revolution .
 In its first years, the Soviet state patronized futurists as revolutionary artists who had embraced technological change . Futurists provided a new aesthetic for socialism in the construction of an ideal society .
 Artists collaborated with designers in producing models for standardized clothing and household items . Artists collaborated to produce standardized clothing for standardized items .
 The initial mini-explosion of cultural forms that had occurred during the first years of the Soviet state gave way to repressive orthodoxy . As the state subsumed most aspects of public life, cultural forms began to be suppressed .
 Stalin preferred monumental murals to show smiling workers toiling for the state . Stalin's murals featured smiling workers working for the Soviet state .
 Artists who did not conform stood accused of pandering to ‘bourgeois values,’ an increasingly dangerous denunciation . Artists who didn't conform were accused of ‘pandering to bourgeois values’ Artists who don’t conform are now accused of being ‘
 Stalin charmed and deceived many foreign statesmen and visitors, impressing them with the fact that millions of working-class children were now entering school for the first time . Stalin said: 'Millions of working class children were entering school . Millions of working children now entering schools for the
 Women obtained training and positions in fields from which they previously had been excluded, such as medicine . Women obtained jobs and training in fields where they had previously been excluded from .
 Soviet guides whisked foreign visitors around on Moscow’s new subway to see the Soviet capital’�s improved housing, water supply, and sewage facilities .
 Despite promoting atheism Stalin nonetheless discouraged unmarried couples from living together, banned abortion, and forbade homosexuality . Stalin also banned unmarried couples living together and banned abortion .
 Stalin’s early enthusiasm for equal opportunity for women waned in the 1930s . The state-approved image of the female as mother of committed Soviet children prevailed prevailed .
 Stalin was no longer content merely to expel from the party those who did not share his views . By 1934, Stalin was not content with expulsion of those who disagreed with him . Stalin's purges were the first of his series of purges .
 As arrests mounted in number, executions replaced sentences of hard labor . The executions replaced hard labor with hard labor, executions .
 The first of the great show trials took place in 1936, the last in March 1938 . Bukharin and the Right Opposition faced judges who sometimes appeared to be more nervous than they were .
 Those on trial were forced to sign confessions in court, where sympathetic foreign observers sometimes nodded in agreement to absurd accusations . The trial is expected to last for years .
 Children were encouraged to denounce their parents for crimes against the state . Children could be executed at age 12 .
 Osip Mandelstam mocked Stalin with a poem that he read to friends in 1933 . The poet read the poem to friends and mocked Stalin in a speech to Stalin's friends .
 We live, deaf to the land beneath us, Ten steps away no one hears our speeches, But where there's so much as half a conversation The Kremlin’s mountaineer will get his mention His cockroach whiskers leer .
 Around him is a rabble of thin-necked leaders— Fawning half-men for him to play with. Around him was a thin-neighed leader . Around him, he was surrounded by thin-naked leaders . He said: "Around him is the
 They whinny, purr or whine As he prates and points a finger, One by one forging his laws, to be flung . Like horseshoes at the head, the eye or the groin, they whinne, purne or whine .
 Mandelstam was arrested in 1934, sent to a camp for three years, and, after returning to Moscow, arrested again and sentenced to five years hard labor in another camp . He was arrested again in 1934 and sent to prison for five years .
 Estimates of the number of prisoners in labor camps, colonies, and prisons have ranged from about 1. million to 7 million . Estimates have ranged between about 1 million to about 7 million prisoners .
 Stalin’s long arm reached far beyond the boundaries of the Soviet Union to force Communist parties in Spain, France, and other nations to purge those who disagreed with his policies . Increasingly paranoid, Stalin's long arm .
 Stalin’s agents caught up with Trotsky, who had gone into exile in 1929 and lived outside Mexico City, and stabbed him to death with an ice pick in August 1940 . Trotsky had been living in exile in Mexico City since 1929 and was stabbed to death in a garden .
 The purge of the “national deviationists” accused of nationalist sentiments, for example in the Muslim lands of Central Asia, was an economic purge . 1042 Ch. Ch. 1042 was the first attempt to purge the ‘national deviationistists’ in 1042
 It eliminated many engineers and other people with badly needed technical expertise . The government cut the number of people with technical expertise in the U.S. government .
 The purge weakened the Soviet armed forces at a time when the rise of Hitler to power in Germany was increasing international tensions . Furthermore, at the time of the purge, the purge was also weakened .
 Behind Stalins move against military commanders was his fear that they might one day oppose his conduct of foreign policy .
 All 8 Soviet admirals were executed, as were 75 out of 80 members of the Supreme Military Council . Among the 30,000 to 40,000 officers who perished, all 8 Soviet advisers were executed .
 A journalist recalled that one of the most striking things about the Russian Revolution of 1917 “was the speed with which the masses, after the overthrow of tsarism, created new forms of organization,” including soviets of workers and soldiers, factory committees, military organizations at
 The Bolsheviks seized power on behalf of the working class and poor peasants, they never relinquished it . But once they seized power, the Bolsheviks did not relinquish it . The Bolshevik revolution was a victory for the poor and poor .
 They destroyed these popular organizations that had embodied the aspirations of millions of people . They destroyed them, they destroyed them as they embodied millions of aspirations .
 Under the rule of Joseph Stalin, the Soviet Union took on some of the murderous characteristics of the fascist regimes its leaders so bitterly denounced . The Soviet Union became a state of fascism under Stalin's rule in the 1930s .
 The Spanish Civil War Spain became the battlefield of European ideologies during the bloody civil war that began in 1936 . Spain was the site of the most ideological ideologies in the world .
 The worlds attention turned to Spain for the first time since the time of Napoleon . The World Cup is the first major tournament in Spain since Napoleon .
 There was little to distinguish the Spain of 1920 from that of more than a century earlier . Indeed, there was relatively little to . distinguish the . Spain of the 1920s and 1920s .
 Spain remained an overwhelmingly agricultural society . With the exception of relatively industrialized Catalonia and the Basque provinces in the northwestern corner of the country, Spain remained overwhelmingly agricultural .
 Coalitions between the nobility, the Catholic Church, and the army determined political power in Madrid .
 King Alfonso XIII confronted social and political problems that defied solution . Alfonso was ineffectual king of Spain . He faced a series of political and social problems .
 Catalonian and Basque regional separatism challenged the Spanish government in Madrid . Catalonians and Basques have been fighting for independence from Spain .
 Chronic political and social instability helped push the army into the role of chief arbiter of political life . Chronic political instability forced the army to become the country's most powerful institution .
 Labor strife, assassinations, street battles, and police violence became the order of the day in the early 1920s .
 Spain declared a protectorate over northern Morocco in 1912 and used poison gas against The Spanish Civil War 1043 Moroccan insurgents who wanted independence . Spain had declared a protorate over northern Morocco in 1912 .
 In 1921 Moroccans inflicted a shocking defeat on Spanish forces, costing the lives of 10,000 Spanish soldiers . In 1921, Morocans inflicted the defeat on Spain, killing more than 100,000 soldiers .
 This increased pressure from socialists and republicans on the monarchy . The monarchy is under pressure from both sides of the aisle .
 In 1923, General Miguel Primo de Rivera seized power with the support of the army and even the king . In 1923 he seized control of the country .
 Primo de Rivera set out to “modernize” Spain, ordering the construction of dams, sewers, roads, and prisons . Four years later, espousing “nation, church and king,” he espoused ‘nation, . church and . king
 He became a familiar sight in the cafes and bars of Madrid after his return home . His gushing, incoherent bulletins to the Spanish people were drafted on his return .
 Primo de Rivera antagonized the left by promulgating a constitution in 1927 that left ministers no longer responsible to the Cortes . He upset army officers (so numerous that they made up onesixth of the army) by intervening in promotions .
 Alfonso XIII left the country after elections returned an anti-monarchist majority to the Cortes . The following year, Alfonso XVIII was forced to leave the country .
 The army refused to save the monarchy, because most officers now hoped to impose authoritarian rule . Most officers now wanted to impose an authoritarian rule, the army said .
 The nobles, upon whose support the kings of Spain had for centuries depended, sat back and watched the monarchy fall . The nobles were on the throne for centuries .
 A coalition of republicans and moderate Socialists established the Second Spanish Republic in 1931 . It was formed by republics and Socialists and republicans .
 The government of Manuel Azana enacted anticlerical measures, including the formal separation of church and state, imposed new taxes, passed new taxes and imposed new land laws .
 Strikes, land seizures by peasants, and attacks on churches and convents drove wealthy landowners and churchmen to the anti-parliamentary right .
 The Spanish Republic could not count on the support of the unions, which wanted even more far-reaching social reforms, or of anarchists, who wanted the abolition of the state itself . The unions and anarchists did not support the Spanish Republic .
 Thus began the republic s two “black years,” marked by increasing social and political violence . The republic began its two ‘black years’ in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The inclusion of the right in a more conservative republican government angered the left . The inclusion has angered many of the left in the US .
 During the “October Revolution” of 1934, leftists in Madrid, Catalan autonomists, and miners in the northern province of Asturias rose up, setting up local ‘soviets’ throughout their region .
 Radicals, Socialists, Communists, Communists and some anarchists formed a “Popular Front” in 1935 . Radicals and Socialists formed a "Popular front" in defense of the republic against the right in Russia .
 It barely won a majority in elections held at the beginning of the next year, then quickly fell apart because of ideological differences amid high unemployment and political violence . The country's first election was held in 2010, but quickly fell out of control amid political turmoil .
 Falange, a small paramilitary fascist movement begun in 1933, further destabilized the republic . The Falange was emulating the Italian fascist 1044 Ch. Ch. 1044 . Falange emulates the fascist movement in Italy .
 Nationalist attacks _^ Republican loyalists attacks . Republican loyalist attacks . Nationalist and loyalist loyalists attacked .
 The government declared the Falange illegal and arrested its leader in March 1936 . In response to a wave of violence against republicans, the government declared it illegal .
 A military insurrection against the republic began in Morocco on July 17, 1936 . A military uprising against the government began in 1936 .
 Right-wing nationalist rebels overwhelmed loyalist troops and soon held the traditionally conservative regions of Castile, Galicia, and Navarre . The rebels took over Castile and Galicia in the 1980s .
 The fragility of the loyalist alliance compromised the loyaltyist defense of the Spanish Republic, says Spanish President Jose Antonio Calderona .
 In Catalonia and Andalusia, anarchist workers and peasants were a majority . Anarchists were a large majority in Spain and Catalonia .
 They took the outbreak of the war as a signal to begin a social revolution, expropriating land, occupying factories, and establishing cooperatives . They expropriated land, occupied factories and established cooperatives.
 Workers' committees, holding power in some regions, unleashed terror against the upper classes . Workers’ committees, hold power in many regions, have unleashed terror on the upper class . Workers have been fighting for years against the ruling class .
 The Socialists were in the awkward position The Spanish Civil War 1045 of trying to rein in the social revolution for which they had originally called . Socialists now were in an awkward position . The Spanish Socialists had originally been calling for a social revolution .
 Communists feared that an attempted social revolution from below would compromise the attempt to save the republic and undercut support for their party . Communists feared it might undercut their party's support .
 Communists withheld supplies and ammunition from anarchist and Socialist units . Communist forces withheld supplies from anarchists and Socialist forces . The Communists withheld ammunition from both sides of the border .
 Loyalists suffered the consequences of disunity, the nationalists benefited from increasing unity . The loyalists suffered from disunity but benefited from increased unity .
 General Franco believed that freemasons had undermined Catholic Spain . General Franco considered himself himself a warrior king struggling against infidels who deserved no mercy .
 The Spanish Civil War was fought with a savagery unseen in Western Europe since the seventeenth-century wars of religion . The struggle between Loyalists and Nationalists is described as a struggle for independence .
 At least 580,000 people, and probably many more, died as a result of the war . At least 500,000 died during the conflict in Afghanistan .
 Ten thousand died in air raids on civilians, and thousands more died from disease and malnutrition . Ten thousand people died in the raids, including thousands more in malnutrition .
 During the war, nationalists executed at least 200,000 loyalists, and about that same number died at the hands of the loyalist forces or from disease in prison .
 Throughout the first two months of the war, in areas controlled by the loyalists, social and political tensions exploded in violence and death . In areas controlled in the loyalist-held areas of the country, social tensions exploded .
 Members of the Falange and monarchists were taken from their cells in the Madrid prison and shot . In the province of Catalonia alone, more than 1,000 clergy and nuns perished .
 The nationalists organized ‘fiestas of death’ in bull rings, machine-gunning loyalists, including prominent intellectuals and Basque priests . The nationalists were machine gunned down loyalists and intellectuals .
 The Spanish Civil War polarized Europe because it pitted against each other the political extremes that had emerged in Europe since the Great War . Spain's Civil War was the first of its kind since the Civil War .
 For the political right, religion and social hierarchy were at stake in a pitched battle against socialism and communism, as well as anarchism . For the left, religion was at stake against socialism, communism and anarchism .
 Those supporting the Spanish Republic saw the civil war as a struggle against international fascism . Those supporting Spain's republic saw the war as an attempt against fascism .
 Foreign volunteers, including 20,000 Britons and Irish and refugees from Nazi Germany, joined the loyalist forces . Many refugees from Germany, including many refugees from the country, also fought in the Northern Ireland .
 The volunteers of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade from the United States fought with idealism and determination, but with only occasional effectiveness . The volunteers from the U.S. fought with ideals, determination and determination .
 The ‘International Brigades’ were largely responsible for the heroic defense of Madrid that began in November 1936 . However, these ‘Brigade’s’ largely responsible .
 The writers who fought in the Spanish Civil War, virtually all on the loyalist side, produced some of the most remarkable literature .
 George Orwell’s Homage to Catalonia memorably related an account of his service on the loyalist side and of the damaging divisions between the major political factions, above all, the role of the Communists .
 The nationalists enjoyed a significant military advantage over the loyalists because their forces included the bulk of the Spanish armed forces . The loyalists had the majority of the armed forces in Spain .
 The republican loyalists counted on receiving arms, munitions, and other supplies from the Western democracies . The republicans relied heavily on Western supplies .
 British government wanted to maintain peace at all costs . Many of its prominent political figures admired Franco . But many of the British government leaders wanted peace .
 In France, Premier Leon Blum’s Popular Front government hesitated to take any steps that would widen the Spanish conflict and further polarize his own country . In Spain, the conflict has been a source of tension between Spain and France .
 He did not want to alienate the British government, as he was counting on its assistance in any eventual war against Germany . Moreover, he did want to avoid alienating the British .
 Without tanks, airplanes, and other supplies from the Soviet Union, the Spanish Republic probably would have collapsed in the face of nationalist forces . The Spanish Republic would probably have almost immediately collapsed, historian says .
 Italy sent 100,000 soldiers to Spain . Britain, France, and the U.S. abided by nonintervention agreements .
 The loyalists easily defeated the ill-equipped Italian forces, which relied on Michelin tourist Pablo Picasso’s Guernica . However, the loyalists were able to defeat the Italian forces .
 The Italians fared somewhat better in the air, where they faced virtually no opposition . The Italian team won their first two games of the tournament .
 Hitler used the Spanish Civil War as a military training ground, sending planes, guns, munitions, and other supplies through Portugal . Hitler sent supplies to Portugal during the war .
 The German Condor Legion flew bombing runs against loyalist forces, as well as civilians . The Condors Legion was active in the Northern Ireland in the mid-191919 .
 Pablo Picasso immortalized the martyrdom of Guernica on his canvas depicting the horrors of modern warfare . Within a month, the Spanish-born painter Picasso had immortalized his martyrdom . The painter's canvas depicts the horror of modern war in modern times .
 In the north, nationalists reached the Atlantic coast, cutting off the loyalist Basque region from France . However, in the north the nationalists reached . The nationalists also reached the north of France, cutting .
 The loyalists struggled along an imposing front that stretched from the Mediterranean south of Granada to the Pyrenees .
 Franco's army isolated Catalonia from remaining loyalist territory . Franco’s army reached the Mediterranean Sea, isolating Catalonia from the rest of Catalonia .
 Republican refugees carried what they could through the mountains and snows of the Pyrenees to France . Republican refugees carry what they can with them to France. Republican refugees were forced to leave the country .
 Bloody reprisals against loyalists in Spain began immediately, and 1 50,000 more Spaniards were executed . 1 50.000 Spaniard were executed in Spain .
 Franco established authoritarian rule based on the support of the army, the Church, and wealthy landowners, three forces that had opposed the republic . Franco, now known as “Caudillo,” or “leader’*—like the Italian Duce and the German F
 Franco did not pursue a policy of expansion that characterized Italian fascism or German National Socialism . But recognizing Spain’s weakness, Franco didn’t pursue an expansion policy that characterized fascism or Germany .
 The Catholic Church's institutional role in Franco’s Spain or Salazar’�s Portugal would have been unthinkable in Nazi Germany, and was less significant in Italy . The Catholic church's role in Spain and Portugal was less important in Italy, but was less prominent in Italy and
 The collapse of the political center in Europe in the aftermath of the Treaty of Versailles and the Depression helped create the Europe of dictatorships .
 World War I began in 1914 and ended in 1945, when World War II finally ended, as a war of thirty years . In retrospect, the deterioration of the political climate, the rise of dictatorships, and the violence of the inter-war period of economic, social, and political
 It would be even more devastating than World War I, wreaking destruction on a global scale . It would wreak destruction on the global scale, according to the author .
 Germany invaded Poland on September 1, 1939, like its invasion of Belgium in 1914, started a chain reaction that brought the world powers into the conflict . Germany’s invasion of Poland was the first to start a war against Poland .
 The Soviet Union occupied eastern Poland, Finland, and the Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia in the early Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Japan joined Germany and Italy, and the United States entered the war on the side of Great Britain and the free French government exiled in London . The U.S. joined the war against Great Britain .
 Following Germany’s invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the Communist state became an ally of Britain and the U.S. Following the war, Russia became a major ally of the British and American allies .
 The Second World War was the first in which civilian populations became systematic, strategic targets . Civilians became systematic targets for the first time in the war .
 Beginning with the invasion of Poland, Germany used genocide both as an instrument of war and as an end in itself . Germany's use of genocide as a weapon of war began in the 1930s .
 More than 6 million Jews perished in Europe during World War II, most in German death camps . Most of them were killed in concentration camps .
 The technology of warfare developed rapidly; existing weapons were perfected . By the end of the war, the atomic bomb had taken a terrible toll on human life .
 When the war ended in 1945, Europe seemed to be entering an even more threatening era . When the end of the war, Europe looked like it was entering a new era .
 Adolph Hitler allied with Italy and Japan in 1936 to achieve his territorial goals . Hitler was willing to go to war if necessary to do so . The coming of World War II is a look at the events leading up to WWII .
 He sent German troops into Austria in 1938 and then Czechoslovakia a year later . He believed that Great Britain and France would not resist, but prepared to go to war if they did so .
 Germany and the Soviet Union astonished the world in August 1939 by signing a mutual nonaggression pact . The pact was signed by Germany and Soviet Union in 1939 . It was the first time the two nations had signed a nonaggressive pact .
 This cleared the way for Hitler to launch a murderous attack on Poland, Hitler said . Hitler launched the attack in Poland in order to clear the way up for Hitler .
 Germany and the Soviet Union signed a pact in which they agreed to share some of the world's most famous secrets . The pact included secret agreement by which Germany and Soviet Union agreed to a series of secret documents .
 Britain and France accepted the occupation of Austria and Czechoslovakia but drew the line at Poland . Attempting to avoid war at all costs, the two countries agreed to the occupation .
 Hitler made clear that Germany’s interests lay to the east; Mussolini could have the Mediterranean and a free hand in Yugoslavia, Albania, and Greece . Mussolini was able to take over Yugoslavia, Greece, Albania and Greece, and Yugoslavia .
 Nazi Germany and fascist Italy fought in support of Spanish nationalists during the Spanish War (1936-1939) The war brought Nazi Germany, Italy and Italy closer together in Spain .
 Mussolini accepted Austria’s loss of independence in exchange for a closer relationship with Germany . Austria's loss of sovereignty was part of a deal between Mussolini and Germany . Mussolini was forced to accept the loss of his country's independence .
 The Duce ordered his soldiers to goose-step like the Germans, claiming that it was the military stride of ancient Rome . Concluding that German military strength could further Italian aims, he ordered his troops to goose step like Germans .
 This led to considerable embarrassment for the elderly King Victor Emmanuel III, who tried it but fell down . The elderly King fell down after he tried it, but was embarrassed .
 Mussolini ordered his countrymen to stop shaking hands and take up the ancient Roman military salute of an outstretched arm at a 45-degree angle . Mussolini also ordered people to take up an ancient Roman salute of a 45 degree angle .
 Racial theories had hitherto never played more than a minor part in Mussolini's rise to power or his daily bombast .
 In 1938 Mussolini began a campaign against Italian Jews, who numbered no more than 50,000 in a country of 40 million people . Mussolini's anti-Semitic campaign began in 1938 in Italy .
 These measures only managed only to irritate many Italians in a country in which Jews seemed perfectly well assimilated . These measures managed only . Italians in Italy seem perfectly well . assimilated.
 Following the Meiji Restoration of 1868, Japan had made itself an industrial and military power . Over the last half of the nineteenth century following the Meij Restoration, Japan became an industrial power .
 Japanese government sought to build an empire in Southeast Asia . In need of raw materials such as oil and rubber, the Japanese government wanted to build a business empire .
 By the late 1930s, the Japanese army had reached 1 million men, with reserves of twice that number . The Japanese army now has a reserve of more than 1 million people .
 The Japanese air force had 2,000 fighter planes, including the new “Zero’s’ fighter, as fast as any in the world . The new fighter plane is the latest in a series of fighter jets .
 Japan embarked on a piecemeal conquest of Manchuria at the expense of China in 1931 . In 1931, Japan embarked upon a series of piecesmeal conquest .
 Since Japan has virtually no natural resources, its goal was to create a resource base . The resource base would be necessary for fighting the total war that many young Japanese generals eagerly anticipated . Japan has little natural resources and has little of a natural resources .
 A year later, the Japanese government created the client state of Manchukuo, declaring the last emperor of China, Henry Pu-Yi, to be its emperor . The Japanese government declared the state a client state, declaring it to be the last Chinese emperor .
 Fearing that the Soviet Union might try to hinder its military expansion, Japan signed a formal friendship treaty with Germany in 1936 . The treaty was meant to discourage possible British and American intervention in Asia .
 Japanese forces began to conquer chunks of northern China to establish a buffer zone between Manchukuo and the Soviet Union in 1937 . In 1937, Japa. nese forces began . conquering chunks of . northern China . to establish . buffer zone .
 Japan then embarked on a major naval expansion program, exceeding the limits stipulated by the Washington Naval Conference to which Japan, among the other powers, had agreed . Japan embarked on the expansion program after the conference .
 The United States was entrenched in isolationism and still suffering the Depression . The U.S. was still suffering from the Depression. It was still in the midst of isolationism .
 Britain joined the U.S. in imposing an embargo on the sale of oil and other vital raw materials to Japan . Angered by Japanese aggression and Japan’s alliance with Nazi Germany, the embargo was imposed .
 In November 1937, Hitler unveiled to his generals plans to absorb Austria and Czechoslovakia, perhaps as early as the next year .
 Hitler’s confidence derived partly from information he had received that Neville Chamberlain, the new Conservative British prime minister, might accept Germany’�s annexation of Austria and the Czech Sudetenland as inevitable . Chamberlain had once called National Socialism “a great social experiment,�
 Chamberlain was concerned only that the annexation occur without strife . Chamberlain was worried only that it would be without strife.
 The British prime minister feared that if Britain went to war against Germany, Hitler's allies Italy and Japan would strike British imperial interests in the Middle and Far East . Hitler’s allies Italy, Japan and Japan threatened to strike British interests in Egypt and Burma .
 He believed that Germany had been treated too harshly by the Treaty of Versailles .
 Hitler ordered German troops into Austria after Schuschnigg announced that a plebiscite on the question of his nation’s independence would be held . Hitler justified the invasion with the absurd claim that German citizens were being mistreated there and that Austria was plotting with Czechoslovakia
 On March 12, 1938, most of the Austrian population greeted German troops not as conquerors, but as liberators . The Austrian population welcomed the German invasion of Austria . Most of the population greeted the German troops as liberator .
 Hitler thus effected the unification of Germany and Austria that had been specifically forbidden by the Versailles Peace Settlement . Hitler's actions were a violation of the peace settlement .
 Nazis arrested more than 70,000 people and frenzied Viennese crowds beat up Jews . The Nazis arrested over 70,00 people and beat up more than 50,000 others . Viennaese crowds attacked Jews during the Nazi regime .
 Britain and France sent official protests, but the German Reichsbank was able to confiscate funds . The funds were deposited by the Austrian National Bank in the Bank of England .
 This provided the Nazis with valuable gold and foreign currency reserves . This provided them with valuable money and gold . The Nazis also had valuable gold reserves .
 During the summer of 1938, he orchestrated a campaign against the Czech government . He orchestrated a series of attacks against the government in Czechoslovakia .
 At issue was the status of the 3 million Germans living in Czechoslovakia, most in Sudetenland . Most of the Germans were living in the Czech Republic, most of the Sudetensland .
 Hitler was furious that some anti-Nazi Germans had found refuge in Prague . Hitler was also furious that they had been allowed to enter the Czech capital .
 President Edvard Benes desperately sought reassurance from France and the Soviet Union . Teschen is a long-disputed coal-mining region of Germany . The region has been a source of tension between Poland and Poland .
 Both were obligated by separate treaties to defend Czechoslovakia against Austrians . Germany’s annexation of Austria, March 1938, marked the beginning of the annexation of the Czechoslovak Republic .
 The Soviets refused to act unless joined by France, and France refused to . Britain had already ruled out any assistance from the Soviets .
 France could only help its Eastern European allies by attacking Germany, which the French government viewed as out of the question . In any case, France could really only . only help . its Eastern . European allies . by attacking . Germany, France said .
 On September 15, 1938, Chamberlain flew to the Fiihrer’s mountain retreat in southern Germany . Chamberlain's visit to the mountain retreat was the first time he had been to Germany .
 Chamberlain agreed to try to convince the French and Czech governments that Germany’s absorption of the Sudetenland was the best hope for peace . When Hitler informed him that he would risk world war to unite the Suden Germans to their fatherland, Chamberlain agreed .
 Hitler promised Chamberlain that this would be the last territorial revision of the Treaty of Versailles that Germany would demand . Hitler said it was the last time he would demand such a territorial revision .
 On September 19, 1938, Britain and France virtually ordered the Prague government to cede to Germany territories where the 3 million ethnic Germans formed a majority . The Czech Republic was invaded by the Nazis in 1938 .
 He asked only that the new borders of Czechoslovakia be protected by a joint agreement . The new borders should be protected from each other, he said .
 French government balked, demanding Hitler’s original terms as presented to Chamberlain . The French government refused to comply with the original terms of the deal .
 Hitler then agreed to meet with Mussolini, French Prime Minister Edouard Daladier, and Chamberlain to settle everything once and for all . Hitler then seemed to draw back, agreeing to meet Mussolini .
 British government orders preliminary measures for civil defense in case of war . British government ordered preliminary measures to prepare for possible civil defense . The British government has ordered a number of preliminary measures .
 Hitler refused to allow representatives of the Soviet Union to attend a multilateral conference at Munich in September 1938 . The conference took place at the end of September 1938, in Munich, Germany .
 Czech officials were not even permitted to assist at the dismemberment of their own country . Czechs were not allowed to assist in the disassembly of their country . The Czech Republic was not even allowed to participate in the process .
 Chamberlain and Daladier agreed to immediate German occupation of the Sudetenland . Poland’s annexation of Teschen, and the transfer of parts of Slovakia to Hungary, were all in exchange for Hitler's personal guarantee of the redrawn borders of the partitioned nation .
 YUGOSLAVIA ITALY BULGARIA ADRIATIC SEA Rome _ Boundary of Czechoslovakia, 1937 . Area of German occupation, end of 1939 ] Area of Italian occupation MEDITERRANEAN SEA Map 26.
 German and Italian Expansion, 1935-1939 . Germany and Italy against neighbors against neighbors . Aggression .
 In France, popular opinion did not want another war, and the military expressed apprehension about taking on the expanded German armed forces . In the 1930s, the French military was wary of taking on German forces .
 The French government felt abandoned by Britain, and by neighboring Belgium . Belgium had abrogated its 1920 military agreement with France and proclaimed its neutrality .
 Neville Chamberlain promises ‘peace in our time’ after his return from Munich in September 1938 . The Maginot Line had completed a line of bunker-like fortifications to the Belgian frontier . France was now more exposed to a German onslaught .
 The French government also feared that Hitler might convince Franco of Spain to join Germany in a war against republican France from the other side of the Pyrenees .
 The appeasement of Hitler at Munich provided the German army with more time to prepare for the conquest of what remained of Czechoslovakia .
 Appeasement as foreign policy was influenced by the sheer horror of the Great War and many Europeans’ unwillingness to contemplate a new conflict . Appeasment as foreign . policy was inspired by the . sheer horror . of the . Great War . Many Europeans were unwilling to contemplate new conflict
 Appeasement did not mean peace at any price, but rather the belief that if Germany could be appeased on one or two demands, then Hitler would be satisfied, or so the reasoning went, and Europe would be safe from war . The reasoning went that if Hitler was satisfied on
 The British government allowed the transfer of 6 million pounds of Czech gold deposits from London banks to the German-occupied state . The transfer of the money was allowed by the British government .
 Germany strengthened its forces with the addition of the Czech air force and army, and it no longer had to maintain strong defenses on its southern border . The Czech Republic is now the only country in the Czech Republic .
 British factories began turning out fighter planes as quickly as possible . The planes were built in the 1950s and '60s .
 He then insisted that Poland relinquish the port of Gdansk and international access to the Polish Corridor . The Corridor had by virtue of the Treaty of Versailles separated East Prussia from the rest of Germany . The Polish Corridor was a key link between East Prussian and the rest
 The Polish government had been in a state of crisis since the death of Jozef Pilsudski, its authoritarian ruler, in 1935 . Poland's military has been readied its military defenses in Poland .
 Britain signed pact with Poland on April 6, 1939, guaranteeing Polish independence and assistance in case of German aggression . British government had refused to consider any alliances with the small states of Central Europe .
 On April 26, Chamberlain announced to the House of Commons that conscription of men twenty and twenty-21 years of age would begin . Chamberlain—even he had now lost his illusions, Chamberlain—announced to the . House of . Commons .
 France and Britain then signed pacts with Romania and Greece and offered military support to Turkey . France then signed agreements with Greece and Romania to support Turkey .
 Hitler probably hoped that rapid Polish capitulation in the face of a German invasion might present its Western allies with a fait accompli that could discourage a military response .
 Hitler accepted the strong possibility that war would follow any German move against Poland . But he knew that the German economy could not reach full capacity for war production until 1943 . Hitler accepted that he knew he would have to prepare for war against Poland in 1943 .
 Few statesmen in France or Great Britain still harbored any illusions about what was next . Few statemen in Britain or France still harboured any illusions .
 Winston Churchill called for an alliance with the Soviet Union against Germany . Winston Churchill was one of the few British leaders who had been convinced since 1936 that war against Hitler was inevitable .
 Poland and Romania refused to accept Soviet troops on their territory . Discussions with Soviet diplomats dragged on, stumbling on the refusal of either Poland or Romania .
 Chamberlain heard rumors that Stalin and Hitler were conducting diplomatic discussions, but laughed them off . Chamberlain then heard rumors of diplomatic talks with Stalin . Chamberlain laughed off them .
 Hitler ordered the German army to prepare for an invasion of Poland on the following September 1 . The invasion was the first since the fall of Poland in 1939 .
 President Obama signed the “Pact of Steel’s” military alliance with Italy in May . He signed the pact in May, a formal military alliance .
 Mussolini thought he could continue to play off Germany, Britain, and France against each other . Mussolini called the pact “absolute dynamite,” but said he would continue to do so .
 He had believed Hitler when he said that he would not begin a war with Poland for several more years . Hitler believed Hitler would not start a war for years, he said .
 The War in Europe Begins 1057 unprepared for war, and now tied by a formal alliance to Hitler, the Duce had painted his country into a corner . But knowing that doctored statistics could not hide the fact that . Italy was The War
 Stalin himself no longer had doubts about Hitler’s ultimate intentions toward the Soviet Union . The Unholy Alliance was formed by the Nazis in the early 1930s . Stalin himself had no doubt about Hitler's intentions .
 Stalin had decimated the officer corps during the purges of the past three years . Stalin's purges have decimated many of the officers corps .
 Hitler wished to avoid war with the Soviet Union while he was fighting in Poland . In the longer run, he sought, like Bismarck in different circumstances, to avoid fighting a war on two fronts .
 Stalin did not trust the Western Allies to maintain their commitment to resist Hitler . He did not think that even a Soviet pact with Britain and France would prevent Hitler from attacking Poland .
 Hitler announced on August 23, 1939, that Germany had signed the MolotovRibbentrop Nonaggression Pact with the Soviet Union . The pact, named for the two foreign ministers who negotiated it, was named for Russia's foreign ministers .
 Stalin signed an agreement with the Communist leader Hitler with whom he called “the bloody assassin of the workers” Hitler had referred to as ‘the scum of the earth” Stalin had called Hitler’s state that Hitler planned to conquer a state that he planned to
 Hitler believed that a German pact with the Soviet Union would smash the will of Britain and France to defend Poland . Hitler believed a pact with Russia would smash Britain's will of defending Poland .
 Stalin had reasons not to trust Britain or France, which had not bothered to consult the Soviet Union while appeasing at Munich . Britain and France did not bother to consult Stalin before appeasing him .
 The German dictator assured Stalin that “in the event of a territorial and political rearrangement,” the independent states of Latvia and Estonia, coveted by Russia, would be fair game for the Soviet Union .
 Stalin assumed that the imperialist powers ultimately would destroy each other in a protracted war . Stalin still assumed that Russia and the U.S. would die in protracted war. Stalin still believed that the world's imperialist powers would destroy themselves .
 Most Germans seemed prepared to follow Hitler into a new war . In the meantime, most Germans seemed ready to follow him .
 The war for which Hitler had prepared for so long began with a rapid, brutal German attack on Poland . The war in Europe began with the brutal attack on the Polish Republic .
 As Nazi troops overran Poland, the latter’s Western allies, Great Britain and France, protested, but took no military action . Great Britain, France and Britain did not intervene in Poland .
 Soviet troops soon invaded Finland, and German forces occupied Denmark and then Denmark . 1058 Ch. Ch. 1058 was the first time the Soviet Union invaded Finland .
 Hitler next turned his attention to the west, invading France, the Netherlands, and Belgium, and launching massive bombing attacks against Britain . Hitler also invaded Belgium, France, and the Netherlands .
 On September 1, 1939, about 1. million German troops, led by an armored division, poured into Poland . The German invasion was led by a division of about 1 million troops .
 Fighters and light bombers thundered overhead, carefully coordinating their attacks to protect the infantry . Fighters and bombers carefully coordinated their attacks on the ground .
 Britain and France responded two days later by declaring war on Germany . The two countries declared war on each other in 1940 .
 Hitler wanted Polish resistance crushed quickly enough that Britain, and possibly France as well, would limit their reaction to a declaration of war . Hitler wanted to crush the Polish resistance quickly enough to limit the reaction .
 Poland had a large and well-trained army of more than 1 million soldiers . Poland has a large army of over 1 million troops .
 The German air force destroyed half of Poland’s planes in the first attacks on its bases . The first attacks were the first to destroy half of the Polish planes .
 Polish government moved to Paris on September 17 . After moving east as German forces advanced, suffering heavy losses in the process, the Polish government has moved to France . The Polish government suffered heavy losses from the German forces .
 The German armies immediately implemented a policy of terror, killing prisoners of war, burning hundreds of towns and villages, and systematically massacring the Polish elite, while preparing for the settlement of the conquered lands .
 From the east, Soviet armies invaded Poland on September 17, 1059 . The War in Europe Begins 1059 from the east .
 Stalin and Hitler made secret agreement between them under Molotov-Ribbentrop Nonaggression Pact . They did so with Hitler’s blessing, under a secret agreement made between Stalin and Stalin .
 Poland, partitioned three times late in the eighteenth century, was once again divided up . Poland was once partied three times in the 17th century . Poland is now divided up again .
 The Soviet dictator ordered the transfer of Poles in cattle wagons as “special settlers’’ to the eastern reaches of the Soviet Union . The Poles were transferred to eastern Soviet Union as "special settlers''
 As Hitler had hoped, Britain and France took no military action . The “Phony War’s” was a ‘phony war’ As Hitler hoped, the ‘Phony World’ was ‘unsuccessful’
 Few people seemed willing to ‘die for Danzig ,” the Polish port Germany had lost by the Treaty of Versailles . Few people were willing to die for the Danzig .
 British and French military experts overestimated the strength of Hitler’s armies . Experts were shocked by speed of the German victory over Poland .
 An immediate French and British attack on Germany from the west might have been successful while the Germans were tied up in Poland, where the German army and air force had seriously depleted available munitions .
 Britain and France had more than twice as many divisions ready, and the German air force had few planes available to fight in the west . Germany had fewer planes available, and Britain had twice more divisions ready .
 French troops made one brief, unopposed excursion fourteen miles into Germany, then fell back . French troops fell back after unopportunity 14 miles .
 The British Royal Air Force flew over Germany, but dropped only leaflets calling for peace .
 Both the British and French governments believed that an attack on Germany would fail . Both governments believed the attack would fail.
 Germany was stunned by Hitler’s pact with Stalin; unlike in World War 1, it now appeared that Germany would only have to fight a war on one front . They had been stunned by the pact with . Stalin .
 Hitler confidently announced to his generals that he planned to order an invasion of France in the near future . Hitler planned to invade France with the help of his French troops .
 The German invasion of Western Europe was postponed until the spring of 1940 . Planned first for November and then for January, the invasion was postponed . The invasion was scheduled for November 1940 .
 Fearing German bombing attacks, the British government issued Londoners gas masks and imposed a nighttime blackout . Londoners were issued gas masks, and the nighttime blackout was imposed .
 In Rome, Mussolini had developed cold feet just before Hitler’s invasion of Poland . He knew that Italy lacked enough coal, oil, iron, and steel to wage a lengthy war .
 Mussolini announced that Italy’s status would be one of “non-belligerence,” a term he selected to avoid comparisons with the “neutrality” against which he had vociferously campaigned against . Italy entered World War I in 1915 .
 The opening of the war included advances by the Germans into Poland, the U.S.R., the Scandinavian countries, the Balkans, and North Africa . The German and Italian advance included advances into Poland and the United States, Italy, and the Balkans .
 The British unsuccessfully attempted to take a stand against the Germans in Norway . British and French troops were evacuated from the continent at Dunkirk . The British were forced to leave the continent in 1940 .
 The War in the Frozen North began in northern Europe . The "phony war" continued in the west but fighting began in the north .
 The Russian border with Finland, independent since the Russian Revolution, lay only 14 miles from Leningrad . The border is only fourteen miles from the Russian capital .
 Stalin demanded that the Finnish government cede strategically important territories to the Soviets . The Finnish government refused to give up strategically important territory to the USSR .
 The Red The War in Europe Begins 1061 Army invaded Finland in 1939 . When the Finnish government refused in November 1939, the Red Army invaded . The 1061 army invaded Finland .
 Badly outnumbered Finnish soldiers fought bravely in subzero temperatures, sometimes on skis, carrying machine guns against Russian tanks and temporarily holding back Soviet forces . The Finnish soldiers were temporarily holding off Soviet tanks .
 Finland harbored no illusions about winning the ‘Winter War,’ but hoped to be saved by British and French intervention . The Finnish government had no illusions of winning the "Winter War"
 France now favored, at least in principle, armed intervention on behalf of Finland . France now favors armed intervention in the country .
 By the Peace of Moscow, signed March 12, 1940, the Soviet Union annexed about 10 percent of Finnish territory . By the end of the 1940s, Finland had more than 80 percent of its territory .
 In April British ships mined the Norwegian harbor of Narvik, despite the objections of the government of Norway . With the goal of stopping Swedish iron ore from being shipped to Germany, the British ships have mined the harbor .
 German paratroopers landed at Oslo and other Norwegian port cities, followed by troops put ashore by ships . The invasion was the first of its kind in Norway .
 German soldiers repelled Allied troops, who arrived at the end of April with sketchy orders and inadequate weapons . Allied troops arrived in Germany at the start of the war, arriving in April . German soldiers fought off the Allied forces, who died in the battle .
 Prime Minister Chamberlain had assured the British House of Commons that Germany “had missed the bus” by waiting so long to attack in the west . Chamberlain had told the British Parliament that Germany had ‘missed the bus' by waiting to attack .
 Germany's lightning occupation of Denmark and victory in Norway brought down the Chamberlain government . But Germany’s lightning occupation . of Denmark brought down . Chamberlain government.
 Churchill, who had been a member of Parliament on and off since 1900, became prime minister on May 10, 1940 . Churchill was prime minister of the UK in 1940 .
 Churchill was an unpopular choice among even some Conservatives, who held an overwhelming majority in Parliament . The outspoken Churchill was unpopular with even some Conservative MPs .
 Many remembered his impulsive attachment to far-fetched military operations during the First World War . This led to the catastrophic defeat of British troops at Gallipoli in 1915 in 1915 .
 Churchill had ten new ideas each day, but that nine of them were bad, advisers said . Churchill had 10 new ideas a day, one adviser said, but nine of those were bad .
 Churchill's resilience, determination, and dedication made Churchill an extraordinary wartime leader . Still, his resilience and determination made him a remarkable wartime leader, Churchill said .
 German troops stared confidently across the Rhine River at their French opponents . The Fall of France was Germany's first invasion of France .
 The German army could sidestep the French Maginot Line, which stopped at the Belgian frontier . The French line was established at the end of the Second World War .
 The German army and air force were already well-practiced, having conquered Poland . Furthermore, the German air force was well-prepared, having already been conquered .
 French soldiers had become demoralized by the winter months in the damp bunkers along the Maginot Line . French soldiers became demoralized after spending winter months inside the bunkers . The French soldiers were demoralised by the damp conditions .
 The plan of the French high command to engage the enemy forces as they moved into the Low Countries was undermined by the Belgian and Dutch governments . Both, hoping to remain neutral, were unwilling to coordinate defense planning with the French army .
 French tanks were as good as those of Germany but lacked sufficient fuel . They were dispersed among infantry divisions, instead of concentrated in tank divisions as in the German army . French tanks lacked fuel and were dispersed in infantry divisions .
 Many people in France were uncertain as to why they might be once again fighting Germany . After eight months of “phony war,” many people were uncertain why they were fighting again .
 French and British governments were already sniping at each other . Compounding serious military problems, the British and French governments had already been sniping . Compound serious problems, they were already adding to the problem .
 The French resented the fact that their ally sent a relatively small British Expeditionary Force to France . The British government seemed willing to defend France down to the last Frenchman .
 The French had irritated their British counterparts by opposing Allied bombing of Germany, fearing that the expected swift reprisals would strike them, not Britain . On the other hand, the French were irritated by opposing the Allied bombing .
 German gliders landed troops who captured a massive Belgian fortress . German glider landed troops in a carefully rehearsed attack .
 Airborne divisions took the airport and central bridges of the Dutch port of Rotterdam . German bombers then destroyed ships, docks, and the heart of the old city . 40,000 people were killed in the attack .
 The German assault on France began through the Ardennes Forest on the Belgian border . Ten tank divisions pushed seventy miles into France .
 German planes, controlling the air, swept down on French troops . They destroyed half the planes of the British Royal Air Force in three days .
 Mussolini declared war on France on May 10, but an Italian army managed to advance only about a hundred yards across the border toward Nice . Mussolini, a portly vulture circling above the wounded French prey, declared war against France . The Italian army was only a few hundred yards
 French commanders foolishly sent most of their armored reserves into the Netherlands . German tanks had reached the Meuse River in eastern France, now turned west and moved toward the English Channel .
 Only a minor challenge by a tank column by French General Charles de Gaulle slowed the German drive to the Channel . They were vulnerable to an Allied counterattack, but only a small challenge by the tank column .
 British troops retreated from Belgium into France, heading toward the Channel . Instead of attacking, British forces retreated into France and headed toward Channel .
 German columns reached the Channel on May 21, 1940, cutting the Allied forces in half . They cut the Allied Forces in half, cutting them in half in the Channel .
 By now the roads of northern France were choked, not only with retreating British and French troops, but with fleeing Belgian and French refugees fleeing the battle zones .
 340,000 British and French troops were evacuated from Dunkirk by every available British vessel, including fishing trawlers and pleasure craft . British troops, joined by remnants of French forces, managed to hold off the German army .
 The German army wheeled to confront the French troops still uselessly defending the Maginot Line . The French troops remained uselessly fighting for their lives .
 The German The War in Europe Begins 1063 Hitler takes a triumphant stroll through Paris in June 1940 . The German army occupied the capital on June 14 .
 Marshal Philippe Petain, hero of the Battle of Verdun in 1916, became premier . On June 16, Marshal Petain became premier of France .
 France and Britain had agreed that neither would ask for an armistice without the approval of the other . The two countries had agreed not to ask for a cease-fire without each other's approval .
 The British government wanted the French armies to move to North Africa and continue the war from there . The French armies were wanted to continue to fight in North Africa, but the British government did not want them .
 On June 22, Hitler accepted the French surrender in a railway car in the spot where Germany had signed a similar document in November 1918 . The gleeful Hitler accepted France's surrender on June 22 in a train car .
 On July 3, the British navy sunk a battleship, a cruiser, and several destroyers of the French fleet as they lay in port at Mers el-Kebir in Algeria . 1,300 French sailors were killed in the attack .
 The British command feared that the ships might fall into German hands . The ships were taken over by the German forces .
 Germany held the French and Belgian Channel ports, a position it had never achieved during World War I . Ireland having proclaimed its neutrality, the Royal Navy no longer had use of southern Irish ports . The Royal Navy had no use of the ports in southern Ireland .
 In some places, officials took down road signs and place names . Shopkeepers shredded local maps to disorient any German invading army .
 For an invasion of Britain to succeed, the German air force had to control the skies . For the success of the invasion, the air force would need to be in control of the skies to succeed .
 Battle of Britain lasted four dramatic months, from the very end of July through October 31, 1940 . Most of the climactic duels in the sky took place in August and September .
 Londoners took to subway stations and underground air-raid shelters for protection . Londoners also took to the subway stations for protection from the air raid .
 The British used radar, first developed in 1935, to detect German attacks . Radar was first developed by the British in the 1930s .
 Recently built British Spitfires and Hurricanes reached greater speeds than the German Messerschmitt fighters . Spitfires could break through fighter escorts to get to the cumbersome German bombers .
 Hitler ordered the bombing of key industries and aircraft factories in England even as British bombers appeared over Berlin in August, demonstrating that Britain was far from defeated .
 As German air losses mounted, the Luftwaffe turned to less accurate night bombing to keep the British fighters out of the air .
 At the end of September 1940, Hitler was forced to abandon his plan to invade England . Hitler's plans to invade Britain were eventually abandoned .
 Children were evacuated from London during the German bombing “blitz/ 1940.”
 Winston Churchill was Prime Minister of Britain during the Second World War . Churchill was the prime minister of the British Prime Minister during the war .
 World War II rapidly spread to almost all corners of the globe . A Global War 1065 A World War of the Second World War began in 1941 .
 Total war absorbed national resources on an unprecedented scale, as factories began to turn out weapons, munitions, and war materiel .
 Governments assumed considerable control over economies, coordinating production, raising taxes, and imposing rationing . Governments assumed control of economies by coordinating production and raising taxes .
 Germany launched an air and ground attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941 . In June 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Russia .
 Hitler failed to reckon with determined Russian resistance, as well as with the harsh Russian winter . However, he failed to contend with determined resistance and the harsh winter .
 The largest invading army in history ground to a halt in the frozen snow . It was the largest invasion of all time in history .
 On December 7, 1941, Japanese planes carried out a surprise attack on the United States naval and air force base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii .
 The raid inflicted great damage on the United States Pacific Fleet . It brought the U.S. into what had become a global conflict fought on an unprecedented scale . The raid was the first of its kind .
 Total War Britain was the first combatant in World War II to find itself engaged in a total war . Total War War Britain is the first total war of the war .
 German military planners counted on Hitler’s confident assertion that the U.S. would stay out of the war and that Germany could bring the British to their knees . Hitler's confident assertion was that the United States would not enter the war .
 British resistance won sympathy and admiration from the United States . But the U.S. could help Britain in other ways, it could help the British government .
 On December 29, 1940, President Franklin D Roosevelt announced that the United States would be “the arsenal of democracy,” despite official neutrality . President Roosevelt declared that the U.S. would be the “armour of democracy” in 1940 .
 Congress passed the Lend-Lease Act in March 1941 . Since World War I, direct loans might recall for many Americans the defaults by those countries in debt to the U.S. after World War II .
 It authorized the president to lend destroyers, trucks, and other equipment to Great Britain . Great Britain in exchange would lease naval bases in the Caribbean to the U.S.
 Unlike Germany, which had been preparing for war virtually since Hitler came to power, Britain had to start almost from scratch . The British government had to prepare for war in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The British government succeeded in rallying the king’s subjects to wartime sacrifices . The king's subjects were made to sacrifice their lives in the war .
 Military conscription at the beginning of the war was quickly accepted . Few people had any doubts about the extent of the Nazi threat to Britain itself .
 Before the war began, the British armed forces comprised 500,000 people . At the end of the war, 5 million people were in the armed forces, including 5 million men .
 Women took the places in industry vacated by departing troops, accounting for 80 percent of the increase in the labor force between 1939 and 1943 . Women took up 80 percent in industry .
 In 1939, 7,000 women worked in ordnance factories in Britain; in October 1944, there were 260,000 . In October 1944 the number of women working in Britain's ordnance factory rose to 7,500 .
 The British War Cabinet imposed governmental controls on the economy in 1942 . By 1942, the government had achieved a high degree of coordination in wartime production .
 The government imposed higher taxes, implemented rent control, established rationing, and called for voluntary restraints on wage raises . The government also imposed rent control .
 British farmers augmented agricultural production by increasing the amount of land under cultivation by a full third . Farmers increased the amount under cultivation of land by a third .
 Churchill established a scientific advisory committee to put some of Britain's most eminent scientists to work designing more powerful and reliable weapons . Churchill established the committee in October 1940 .
 One of the most significant breakthroughs of the war was not a technological innovation but the solving of the complex puzzle of a secret code . The code was solved by solving a complex puzzle .
 British intelligence officers aided by mathematicians deciphered communications between Hitler and his high command during the Battle of Britain . Intelligence officers decippedhered communications during the battle .
 This subsequently allowed the Allies to know many German military moves in advance . This led to the Allies being able to anticipate many of the German's military moves .
 British intelligence officers broke the German communications code, facilitating identification of spies . The code was used to help identify spies .
 By the end of 1943, the code breakers were intercepting more than 90,000 messages a month . Some codebreakers were using the “Enigma’s machine developed after World War I to decipher secret messages .
 The British Psychological Warfare Division, along with their U.S. counterpart, also put the science of psychology into the service of modern warfare .
 Hitler sought other allies in an attempt to win the war quickly . Hitler sought allies in a bid to increase his chances of winning quickly .
 Tripartite Pact with Japan was designed to discourage the U.S. from entering the war on the Allied side against Germany and Italy . The two Axis powers signed the pact in September 1940 .
 Germany and Italy recognized Japan's interests in Asia, while Japan acknowledged those of Germany, Italy in Europe . Japan acknowledged its interests in Europe, while Germany recognized its own in Asia .
 Hitler tried to convince Francisco Franco, whose victory in the Spanish Civil War Hitler helped make possible, to join the war of the Axis powers against Britain . Hitler then tried to persuade Francisco Franco to join his war effort .
 The German dictator envisioned a Spanish seizure of Gibraltar and German use of naval bases in the Spanish Canary Islands . The dictator wanted to seize control of Gibraltar .
 The Spanish dictator pleaded the poverty of his country and, as if to emphasize the point, arrived at the meeting with Hitler hours late on a plodding train . Hitler's visit to Spain was the first time Hitler had met with the dictator .
 Franco’s Spain, however, however much ideologically in tune with Hitler's Germany, remained neutral . Franco's Spain remained officially neutral in the 1930s .
 In Romania, King Carol II was powerless in the face of his greedy neighbors, who were encouraged by Germany . In Romania he was powerless against his neighbors' wishes .
 He surrendered to Hungary a part of Transylvania that had been awarded to Romania by the Treaty of Versailles and that included a considerable Hungarian population . The area included a large Hungarian population and a large population of the population .
 Stalin forced Romania to hand over to the Soviet Union northern Bukovina and Bessara . The area had once been part of the Russian Empire .
 As a result, the Romanian fascist Iron Guard rebelled and forced King Carol to abdicate in 1940 . King Carol abdicated in favor of his son Michael in September 1940 .
 Germany hurried to secure a supply of raw materials by occupying Romania and its rich oil fields in October 1940 . Now convinced it was facing a long war, Germany made the move in Romania .
 A right-wing general, Ion Antonescu , ran the country with the help of the Iron Guard, which served German interests . The Iron Guard unleashed its fury against Romania’s Jews and Communists .
 From the beginning, it appeared that Italy’s contributions to the German war effort would be minimal at best . From the start of the war effort, it looked like it would be a modest contribution to Germany's efforts .
 Mussolini aimed to take as much territory in North Africa as possible before the British surrender upon which he counted . Mussolini wanted to take control of North Africa before British surrender .
 Mussolini invaded Egypt in September 1940, refusing a German offer to supply tanks because he wanted Italy to claim victory on its own . After having failed to launch air attacks, as Hitler had wanted, on British bases on the Mediterranean island of Malta, Malta .
 Unable to provide troops with air cover, Italian forces suffered a series of defeats at the hands of British forces . The Italian government was unable to provide air cover to troops .
 On October 28, 1940, the Duce surprised Hitler by ordering his army to invade Greece from Albania . The invasion surprised Hitler, as well as his own generals .
 Mussolini had paid large bribes to Greek generals and officials not to resist . Mussolini anticipated an easy victory in Italy .
 A Greek patriot army drove the Italians back into Albania, where resistance movements made life difficult for Mussolini’s troops . A Greek patriot army fought back against the Italian invasion of Albania .
 The Italian army took out its frustrations against the Croatian population of Dalmatia on the Adriatic coast . The Croatian population was targeted by the Italian army during the war .
 Italy's imperial holdings in East Africa rapidly crumbled in the spring of 1941 . Italy’s imperial holdings of East Africa quickly crumbled .
 A British and French force took Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital, in April . The Ethiopian capital is Ethiopia's capital .
 Hitler sent General Erwin Rommel to North Africa to bail out the Italian troops . Rommel was a tank division commander in the North Africa .
 Hitler always intended to invade and defeat the Soviet Union, despite the Molotov-Ribbentrop Nonaggression Pact of August 1939 . Hitler always planned to invade Russia .
 Soviet troops had occupied Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania during the summer of 1940 . Claimed they had been illegitimately detached from Russia after World War I .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov anxious about moves in Romania and Finland . German interest in Finland and Romania now made Soviet foreign minister anxious . Molotrov: "I'm not worried about what's happening in Romania"
 The Soviets sought reassurance in a new pact, one that Mussolini would sign as well . Mussolini signed a pact with the Soviet Union in 1940s .
 Hitler intended “Operation Barbarossa,” the invasion of Russia, to be a “quick campaign” of no more than ten weeks’ duration . Hitler intended the invasion to be an invasion of ten weeks' duration . The invasion was intended to be no more
 He hoped that Japan would attack Siberia, thereby forcing Stalin to divert troops there . Stalin hoped that the attack would force him to divert his troops to Siberia .
 Some German generals held the Russian army in such contempt that they ordered no serious assessment of Russia’s existing or potential military strength . Some of those generals held Russia in contempt .
 The opening of a Balkan front delayed Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union, which had been planned for May 1941, had been due to take place in May 1941 . The opening delayed Hitler's invasion of Soviet Union .
 Britain had sent forces to Greece following the Italian invasion, which made German bases in Yugoslavia even more crucial . Germany had sent troops to Greece after the invasion of Italy .
 An anti-German faction had overthrown the Yugoslav government in March and refused to join the Axis or to allow German troops into the country .
 The German army forced a British withdrawal from the Greek mainland to the Aegean island of Crete . Crete soon itself fell to German paratroopers . The British withdrawal was forced by the German army .
 Five percent of the Greek population died of starvation, along with hundreds of thousands killed in the fighting or executed . Hundreds of thousands of Greeks were either killed or executed in the conflict or starved .
 Stalin failed to heed warnings from Britain and the U.S. that Russia was Germany’s next target . Stalin, however, didn’t heed warnings that Russia would be the next target of the Nazi regime .
 Stalin ordered the execution of some of his intelligence officers . Stalin believed these warnings to be part of a conspiracy to turn him against his German ally .
 On June 22, 1941, German planes, tanks, and more than 3 million troops attacked the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was invaded by Germany in June 1941 .
 The German generals were convinced that the Soviet forces could be easily defeated . The German general was convinced that he could easily defeat the Soviet troops .
 The Soviets had many more men, field artillery, tanks, and aircraft than Germany . However, the Soviets had a better quality of weapons than the Germans . Their weapons were of quality equal to or even superior to that of the Germans' .
 German forces quickly devastated Soviet defenses and communication networks . German forces devastated Soviet defense and transportation networks . But German forces were quick to destroy Soviet defenses .
 One army pushed toward Leningrad in July 1941, laying siege to the city . The city was one of the most densely populated cities in the Soviet Union .
 The battleship Aurora was pressed into service, its guns commandeered from a museum . Aurora had served the Bolshevik cause in the Revolution of 1917 .
 Hitler rejected generals’ suggestion that the attack on Moscow be given priority . Hitler rejected the idea that the Russian attack should be prioritised . Hitler also rejected his generals' suggestion that he should attack Moscow .
 Armored units were transferred to the northern army besieging Leningrad . Instead of armored units, armored units were moved to the north .
 A Global War 1069 Peasants watching the effects of the German invasion of Ukraine, August 1941 . Peasans watching the effect of the Nazi invasion of the Ukraine .
 The German advance left Russian towns and villages in ruins, and hundreds of thousands of civilians dead . Hundreds of thousands also died in the advance .
 Despite enormous battlefield casualties, Russian resistance stiffened . Half a million captured prisoners died of hunger and cold in German camps .
 German armies bogged down in the face of determined resistance around Smolensk . German armies were unable to break into the city to reach the city .
 Soviet state-run factories were converted to wartime production, soon turning out great numbers of tanks of good quality . The tanks were built in the Soviet Union during the Second World War .
 The United States extended the Lend-Lease policy to the Soviet Union . The U.S. was still officially neutral in the conflict .
 A frozen winter, the coldest in a century, followed the chilly Russian fall . The drive to victory stalled, despite having captured more than a million square miles of Soviet territory, the German troops .
 The German high command had not bothered to provide them with warm clothing and blankets for temperatures reaching far below zero . They were so certain of a quick victory, they did not bother to provide warm clothing .
 Hitler ignored the advice of his generals to pull back and await spring weather . After ordering a halt in the push toward Moscow, Hitler feared the consequences of retreat on German morale .
 A desperate German attack stalled twenty miles from Moscow in December 1941 . The German attack was a desperate attempt to get Russia to Moscow .
 During the first year of the Russian campaign, German casualties reached 1. million, or 40 percent of the original invading force . The greatest losses of any single military operation in history were caused by 1 million German casualties .
 Japan had sought to expand its influence and territory in the Pacific region . Since invading Manchuria in 1931 and proclaiming it the puppet state of Manchukuo a year later, Japan had wanted to expand .
 Southeast Asian oil was one Japanese target, particularly after the Manchurian invasion . The United States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands imposed an economic boycott following the invasion .
 The Japanese quest for rubber, tin, and other raw materials threatened British economic interests in Burma and Malaya . The Dutch in Java and the United States in the Philippine Islands also threatened British interests .
 Japan joined the Anti-Comintern Pact that Germany and Italy had signed the previous year . In 1937, Japan had joined the pact that Germany, Italy and Germany had signed .
 Also in 1937, the Japanese army moved further into China and occupied the main ports . The American government viewed the moves with alarm .
 Molotov-Ribbentrop Nonaggression Pact, signed between the Soviet Union and Germany in August 1939, voided the Anti-Comintern Pact . Pact voided as Soviet Union was a Communist state, as it was Communist state .
 After Japanese troops entered Indochina, in September 1940, Japan concluded the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy, thus becoming part of the Axis . Japan became the Axis state of the Soviet Union in November 1941 .
 Japan assumed a “protective” occupation of French Indochina in July 1941 . In an effort to stop the flow of Allied supplies to Chinese forces over the railway from Hanoi and a dirt road from Burma .
 Japanese dive bombers preparing to take off from an aircraft carrier before attacking Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941 . Pearl Harbor was attacked by nonaggression Japanese aircraft carriers .
 A Global War 1071 pact with the Soviet Union, signed in April 1941, bolstered Japanese confidence that it could attack and inflict a stinging defeat on the United States . The pact was signed two months before the German invasion of Russia . It was made to bolster Japanese confidence they could inflict
 On December 7, 1941, a Japanese force of fighters and dive-bombers surprised the U.S. base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii .
 The attack killed 2,403 naval and other military personnel, and more than 1,000 were wounded . More than a million people were killed in the attack .
 Three aircraft carriers were at sea and could still be readied to take on the Japanese fleet in the Pacific Ocean .
 President Roosevelt had known that Japan was planning to launch a war against the United States . American intelligence officers had deciphered Japan’s coded messages, President Roosevelt said .
 Pearl Harbor came as a surprise, part because U.S. intelligence services were swamped with messages suggesting attacks at other locations . Yet, the attack on Pearl Harbor was a surprise .
 December 7, 1941, was “a day that will live in infamy,” Roosevelt declared war on Japan . December 7 was a day that “will live ininfamy”
 Hitler bound by treaty to Japan, then declared war against the United States . U.S. President George W. Bush declared war on Hitler in 1941 .
 He believed public opinion in the United States was against American involvement in another European war . He believed that public opinion was against U.S. involvement in the war .
 The entry of the U.S. into the war against Germany provided a crucial material advantage to the Allies . In 1917, the United States entered the war with Germany .
 Despite its slow recovery from the Depression, the United States had become the largest industrial power in the world . The U.S. produced more than the next six powers combined .
 Industrial production in the United States doubled by the end of 1943, pulling the U.S. out of the Depression . Industrial production doubled in response to wartime demand . The United States finally pulled out of its Depression .
 Churchill and Roosevelt had a warm personal relationship despite their patronizing attitude . Churchill was the prime minister of the U.S. during the Second World War . Roosevelt was the president of the United States .
 Their rapport helped overcome tension that had developed between the two powers because of the original unwillingness of the United States to join Britain in the war .
 American citizens rallied to the war effort, particularly against the Japanese . Americans rallied around the U.S. in support of the war efforts .
 The fact that an Asian power had attacked the U.S. galled Americans, many of whom believed that Asians were inferior .
 The Japanese Advance And Allied Counteroffensive, 1941-1945 . After launching a surprise attack against the United States naval and air force base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii .
 U.S. government interned about 40,000 Japanese citizens in the United States . 70,000 Americans, most living on the West Coast . Hitlers Europe 1073 said Japanese citizens and Japanese Americans were preparing to carry out acts of sabotage .
 The first of several meetings between the British and American military chiefs of staff took place in Washington, D.C., in January 1942 .
 Allied commanders gave the European theater of war the highest priority . Allied commanders decided to give the European Theater of War the most priority .
 An immediate concentration of attacks against Japanese forces seemed less urgent . A concentration of Japanese forces was less urgent. An immediate attack on Japanese forces would be less urgent than an immediate attack .
 In any case, it would take considerable time to dislodge the Japanese from the Southeast Asian countries and Pacific islands they had conquered .
 Hitler's policies were first directed at extracting useful raw materials needed to wage an extended war . Whether or not each conquered state retained some autonomy, German policies were aimed at extracting valuable raw materials .
 The exact nature of the relationship between Germany and each occupied state varied from country to country . Germany's relationship with occupied states varied from Germany to Germany .
 The Nazis carried out Hitler’s policy of genocide against Jews and others belonging to what he considered to be inferior races, often aided by local collaborators . Yet in all of these states, the Nazi regime carried out genocide against Jewish people .
 In every country overrun by German troops, people could be found who were eager or willing to collaborate with the Nazis . The Nazis were found in all countries overrun by their troops .
 These ranged from leaders willing to serve German interests to ordinary people whose political biases or hope for gain or even just survival led them to help the Nazis .
 In many countries, resistance movements bravely opposed the rule of the Nazis or their allies . Yet, many countries still fought against the Nazis and their allies.
 The largest and most successful resistance was in mountainous Yugoslavia, where resisters were able to take on entire German divisions . Groups of guerrilla fighters undertook hit-and-run attacks against the Germans and the collaborationist government .
 In Germany, resistance to Hitler and the Nazis barely existed, notwithstanding a courageous attempt by disenchenchanted army officers to assassinate Hitler in July 1944 . Resistance to Hitler barely existed in Germany .
 To the end, most Germans remained loyal to the Fiihrer, or at least could not or did not resist .
 The Nazi “New European Order” sought to exploit the economic resources of the countries his armies had conquered . Hitler sought to assure that no effective opposition could emerge in any of them . The Nazi "New European order" was created by the Nazis in 1945 .
 Germany annexed the disputed Polish territories it had claimed, including Poznan, Upper Silesia, and the Polish Corridor . Hitler considered the territories German in the first place .
 Germans who lived in Poland, NORWAY, NORway and Malta live in the Mediterranean Sea . Germans also lived in the Middle East .
 Hitler’s Europe, 1942, shows the greatest extent of the German occupation of Europe . Hitler's expansion to the east and west, showing the . greatest extent . of the . occupation .
 German policies were different in Poland and Russia, whose peoples Hitler considered to be racially inferior . Hitler considered the Poles and Russians to be "racial inferior"
 Following the fall of Warsaw, Hitler had sent five special “action squads to Poland with orders to wipe out the Polish upper class . Hitler had been sent five squads to kill off the upper class in Poland .
 All over the country, businessmen, political leaders, intellectuals, and teachers were executed or sent to extermination camps . Businessmen, politicians, intellectuals and intellectuals were executed, sent to camps .
 Norway and Denmark were deemed to be sufficiently “Nordic” or “Aryan” to be “Germanized” by Hitler . Denmark and Norway were allowed relative autonomy by Hitler's regime .
 Hitler left Germany’s central and southern European allies with some autonomy, depending on the extent of which they followed his wishes . Hitler's central and . southern European “independent” allies were ‘independent’
 Adm. Miklos Horthy ruled Hungary under increasingly close German supervision . Horthy's rule was closely monitored by the German government .
 Slovakia had been denied independence by the Versailles settlements . It had become autonomous when Germany marched into Czechoslovakia in 1938, splitting the country .
 Hitler divided Yugoslavia into the states of Serbia, Montenegro, and Croatia . Yugoslavia was divided into three states: Yugoslavia, Yugoslavia, Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro . Croatia was declared Yugoslavia in 1945 .
 Serbia was placed under direct German administration . Croatia and Montenegro were placed under the rule of an authoritarian leader responsible to Mussolini . Montenegro and Croatia were also put under the influence of a dictator .
 The Germans imposed crushing obligations on conquered lands, including financial indemnities and exchange rates that strongly favored the German currency . The German currency was strongly favored by the Germans during the German invasion .
 Germans operated factories and shipping companies in occupied countries . They operated factories in occupied Germany and occupied Europe . Germans also operated shipping companies .
 In France, the Germans first took movable raw materials and equipment useful for war production . The Germans also took equipment from France that could be used in production .
 As the war went on, German demands became greater . The occupation authorities closely regulated the armament, aircraft, mining, and metal industries .
 Some French businesses made the best of the situation, eagerly working with German firms . Some French firms made the most of the time, eager to work with them .
 A few quietly subverted German demands and expectations for cooperation . A few subverted Germany's expectations and expectations of cooperation .
 They made a temporary exception to foreign laborers, upon whom the economy depended during the war . They made the temporary exception of foreign laborers .
 Hitler ordered the killing, often by injection, of Germans who were mentally deficient and handicapped . In 1939, Hitler had ordered the killings, often in Germany, of those deemed mentally deficient or handicapped Germans .
 At least 70,000 mentally retarded people perished, including children, before public objections that victims were German halted this practice in August 1941 .
 Hitler mandated experiments to determine how thousands of people could be killed “efficiently’s” in assemblyline fashion . Hitler mandated the experiments to find out how to kill thousands .
 In 1939, Hitler told Heinrich Himmler to plan for the occupation of Poland and the Soviet Union . Hitler told him to prepare for the invasion of Poland .
 The short, stout Himmler was obsessed with the pagan Germans of prehistory . He established several spurious academic institutes to study his crackpot theories .
 Nazi plans to exterminate Jews took shape as German military defeats mounted in Russia . Nazi plans for exterminating Jews came to light as Nazi military defeats mount .
 Hitler no longer wanted to transform Slavs into a slave labor force, but rather wanted to destroy at least 30 million of them . Hitler wanted the Slavs to be a slave force, rather than a labor force force, he said .
 German troops and death squads executed Russian prisoners and civilians . Death squads executed prisoners and executed Russian civilians .
 Before the war ended, at least 3. million Soviet prisoners of war—of 5. million captured—were executed or died in German prisoner-of-war camps . At least 3 million Soviet POWs were executed or killed in German POWs camps .
 In October 1941, the Nazis began to prepare for the Holocaust, the genocide of European Jews . The Holocaust was the first step in the Nazi Holocaust .
 Heydrich and other Nazi officials met in Wannsee, a Berlin suburb, in January 1942 . The meeting took place in the middle of the winter months .
 The assembly-line-like murders of Jews began, first in mobile vans, using carbon monoxide gas, then in the extermination camp of Auschwitz .
 Most victims were exterminated in airtight gas chambers with Zyklon B gas, chosen because it killed with efficiency . The gas chambers were filled with gas chambers filled with Zylon B, chosen to kill efficiently . Most victims died in the gas chambers .
 The victims’ eyeglasses, gold from their teeth, and all other valuables became the property of the Reich . The victims were forced to wear their eyeglass and gold teeth to protect them .
 Inmates of the camps wore tattered striped uniforms, and they were identified by numbers tattooed on their arms . Inmates wore striped uniforms .
 Sites of the death camps in Europe are sites of the Nazi death camps . Gesture gesture, a small piece of soap, is a gesture of remembrance .
 A recent, unknowing arrival at Auschwitz inquired of another prisoner as to the whereabouts of his friend . A recent . unknowing . prisoner as well as another prisoner, the . friend of the friend .
 A hand pointed to the chimney a few hundred yards off, which was sending a column of flame up into the sky of Poland . The chimney was sending the flame up to the sky, a hand pointed out .
 Hungarian Jews perished in the largest numbers, followed closely by Poles . Overall, Hungarian Jews were killed in Hungary in the Holocaust .
 One of the granddaughters of Alfred Dreyfus, the Jewish French army officer falsely accused of treason in the 1890s, perished there in 1944 . The Jewish French officer was falsely accused .
 The fascist states of Croatia and Romania, both Germany’s allies, carried out the mass murder of Jews themselves . The fascist state of Croatia, both of which were allies, murdered Jews themselves themselves .
 The Romanian government killed 300,000 Jews in the provinces that the Soviets had occupied in 1940, but few in what the Romanians considered the heartland of the country . The Soviet Union occupied the provinces of Romania in 1940 .
 In Lithuania, Ukraine, and, to a lesser extent, Poland, there were many cases of local populations massacring Jews . In Lithuania and Ukraine, the majority of Jews were killed by local populations .
 A small French town took in Jewish children, producing identity cards that made them family members . The identity cards were produced by the town that made the children feel they were family .
 Varian Fry found sponsors for about 1,000 Jews early in the war, including the painter Marc Chagall and the poet Andre Breton . Fry planned escape routes, purchased tickets, and, where possible, obtained transit and other visas .
 In Amsterdam, Christians brought food and other supplies to a German Jewish family hidden in a secret annex apartment in the father’s office building for several years . Christians bring food and supplies to the family, hidden in an annex apartment . The family lived in the building's annex apartment for
 Several months after her fourteenth birthday, Nazi soldiers discovered Frank’s family . Frank's family was found by Nazi soldiers in 1944 .
 1079 Dutch Jews on their way to the trains for transport from Amsterdam to a concentration camp . Danes ferried Jews across the straits to nearby neutral Sweden . 1079 Danish Jews were transported to neutral Sweden to escape concentration camps .
 Perhaps fearing that mass deportations might spark Danish resistance, the German authorities looked the other way . Perhaps fearing fearing that the deportation might spark resistance, they did not .
 In Hungary, Horthy resisted for three years German demands that the Jews of Hungary be sent to death camps . Horthy was Hungarian president of the Hungarian Republic in 1944 .
 After German occupation in 1944, he ordered deportations of Jews that had begun to be stopped . He ordered the deportations that had been stopped in 1944 .
 Some Italian army officers protected Jews from Croatian death squads . In Croatia, where Italy had established an occupation zone, some Italian soldiers protected Jews . Some of the Jews were killed by the death squads in Croatia .
 Mussolini wrote “No objection” to the request that the Italians turn the Croatian Jews over to the Nazis in 1942 . But in August 1942, Germany requested that the Italian government turn the Jews over .
 They ignored German directives, or they could have been bribed to look the other way . They ignored the directives, either they could be bribed or ignored them .
 Some non-Jewish Romans contributed their jewelry to raise a ransom demanded by the Germans from Jews under threat of deportation . The Germans demanded a ransom from the Romans to pay for their protection .
 German troops executed entire families of those who hid or even gave food to Jews . They did so at great risk, and were executed by German troops .
 These included experiments in the sterilization of Slavic women; measuring the pain a patient could survive when being operated on without anesthesia; measuring a patient's pain without anesthesia .
 Gypsies were also Nazi targets, viewed as “biological outsiders” who were both “alien” by virtue of not being “Aryan” and “asocial,” because they were nomadic . Gypsians were also “
 The Nazis persecuted homosexuals ruthlessly, identifying them in the death camps with pink stars . The Nazis were known for their persecution of homosexuals in the concentration camps .
 At what point the leaders of the Allies and of neutral states actually learned that the Nazis were undertaking the extermination of an entire people . The question is at what point they actually learned about the Nazis' extermination campaign .
 Rumors of mass exterminations had begun to reach Britain and the U.S. in 1942 . The details were not known, although the details of the extermination were unknown .
 Articles in British, Swiss, and U.S. newspapers began to relate the mass killings of Jews . Articles in UK, Swiss and United States newspapers .
 Pope Pius XII served as Vatican’s representative in Berlin before his election as pope . He issued no papal encyclicals condemning anti-Semitism by the end of 1943 .
 The pope did no more than offer reminders of the necessity of ‘justice and charity” in the world . Yet the pope did not more than say, “Justice and charity,” he said .
 The United States and British governments had no official reactions to the terrifying news .
 President Roosevelt rejected the idea of retaliatory bombing of German civilians . President Roosevelt certainly knew by the summer of 1942, but he rejected the plan .
 He believed only a sustained military effort could defeat the Nazis . He believed that only sustained military efforts could defeat them .
 With Hitler’s invasion of Russia having gone awry, it looked as though the tide was beginning to turn against Germany . The tide was turning against Germany in the early 1930s .
 Allied governments feared that if too much publicity was given to the disappearance of hundreds of thousands of Jews, it might generate calls to aid them directly . The Allied governments wanted to avoid giving too much attention to the disappearances .
 The Holocaust continued until the very end of the war; by then 6. million Jews had been murdered . 6 million Jews were murdered in the Holocaust .
 Nazis found leaders willing to follow German directives obediently and often enthusiastically . In Western Europe, leaders were willing to comply with the Nazis' directives .
 Vidkun Quisling, organizer of a fascist party in the 1930s, became the puppet head of state in Norway . His name entering the dictionary as synonymous with traitor . In Norway, his name entering dictionary is synonymous with treason .
 In Flanders, the Dutch-speaking part of Hitlers Europe 1081 the country, the German occupation gave the fascist leagues influence they had not had before the war . Flanders was part of the Flanders region of Belgium, which was occupied by the Nazis .
 France had been divided by Germany in June 1940 into an occupied /one and a smaller southern zone that retained independence through collaboration with the Nazis . France's southern zone was occupied by the Nazis and retained independence .
 The free zone had its capital in the spa town of Vichy in central France, although in November 1942 German troops occupied all of France .
 Right-wing French politicians and writers of the 1930s came to fruition in Vichy . The xenophobia and anti-Semitism of the right-wing politicians and . writers of . the . 1930s was the focus of the French government's anti-Semitic policies .
 Traditional conservatives dissatisfied with the Third Republic for religious and political reasons also lent their support to the Vichy regime . Traditional conservatives also supported the regime for religious reasons .
 Marshal Petain served as the head of state of the Vichy government, which the U.S. officially recognized . The United States officially recognized the government of the French government . The elderly marshal served as head of the government .
 Some people shared his anti-Marxism and anti-Semitism . He remained popular, at least until late 1942, because some people shared anti-Semitic beliefs .
 He presented himself as having saved the French state from extinction at the hands of the German invaders . The French state was threatened by the German invasion of France .
 Vichy may have temporarily saved the French state, but he sacrificed the French nation . Petain and other collaborators sacrificed French nation, he says .
 In the ‘new order,” “country, family, work” replaced “liberty, fraternity, equality” on French coins . In the new order, “Country, work, country, work" replaced ‘liberty’, fraternity
 Petain dissolved the Chamber of Deputies and favored the Catholic Church . He also banned Masonic lodges and divorce . Petain was a Catholic who favored the church .
 As in Mussolini’s Italy, Vichy attempted to impose a structure of ‘corporatism’ on the French economy and society, but with little success . As in Italy, Mussolini's Italy, he tried to impose “corporatatism�
 Vertical economic structures were intended to replace unions, which, as in Germany and Italy, became illegal . These vertical economic structures replaced unions . As in Germany, unions were illegal in Italy and Germany .
 A series of laws forbade Jews from holding jobs in public service, education, or cultural affairs, or in professions such as medicine and law . Jews were not allowed to hold jobs in education, cultural affairs or in medical professions . The laws were enacted in October 1940 .
 A law' in July 1941 sought “to eliminate all Jewish influence in the national economy’’; the state appointed a trustee who could sell any property or liquidate any business owned by Jews . A law in 1941 sought to eliminate “all Jewish influence’ in
 French police cooperated with German soldiers after Hitler’s May 1941 order to round up 3,600 Polish Jews in France . The order was aimed at rounding up Polish Jews who lived in the country .
 In December, the Vichy government proclaimed that it would collaborate with the Nazis with “acts, not words,” and did just that . In December the government declared that it had collaborated with the Nazi regime with ‘acts not words’
 In July 1942, French police seized 13,000 Jews, most of them foreign-born, in Paris, sending them to death camps in the east . Most of them were sent to the eastern part of the country, where they died in the war .
 Pierre Laval (18831945) insisted that children be sent along with their parents . Premier Pierre L. Laval insisted that . children be . sent along . along with . their parents.
 Vichy France was the only territory in Europe in which local authorities deported Jews without the presence of German occupying forces . The so-called free zone lasted until November 1942, with the deportation of Jews .
 A militia of determined collaborators created in January 1943 continued to round up Jews, seeking to crush all resistance . The militia was created in 1943, and it was created to crush resistance .
 Resistance in German-occupied territories knew the potential cost of resistance . Resistance in Nazi-occupied areas was a growing problem .
 In Czechoslovakia, Reinhard Heydrich's assassination in May 1942 destroyed the entire village of Lidice and most of its inhabitants . Most of the village was destroyed by the assassination of the former leader of the Communist Party of Czechoslovacia .
 When partisans killed ten Germans in a Yugoslav town in October 1941, the Nazis retaliated by massacring 7,000 men, women, and children . The Nazis massacred 7,000 men, women and children in the town of Yugoslavia .
 On April 19, 1943, the Jewish ghetto in Warsaw rose up against the Nazis . About 300,000 Jews had been sent to the death camps from the ghetto .
 They were crushed almost a month later with the loss of at least 12,000 lives . At least a month after they were crushed, they died in the crush .
 Poland had what amounted to a secret underground state linked to the government in exile, many clandestine publications, and a “Home Army” about 300,000 strong, whose members fought with Allied troops in Europe and Africa . On August 1, 1944, the Warsaw Uprising began.
 After two months of intense fighting, German military strength again won out, with 200,000 Poles perishing in the fighting or executed afterwards . 200,00 Poles died or were executed after the fighting .
 Resistance movements were most effective where hills and mountains offered protection from German troops . Resistance movements most effective in central and southern France, Greece, and Yugoslavia .
 Active and effective resistance was least possible in Hitler’s Europe 1083 . The flatlands of Holland, western Belgium, Moravia, and northern France were difficult to hide in .
 Only in Yugoslavia and, some extent, did the resistance movements help bring about Germany’s defeat . The resistance movements helped bring about the defeat of Germany in the war .
 Josip Broz (18921980), who became known by his code name of Tito, formed the first army of partisans able to engage the Germans effectively in combat . In Yugoslavia, the tenacious Croatian Communist . Communist Josip . Broz formed the . first army . of
 Tito Tito had served in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I and was badly wounded and captured . Tito was captured in 1918 and died in hospital in hospital .
 Tito's partisans fought courageously against the collaborationist Yugoslav puppet states . Tito’s partisans fought bravely against collaborationist Yugoslavia puppet states. Tito died in the arms of the Soviet Union.
 The Croatian minister of education voiced the opinion that a third of the Serbs should be forced to convert, a third expelled from Croatia, and a third killed . A third should be expelled, the minister said .
 Marshal Tito was the head of the Yugoslav resistance in 1944 . Tito died in the hands of a fascist guard at the end of the war .
 At the same time, members of the conservative Serb resistance killed thousands of Croats and other non-Serbs . The conservative Serbs remained loyal to the Yugoslav king, killing thousands of people .
 Tito insisted on cooperation between Serb and Croat resisters, and maintained contacts with non-Communist groups . Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia's anti-communist movement .
 Tito Tito commanded 20,000 men by 1943 . Protected by the rugged mountains of Croatia, Croatia, was Tito's most powerful commander . Tito was known for his loyalty to the Croatian people .
 Despite being hounded by German, Italian, and Bulgarian troops, Croatian fascists and Serb Chetniks, he managed to carve out entire zones under control .
 Late in the war, the British government ended support for the Chetniks and began to supply Tito’s forces with heavy equipment . Tito's forces were given heavy equipment by the government .
 Tito established local Communist committees to serve as governing authorities in each region liberated . Tito set up local Communist Committees in each liberated region to serve governing authorities .
 On June 18, 1940, General Charles de Gaulle, broadcasting from London, called on the French people to resist German rule . De Gaulle's radio broadcast was broadcast from London to France on June 18 .
 Churchill established an agency in London to provide material assistance to resistance groups . The next month, Churchill established the agency . Churchill established a government agency to help British resistance groups in London .
 Churchill grudgingly respected de Gaulle for his uncompromising will to oppose the Nazis and the Vichy collaborators . But he also detested him personally .
 Roosevelt believed the towering Frenchman was dangerously ambitious, a potential thorn in the Allied side . Roosevelt believed him to be a threat to the U.S.
 In December 1941, de Gaulle surprised the Allies by sending a small force to capture the French islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon off the coast of Newfoundland . The islands were controlled by Vichy France .
 Roosevelt believed that there was nothing to be gained from recognizing de Gaulle’s London-based ‘Free French’ movement as the legitimate French government . Roosevelt believed there was no gain from recognizing the movement as France's legitimate government .
 The United States hoped that Vichy might be convinced to try to keep French North Africa out of German hands . The U.S. government hoped that the French government might be persuaded to keep the region out of Germany .
 The British and U.S. governments worried that recognizing de Gaulle’s movement might alienate many people in France . De Gaulle's movement was a French revolution .
 Vichy propaganda repeatedly reminded the public that the British navy had sunk French ships in July 1940, with a huge loss of life . In the meantime, the British Navy had sunk the French ships .
 Several French resistance movements united only by hatred of Nazi occupation and Vichy collaboration . Several resistance movements in France were united by a hatred of the Nazi occupation . Resistance movements were united only to hatred of occupation and collaboration .
 Communists not officially turning against Vichy until Germany attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941 . Communists formed a well-organized and effective resistance force .
 Jean Moulin led de Gaulle’s Free French resistance in France . Moulin was a former departmental prefect during the Third Republic . He led the Free French Resistance .
 Moulin managed early in May 1943 to unify the resistance groups within the National Council of Resistance . Moulin unifies resistance groups in the N.C. Resistance . He is credited with uniting resistance groups .
 He was betrayed by a collaborator and died under torture in July 1943 . He died without revealing the names of others in the resistance network . He was a member of the resistance in the Nazi-occupied Germany .
 Resistance spread when the Germans in 1943 began forcing France to provide workers for factories in Germany . Resistance spread to France in 1943 when Germans began forcing it to provide French workers to factories for factories .
 Many of those refusing to go to Hitlers Europe 1085 Germany fled into the hills and mountains of France . Many of the people who refused to leave Germany fled to France .
 These resistance bands came to be called the maquis, a name for rugged brush in the south of France that could conceal them . The resistance bands became known as the maqis .
 By 1944, they controlled some areas in southern France, at least at night, vulnerable only to the arrival of German military columns . The German army could by then ill afford to divert diversions .
 General Dwight Eisenhower (18901969), commander of Allied forces in the European theater of operations, later claimed that the resistance in France was the equivalent of fifteen military divisions . Eisenhower claimed that France's resistance in the 1940s was equivalent of 15 military divisions in total .
 The vast majority of Germans remained loyal to their Fuhrer, even as defeats mounted and Allied bombers droned overhead .
 Disgruntlement and bitter jokes were common, but they did not threaten the regime . The regime did not want to be seen as a threat to democracy .
 Those who had never approved of Hitler retreated into family life and the daily struggle to get by . Those who didn't agree with Hitler retreated to family life .
 When wartime deprivation left people grumbling, Germans tended to blame Hitler’s subordinates, not the Fuhrer . Germans tend to blame their subordinates for the lack of food and water .
 Courts sentenced 15,000 Germans to death for crimes against the state, under an expanded definition of capital crimes . The crimes included listening to BBC radio broadcasts from London, among others .
 Trade union and Communist groups, earlier smashed by the S.S., emerged again as economic conditions worsened in 1942 and 1943 . Communist groups emerged again in the wake of the war .
 Some students in Munich and Communists in Berlin bravely distributed anti-Nazi propaganda . But such courageous acts were not widespread in Germany .
 At least 250,000 people in Germany were imprisoned or forced to emigrate because of their political opposition . At least 150,000 German Communists were executed .
 The active connivance of ordinary Germans aided the S.S. and Gestapo in rooting out potential sources of opposition . The Gestapo was able to find out the source of opposition to the Nazis .
 Young people responded to Nazism by adopting a counterculture of nonconformity . Young people refused to join the Hitler Youth, listened to American music deemed decadent by Hitler, and scrawled anti-Nazi graffiti .
 The Nazis publicly hanged several 16-year-olds for such actions . The Nazis hanged several sixteen-year old boys for such acts .
 Only serious plot against Hitler came among traditional conservatives within the army . The only serious plot was to kill Hitler .
 Colonel Claus von Stauffenberg carried a bomb in his briefcase to a staff meeting with Hitler near the Russian front . On July 20, 1944, Claus von Stauffenburg (1907— 1944) carried a briefcase with a bomb .
 Stauffenberg was a conservative aristocrat appalled by the Nazi murder of Jews and Soviets . He considered Hitler’s amateur management of the war to blame .
 Hitler hoped that Hitler’s assassination would allow the army to impose its rule, he said . Hitler's assassination was hoped that the army would impose its own rule, Hitler hoped it would .
 Hitler instinctively shoved the briefcase out of his way, moving it to the other side of a heavy table support . He placed the bomb under the table beneath Hitler, who instinctively shoved it out of the way .
 Those implicated in the plot were arrested and slowly strangled by nooses of piano wire as they writhed on meat hooks . Those implicated were quickly arrested and strangled .
 Movie cameras recorded their agonizing death for the later amusement of Hitler, his mistress, and friends . Hitler's mistress, mistress and friends were also at the scene .
 Hitler also ordered the execution of about 5,000 other Germans in positions of authority whose loyalty seemed suspect, including family members of conspirators . The execution was ordered by Hitler in 1941 .
 Thousands of Germans poured into the streets in major cities to celebrate their Fiihrer’s escape from death . Thousands of German citizens celebrated the escape from the Nazis .
 The entry of the United States into the war in December 1941 helped turn the tide against Germany . The U.S. entered the war against Germany in 1941 .
 The German war machine was chaotically managed and German resources were inadequate to fighting a war on so many fronts . American war supplies and then armed forces strengthened the Allied cause as they had in World War I .
 Hitlers invasion of Russia turned into a full-fledged military disaster, culminating in the crushing defeat and surrender of German forces at Stalingrad in February 1943 .
 The Allies launched an invasion of Italy from North Africa, forcing the king of Italy to agree to a secret armistice and pushing German troops to retreat to the north . As Hitlers Balkan allies one by one pulled out of the war, the Allies invaded Italy and pushed German troops
 On June 6, 1944, Western Allied forces launched a massive invasion of France . Allied forces landed on the beaches of Normandy, forcing the German army to pull back, fighting all the way .
 The Big Three (Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin) began to plan for the end of the war . Now confident of victory over Hitler, the Big Three began planning for end of war .
 The Red Army began pushing the Germans back across a broad front in July 1943 . It became clear that when the war ended, the Red Army could control large parts of Eastern and Central Europe .
 Churchill feared that the Red Army might never leave the Eastern European nations it liberated from German occupation . This probability brought dissension to the Big Three, particularly as Churchill feared it might not leave Eastern European countries it liberated .
 With majority of German men between the ages of eighteen and fifty in the army, Germany’s war machine required more workers . Germany on the Defensive with the majority of men aged between 18 and fifty .
 By late 1941, there were already 4 million foreigners working in Germany, including prisoners of war . In May 1944, almost twice that number, the majority of whom were Soviet citizens . The majority of those who worked in Germany in May 1944 were Soviet nationals .
 The Defeat of Germany, 1942-1945 Allied advances and Axis withdrawal up to the end of World War 11 . Allied advances up to 1945 Allied advances . Allied advance up to end of the war in Germany .
 JORDAN ^Alexandandn^) CYPRUS FRENCH MOROCCO mediterranean sea . ALGERIA EGYPT 1088 Ch. 1: 1088 . J. 1088. J. 100 .
 In the spring of 1942, Hitler named Albert Speer to be minister of armaments production . Speer was the architect of the Nazi regime's armaments policy .
 Speer's organizational skill helped triple German production within two years . Speer’s organizational skill . helped triple the German production in two years. Speer: “I’m not afraid to be afraid of the future’
 Hitler granted Speer responsibility for the needs of the air force in 1944 . Goring was Goring’s personal preserve . Speer was responsible for the development of the German air force .
 Hitler awarded Goring ‘plenipotentiary powers” over the entire war effort . Hitler then awarded him the title of “plenimotentiary power” Goring . Goring was awarded the title by Hitler .
 German supplies remained inadequate to the enormous goals Hitler had set . German war supplies were still inadequate to meet the goals he had set up .
 Realists began to see a German military victory as difficult, even improbable . Realists like Speer saw a German victory as impossible .
 As in World War I, German military commanders placed their hopes on closing Allied shipping lanes across the Atlantic, thereby preventing supplies from reaching Britain .
 New submarine-detecting devices enabled airplanes and destroyers to sink German submarines with depth charges . The devices were developed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Germany now had to depend on its army’s success on land . The failure of the submarine campaign against Allied shipping forced Germany to rely on the success of its army .
 In North Africa, the German tank division commanded by Erwin Rommel forced British troops back from Libya into Egypt . Rommel was known as the “Desert Fox” because of his quick judgment and tactical improvisations .
 Rommel captured 35,000 British troops in the spring of 1942 at Bir Hacheim and Tobruk . Rommel was only sixty miles from Alexandria .
 At the end of August 1942, the British tank force of General Bernard Montgomery pushed back another offensive .
 Montgomery knew his enemy’s plan of attack in advance through reports from British intelligence services . Montgomery knew he was going to be attacked by his enemy in advance of the attack .
 Allied forces broke through German and Italian defenses at El Alamein in early November 1942 . Allied forces enjoying superior strength and controlling the skies, then broke through the Germans and Italians .
 For the next ten weeks they pursued the German armored division across the desert all the way to Tunisia . For the first ten weeks the Germans were in the desert, they were in Tunisia .
 Churchill wanted to strike at what he called the ‘soft underbelly’ of the axis through Italy, the Balkans, and the Danube Basin . Hitler’s armies were driven from North Africa after driving the Allied forces from North African .
 This would leave British forces in an excellent position to protect British interests in the Middle East . This would be an excellent place for British forces to protect their interests .
 Stalin insisted on a major Allied attack against Germany in the west to force Hitler to divert resources from the Russian campaign . Stalin, however, continued to insist on an Allied attack on Germany .
 The Red Army inflicted 90 percent of the losses the German armed forces had suffered in battle since June 1941 . Stalin pointed out that the Red Army had borne the brunt of the war against Hitler .
 The Tide Turns 1089 Free French troops attacking in the North African desert, 1942 . Churchill feared that a direct confrontation with the . largest concentration of German troops might be disastrous . He wanted to postpone a cross-Channel invasion of France as long as possible .
 Allied commanders now decided first to drive all German and Italian troops out of North Africa before contemplating an invasion of France from Britain . With Axis reeling in North Africa, British troops now control Egypt and Libya .
 They had been sobered by a disastrous crossChannel raid by Canadian troops against the French port of Dieppe in August 1942 . The raid was a response to a Canadian raid by Canadians on the same date .
 A British and American force commanded by American General Eisenhower landed on the coast of French Algeria and Morocco, easily overcoming Vichy French resistance . The British and U.S. forces were able to easily overcome Vichys French resistance in the region .
 Despite Petain’s order that Vichy forces in North Africa continue to oppose the Allied invasion, Darlan ordered his troops to accept a cease-fire after three days of fighting . The Allied invasion of North Africa ended in defeat .
 Hitler used Darlan’s capitulation in North Africa as an excuse in November 1942 for German forces to occupy the ‘free’ zone of Vichy France . Germany occupied the “free” zone of France in 1942 .
 French naval commanders scuttled their own ships to prevent them from being used by the German navy . The German navy was defeated by the French in World War II .
 The Allies named Darlan as ‘the head of the French state’ in return for his promise that French troops in North Africa would now join the Allies . The French state was named in return to his promise French troops would join the Allied forces .
 De Gaulle demanded that Britain and the U.S. recognize his 1090 Ch. Ch. 1090 . Ch.1090 was his first French publication of a French magazine .
 Churchill viewed with concern de Gaulle's determination to maintain France’s empire, in the context of the two powers' long-standing imperial rivalry . But Churchill, an old imperialist, viewed with concerns with concern .
 Churchill feared that if the British government recognized de Gaulle as the head of the French state, it would be committing itself to supporting a new France, the direction of which could not yet be seen .
 A French monarchist solved part of the Allied dilemma by assassinating Darlan . The assassination solved the problem by killing the monarchist's son .
 The Allies forced de Gaulle to share leadership of Free France with another general, a slap in the face that he neither forgot nor forgave . De Gaulle was forced to share his leadership with a general .
 By the end of May 1943, no German or Italian troops remained in North Africa . After the defeat of a vigorous German counterattack, by the end .
 The Allies’ strategic bombing campaign began to take its toll in 1943 . The goal of the campaign was to sap German morale as much as to hamper the production of planes and guns .
 The Royal Air Force could now strike at night with reasonable accuracy . The ability to scramble German radar reduced losses to the RAF .
 British bombers dumped tons of bombs during night raids over the industrial Ruhr Valley and major cities . Bombings were dumped in the industrial city of Hamburg and other cities .
 Many American bombers were lost despite fighter escorts . The U.S. Air Force preferred daytime attacks, when pilots could more easily find targets .
 The impact of the strategic bombing campaign on German wartime industrial production was far below Allied expectations . However, the impact on German industrial production in the war was far lower than expected .
 On the eastern front, Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union turned into a military disaster . Hitlers Russian Disaster: Hitler's invasion of Soviet Union was a military failure .
 Defeats in Russia during the last months of 1942 and in 1943 sent the German invaders reeling . The German invasion of Russia in 1943 left the Germans reeling .
 The Red Army was now receiving better and more plentiful supplies from the Allies through the icy northern port of Murmansk and from Iran in the south . Red Army now receiving more and better supplies through the Arctic .
 By now Soviet factories were turning out a steady supply of tanks and trucks equipped to fight in the snow and ice . By now, Soviet factories had begun turning out tanks, trucks and trucks .
 German tanks faced improved Soviet tanks and handmade incendiary bombs . The bombs were known derisively as “Molotov cocktails,’’ after the Soviet foreign minister .
 Improvements in the organization and discipline of the Red Army also made their mark . The Red Army became stronger in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Stalin held back on the ideological indoctrination and murderous purges that had characterized the 1930s . Stalin's regime was known for its purges and ideological purges . The Soviet state of the Soviet Union was a model of democracy .
 The Soviet army that Hitler had once mocked, now larger and more effectively deployed than his own, wore down German forces . Hitler's forces were overwhelmed by the Soviet army .
 More than 300,000 Soviet troops were killed; more than a million Russian civilians starved to death . More than one million Soviet troops died in the Soviet-era Soviet invasion of Russia .
 Hitler's printed invitations to celebrate The Tide Turns 1091 Leningrad’s fall could never be sent out . Hitler’ed invitations were printed to celebrate the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Further defeats in the north made Germany’s drive to the Soviet oil fields of the Caucasus Mountains, and the Donets Basin industrial region in the south, all the more critical .
 In the south, the Red Army slowed the German advance toward Stalingrad, a strategically located industrial city on the Volga River . The Red Army held on to a strategically important industrial city in the south .
 The battle of Stalingrad, which began in November 1942, was a great turning point in the European war . The battle began in 1942 and ended in November 1944 .
 The Soviets had begun concentrating a huge force around the city, even as early German successes deluded Hitler into thinking Stalingrad’s fall was inevitable .
 Hitler confidently began to transfer some of his exhausted troops to the north . The Soviet troops held off the German assault .
 The Soviet army counterattacked on November 19, trapping the weakened German armies as Soviet tanks moved easily across the frozen ground . Soviet tanks were able to move easily across frozen ground in freezing conditions .
 By the time German survivors surrendered on February 2, 1943, the German army had lost more than 300,000 soldiers . By the end of the war, more than a million German soldiers had died .
 In the greatest tank battle ever fought, the Soviets managed to repell a massive German attack against an exposed Soviet line of defense . The Soviets then pushed the Germans back, with a huge loss of life, a Pyrrhic victory .
 This further depleted the German armored divisions that had once seemed invincible . The loss of armored divisions further depleted Germany's armored divisions .
 The Soviets were now battering the enemy on three fronts, even as Hitler diverted troops to Italy . Hitler was forced to divert troops from Italy and divert troops into Italy . Stalingrad was the first major battle of the Second World War .
 The Red Army recaptured all of the Crimea in the south by May 1943, pushing the Germans back to Ukraine in the summer . The Russians recaptured Crimea in May 1943 .
 In February 1944, Soviet troops reached what had been the eastern Polish border before the German invasion . The border had been part of the eastern Poland before the invasion .
 More than 9,000 tons of bombs rained down on Hamburg in July 1943 . British and American bombers continued to devastate German cities .
 Romanian oil and wheat had fueled the German war effort . Romanian troops had greatly aided the Nazi campaign in Odessa and the Crimea . Romanian oil, wheat and oil helped fuel the Nazi war effort.
 The Romanian government approached the Allies, hoping to arrange a separate peace . Now, in March 1944, seeing the writing on the wall, the Romanian government asked the Allies for a peace .
 In August, King Michael ended Ion Antonescu’s military dictatorship, and the new Romanian government declared war on Germany . Romania declared war against Germany in August .
 Hitler intended Bulgaria to serve as a buffer against a possible Allied invasion from Turkey . Bulgaria was intended to be a buffer from a possible Turkish invasion . Hitler intended to protect Bulgaria from an Allied invasion .
 Bulgaria enjoyed the most autonomy of any Naziheld Eastern European state . It provided Germany with badly needed grain, permitted German military bases on its territory, and had declared war on Britain and the United States back in 1941 .
 Hitler allowed Bulgaria to annex Thrace from Greece . Bulgarian forces had executed thousands of Greeks and banned the Greek language . Bulgaria also annexed Greek and Yugoslav Macedonia .
 Bulgaria brazenly announced its war against the Allies had ended . Now, as Germany’s defeat appeared increasingly likely, the Bulgarian government brazenly declared its war with the Allies ended .
 The Tide Turns 1093 September 1944 . The Soviet Union declared war on Bulgaria in The Tide turns 1093 Sept 1944 .
 Following a popular insurrection, the Soviet Union controlled the resulting coalition government, as in the case of Romania . After a popular uprising, the government was overthrown by the Soviets .
 Allies decided to invade Sicily as a first step in an invasion of southern Italy . Sicily was the first stage of the Allied invasion of Italy . North Africa and its airfields secure, the Allies invaded Sicily .
 The plunging morale and material conditions of the Italian population contributed to the Allied decision . The Italians had been promised an empire by Mussolini but had received only hardship .
 Mussolini's fascist Grand Council asked King Victor Emmanuel III to end Mussolini’s dictatorship . Mussolini was the dictator of Italy in the early 1930s .
 Mussolini dismissed as prime minister and ordered his arrest . King wanted to save his throne and feared a complete German takeover . Mussolini was arrested by the King of Italy in 1941 .
 The new government announced that Italy would continue to fight alongside Germany . It began secret negotiations with the Allies in secret .
 Hitler ordered troops to occupy Italian airfields in September 1943 . When Hitler learned this, he ordered his troops to take over the country's airfields .
 Allied invasion of the Italian mainland would tie up considerable numbers of German troops and probably knock Italy completely out of the war . At a minimum, an Allied invasion would likely tie up significant numbers of troops .
 Romanian oil fields would be within reach of bombers taking off in Italy . Romania's oil fields are within the reach of planes taking off from Italy .
 Socialists, Catholic groups, and above all, began to print clandestine newspapers . Communists printed clandestine newspapers and organized scattered attacks against fascists . Socialists and Catholic groups printed clandestine papers .
 The United States, still pushing for a full-scale landing in France, reluctantly agreed to the Italian invasion . The U.S. reluctantly agreed with the invasion of Italy .
 The Italian king reassured Germany of Italy’s loyal participation in the war as an ally . In the meantime, the Italian king, fearing Hitler's wrath, reassured Hitler of Italy's loyalty .
 The Italian government signed an armistice with the Allies on September 3, 1943 . However, the Italian government did not agree with the Allied forces . The Italian army signed a cease-fire in 1943 .
 Victor Emmanuel naively hoped that Italy could make peace with both Germany and the Allies, and that his monarchy would survive the end of the war . Victor Emmanuel hoped that he could survive the war and that Italy would survive it .
 On the same day that the armistice was signed between Italy and the Allies, British and Canadian troops crossed the Strait of Messina, beginning the invasion of the Italian peninsula .
 The king and his family fled Rome with the new prime minister, leaving a million soldiers with the choice of being interned by the Germans or deserting their units . A million Italian soldiers were forced to either be interned or desert their units in the war .
 Most deserted and 80,000 Allied prisoners of war escaped from camps in Italy . Most deserted camps were in Italy during World War II . Most of the camp was in Italy, but most of the Allied prisoners escaped .
 The Allies set up a new government in the south, drawn from the resistance groups . The government was drawn from members of resistance groups in the southern African nation .
 On September 12, 1943, a daring German commando raid freed Mussolini from a mountaintop prison . Mussolini was freed from a mountain mountain prison .
 In Berlin, Hitler proclaimed the Duce head of the “Italian Social Republic,” a puppet regime . The Duce was the Italian prime minister of the 1930s . Hitler declared the Italian Social Republic in 1933 .
 Mussolini ordered the execution of the members of the Grand Council who had opposed him . Mussolini denounced the Italian people for having betrayed him . The execution was ordered by Mussolini .
 The new front settled on a series of fortifications a hundred miles south of Rome . Over which stood the old monastery of iVlonte Cassino, over which stood, the old Monaconi was destroyed .
 In January 1944, two Allied divisions landed behind the German lines at Anzio . Allied forces landed behind German lines .
 Only in the spring, after terrible losses, Allied troops were able to break through the German defenses to free their armies still trapped near Anzio .
 The German armies fell back to establish a new defensive perimeter south of the Po River between Pisa and Florence . The new perimeter was established in the area south of Pisa .
 The Big Three Soviet advances against German forces focused Western attention on the future of Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans after Hitler's Germany had been defeated .
 At a meeting in Casablanca, Morocco, in January 1943, Churchill and Roosevelt had concerned themselves only with military strategy and not with the future of Europe . Roosevelt and Churchill were concerned about military strategy .
 The British and American governments agreed to put off discussions of territorial settlements that would follow Germany’s defeat . With Stalin absent, the British and U.S. governments put off talks of the territorial settlements .
 Churchill and Stalin had already agreed to Soviet absorption of the Baltic states after the war . Stalin and Churchill had already informally agreed to the Soviet absorption .
 Roosevelt argued that Stalin had joined the war against the Nazis only after Hitler had attacked the Soviet Union . They did so despite the opposition of Roosevelt, who argued Stalin had attacked Hitler .
 Stalin’s insistence that the U.S. and Britain open another front in the west by invading France in part stemmed from his fear that his allies wanted to see the Red Army slowed in its drive westward . Stalin feared that the United States and Britain wanted to stop the Red
 Allied supplies to Russia through Murmansk trickled to a halt . Stalin seemed confirmed in his suspicions of Allied supplies .
 The British, American, and Soviet foreign ministers reaffirmed an agreement that the Allies would accept nothing less than Germany’s unconditional surrender . Meeting at Moscow in October 1943, the British, U.S. and Soviet ministers reaffirm an agreement .
 The Atlantic Charter of August 1941 signed by Roosevelt and Churchill reaffirmed its intention to replace the ineffective, moribund League of Nations . The Allies also reaffirmed their intention, originally stated in the Atlantic Charter .
 The political future of Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans after the war was left open . But again they left open the thorny question of the future of the political future .
 Stalin finally met Churchill and Roosevelt in Teheran in November 1943 . Stalin met Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin in November 1944 .
 Stalin stated that the Soviet Union was not about to contemplate any change in its border with Poland as it existed in June 1941 . The border was the result of the Soviet invasion and absorption of much of eastern Poland in 1939 . In June 1941, Stalin said that he would not change the border
 Despite the occasional flurry of improvisational map-making, the Big Three still left the essential specifics of the proposed outlines of post-w'ar Europe .
 At Teheran, Stalin and Roosevelt convinced Churchill to accept a plan for the invasion of France . The Tide Turns 1095 The D-Day Invasion of France is 1095 . The tide turns 1095
 Eisenhower was a forthright man of integrity . Eisenhower was born in a small town in Kansas, Kansas . He was born to a small Kansas town .
 Beneath his sparkling blue eyes, folksy manner, and . smile lay shrewdness, cunning, and a remarkable ability for organization . Beneath the dazzling blue eyes and folksy . manner, he was shrewd and cunning .
 The plan was for 1 50,000 troops to attack the English Channel beaches of Normandy in western France . Almost 500,000 more troops were expected to be attacked in the next days and weeks .
 About 4 million tons of support materiel would have to be landed as well . The U.S. military says it has no plans to land the landings .
 Floating caissons and old ships sunk off the coast would provide three makeshift harbors . Floating caissons and old ships sunk off coast would be used as harbors for the first time .
 German commanders believed that the most likely place for an all-out assault was near Calais to the north . Calais offered the closest crossing points from England .
 The Allies needed to take and protect a beachhead that would allow the bulk of their troops to get ashore quickly . The beachhead needed to be protected to allow them to get on the ground quickly .
 Hitler assigned Rommel to organize the German defense against the Allied invasion . Hitler had assigned him to organize a German defense . Rommel died in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Defenders would depend on the rapid arrival of armored units to back up coastal batteries and infantry units trying to hold their positions .
 At dawn on June 6, 1944, Allied troops struggled ashore in shallow water from landing craft and established beachheads on the coast of Normandy . After a one-day postponement because of a gale, at dawn on the morning of June 6,. 1944, the Allied forces struggled ashore
 They confronted murderous fire from the cliffs above, taking heavy losses . The British soldiers were killed in the attack .
 German air force was outnumbered by 20 to 1 . The landing succeeded, at least in part because of the size of the air force . But the landing succeeded because the Germans were outnumbered by more than 20 .
 As more men, tanks, trucks, trucks and materiel came ashore, German troops gradually fell back . German troops eventually fell back as more troops came ashore .
 By the end of July 1944, despite fierce resistance, the Allies held most of Normandy . The battle was over for most of the Normandy .
 After seven weeks, the Allies had landed 1. million troops and sustained over 120,000 casualties . The Allies landed over 1 million troops in seven weeks .
 Hitler allowed Rommel to escape execution by committing suicide . Rommel was discovered to have known about the plot against the Fiihrer’s life . Hitler allowed him to escape his execution by killing himself himself .
 Allied army landed on the French Mediterranean coast on August 15, 1944, and moved up the Rhone Valley with little opposition . Allied army moved up Rhone valley in the French city of Paris .
 The main Allied army pushed from Normandy toward Paris, France . In the meantime, the Allied army was advancing toward Paris .
 On August 19, an uprising began in Paris . Encouraged by the proximity of Allied troops, the uprising began on August 19 . The uprising was a French uprising .
 French forces reached Paris on August 22, 1944 . Because de Gaulle demanded that a French unit be the first to reach the capital, French forces arrived on August 23 .
 The British government recognized de Gaulle’s administration as the legitimate government of France in October . In October, the British government acknowledged the French government .
 German resistance stiffened at the Rhine River, and the first Allied attempts to cross into Germany failed . The first Allied attempt at crossing into Germany in 1944 failed .
 Hitler, whose moods varied between wild optimism and resigned depression, had aged rapidly through recurring 1096 Ch. Ch. 1096 episodes . Hitler's moods vary from wild optimism to resigned depression . Hitler died in 1945 at the age of 12 .
 He told Albert Speer in November 1944, “I haven’t the slightest intention of surrendering.” Now, although Germany’s collapse seemed imminent, he again seemed confident . He said in 1944 that he had no intention of giving up .
 In December, Hitler ordered a massive counterattack in the hills and forests of the Ardennes in Belgium and Luxembourg . The goal of pushing rapidly toward the Belgian river port of Antwerp was to push rapidly .
 After retreating forty-five miles, the U.S. army pushed the Germans back in the Battle of the Bulge . The Battle of Bulge took place in the early 1940s .
 As the Nazi army retreated in northern Italy, the Red Army approached Germany from the east . The Red Army entered Germany from Italy in 1940s .
 Allied troops increasingly found that their enemies turned out to be boys and older men who had been rushed to the front with virtually no training . On every front, Allied troops were increasingly found to be older men .
 German cities burned, notably Dresden, which American planes fire-bombed early in 1945 . Dresden was the first city to be firebombed by U.S. planes .
 In 1993, about one unexploded World War II bomb was still being discovered every day in Berlin . In 1993 about one of the unexploded bombs were still being found every day .
 First V-l struck London on June 12, 1944, doing considerable Allied Victory 1097 damage . Launched from France, the first V-L struck London .
 Many Germans clung to the hope that such a new weapon would turn things around, or that the Western democracies would join Germany in a war against the Soviets . Many ordinary Germans, too, still hoped such a weapon would change things .
 Hitler accepted, even desired, the total destruction of Germany, considering it better than the shame of surrender . However, with defeat ever closer, Hitler accepted the destruction . Hitler considered the destruction better than a shameful surrender .
 Romania and Bulgaria had surrendered in August and September 1944, respectively, respectively . Romania had surrendered to the Allied Forces in 1944 .
 With the Red Army in control of much of the Balkans, the question was not if Berlin would be taken, but when, and by whom . The Red Army had control of most of the Balkan region, but it was not clear who would take Berlin .
 Eisenhow'er was prepared to allow the Red Army the prestige of capturing Berlin . He was worried that the Soviets sought a preponderant role in Central Europe, as well as the Balkans .
 The meetings of the Big Three in the waning months of the year proved exceptionally important for the future of Europe . As the Red Army moved closer to Berlin, the meetings were extremely important .
 Churchill and Stalin met in Moscow in October 1944 and worked out a rough division of post-war Western and Soviet interests in Central and Eastern Europe . Stalin and Churchill met in . October 1944 to discuss a post-WWII division between the two countries .
 By the time the Big Three came together at Yalta in Crimea in February 1945, German armies were falling back rapidly on every front and the Red Army was closing in on Berlin .
 The American army crossed the Rhine River on March 8, 1945 . On April 25, 1945, they met up with Soviet troops at the Elbe River just sixty miles south of Berlin . The U.S. and Soviet troops crossed the river .
 Churchill was determined to work out an informal agreement with the Soviets as to the respective spheres of influence in the Balkans when the war ended .
 Roosevelt suspected Churchill of trying to maintain the British Empire at all costs . This time Roosevelt did not participate in the war .
 The British prime minister pushed the paper across to Stalin . After adding 75 percent for the Soviet Union in Bulgaria and fifty-fifty for Hungary, the British Prime Minister pushed it across .
 He took his blue pencil and made a large tick upon it, and passed it back to us . Then he took it back and made it into a tick, and gave it to him .
 Soviet soldiers, some of whom had come upon the ghastly death camps in Poland, gunned down German soldiers who had surrendered, and pillaged villages . Some of the soldiers had come to the death camps .
 Soviet soldiers sometimes systematically raped all German females who were more than about about twelve years old . Soviet soldiers often systematically raped German females .
 Hungarian and Romanian women also attacked . Soviet soldiers entered a mental hospital, where they raped and killed . In Hungary, Soviet soldiers attacked and killed Hungarian women .
 Soviet officers tried to bring the situation under control but incidents of rape occurred for several years in Germany after the Nazi defeat .
 For some Soviets the occupation seemed to represent a continuation of the war and the exacting of revenge . For some Soviet soldiers, the occupation was the continuation of a war .
 Soviet military might in Eastern and Central Europe hung over Yalta, where the Allies considered the post-war fate of Germany . The Soviets considered the fate of Eastern Europe .
 Churchill agreed to the post-war division of Germany into British, American, French, and Soviet zones of military occupation . Churchill agreed that the zones should be divided into zones of occupation .
 Stalin feared that his wartime allies might lead a post-war campaign against communism . He secretly agreed to Roosevelts demand that the Soviet Union declare war on Japan three months after Germany’s defeat .
 Allied promised the Soviet Union would control Outer Mongolia, the Kurile Islands, the southern half of Sakhalin Island, and its former naval base at Port Arthur .
 Stalin insisted that the new government of Poland be based on the provisional Polish Communist government . Stalin, Franklin Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Vyacheslav Molotov at the Yalta Conference, 1945 . Stalin insisted on the new Polish government being based on that of the provisional Communist
 Churchill and Roosevelt also went along with Stalin’s insistence that the Soviet Union keep the parts of eastern Poland that had been absorbed by the Soviet invasion in 1939 . Stalin also insisted on keeping parts of Poland under Soviet control .
 Poland’s western frontier with Germany was to be left to a future conference, one that was never held . Poland's western frontier was never left to be discussed .
 The Big Three all agreed that free elections would be held in Eastern Europe . Free elections were agreed that the Big Three would hold free elections in the region .
 Stalin defied the Atlantic Charter of 1941 by setting up an unelected puppet government in Romania and Poland . The Allies had agreed that free elections would lead to democratic governments in the nations freed from German occupation .
 At Yalta, the Allies remembered that the League of Nations had been doomed in its attempts to keep the peace by the nonparticipation of the then-isolationist United States and by the exclusion of the Soviet Union .
 Roosevelt wanted to avoid committing the U.S. to an active role in post-war Europe . Roosevelt wanted not to commit the United States to a military presence in Europe .
 He counted instead on the United Nations to resolve future problems by facilitating collective security . He counted on the U.N. to solve future problems .
 In the meantime, with the Red Army occupying Eastern Europe, Stalin held all the cards . The Red Army occupied Eastern Europe in the early 1950s .
 Eastern European peoples subsequently had reason to view Yalta as a betrayal and a victory for Stalin . Eastern Europeans had reason for reason to think Yaltas was a betrayal for Stalin. Eastern European people had reason .
 They executed him and his mistress, hanging their bodies upside down at a gas station . Their bodies were hung upside down from gas station gas station, hanging upside down . They hung their bodies at gas station.
 Soldiers from the Red Army hoist the Soviet flag over the German Reichstag in Berlin . Himmler, von Ribbentrop, and Goring Soldiers . Goring soldiers .
 They committed suicide on April 30 as the rumble of Russian tanks could be heard above . Then they committed suicide as they were surrounded by Russian tanks .
 Joseph Goebbels poisoned his six children, shot his wife, and killed himself . Goebmels poisoned himself, poisoned his wife and poisoned his children . He shot himself and shot himself .
 Admiral Karl Donitz, to whom Hitler had delegated authority, surrendered to the Allies on May 8, 1945 . Adm. Donitz surrendered to Allied forces in 1945 .
 The Reich that Hitler had once bragged would last for a thousand years lay in ruins twelve years after its creation . Hitler had bragged that the Reich would last forever . The Reich had once boasted that it would last a thousand thousand years .
 The German collapse in North Africa, Russia, and Eastern Europe allowed the Allies to turn their attention more fully to the war in the Pacific . The defeat of Japan allowed the Allied to turn attention to the Pacific War .
 The sheer scope of Japanese military operations, spread from the Aleutian Islands southwest of Alaska to the South Pacific, put Japan on the defensive . Japan's operations spread from Alaska to South Pacific .
 Troops and supplies poured into the Pacific from the United States . The U.S. had speedily reconstituted its fleet after the Pearl Harbor disaster . Troops, supplies poured in the Pacific .
 Victory in the Battle of the Coral Sea turned back Japanese ships carrying troops to the southern coast of New Guinea, protected Australia from possible invasion . The Battle of Coral Sea protected Australia .
 A month later, the American fleet and torpedo bombers inflicted a major defeat on the Japanese navy at the Battle of Midway, an island almost a thousand miles northwest of Hawaii . Four Japanese aircraft carriers were sunk .
 In August 1942, an American offensive had begun against Guadalcanal, one of the South Pacific Solomon Islands . The U.S. had taken control of the island in August 1942 .
 Guadalcanal fell on February 8, 1943, the first of the Japanese wartime conquests to be recaptured . It was the first Japanese capture of the Pacific Ocean .
 American assaults on New Guinea and far north in the Aleutian Islands also succeeded . American assaults in New Guinea, Alaska and New Zealand also succeeded.
 General MacArthurs forces began driving the Japanese from New Guinea in January 1943, completing the task early in 1944 . The Japanese were driven out of the island in early 1944, but were forced to withdraw .
 The Americans then adopted the strategy of driving Japanese forces from one island to another, ‘leapfrogging’ through the Pacific . The U.S. used the strategy to drive Japanese forces to another island, “leapfrog’s”
 The U.S. navy gained control of the seas, its submarines picking off Japanese supply ships . Gradually, the United States navy became stronger .
 Hard-earned summer victories brought United States troops within 1,400 miles of Tokyo . U.S. troops came within a mile of Tokyo, Japan, in the summer of 1944 .
 In October 1944, MacArthurs forces attacked the Philippines, defeating the Japanese fleet and the demoralized Japanese troops . MacArthur forces defeated the Japanese forces in October 1944 .
 There, the Japanese first used kamikaze tactics, suicide missions flown by pilots who crashed their planes into American ships . There, there, were suicide missions .
 On Okinawa, piles of bleached human bones could still be seen on the beaches a decade after the war’s end . The next stop is Okinawa, where piles of human bones are still seen on beaches .
 Saipan and Guam provided bases from which American long-range bombers could reach Japan . U.S. bombers were able to reach Japan using Saipans and Guam bases .
 American “super fortress” bombers showered Japanese cities with incendiary bombs that turned wooden buildings into fiery death traps . American "super fortress" bombers hit Japan with bombs .
 American forces prepared to invade the southern 1101 islands of Japan itself . U.S. troops prepared to attack the southern part of Japan .
 With the American fleet off Okinawa confronting suicide missions by Japanese pilots, it was clear that such an invasion would cost many lives . The U.S. invasion of Okinawa would be the first of its kind in the history .
 The United States is readying a new weapon hitherto unimaginable . Meanwhile, the U.S. readies a weapon previously unimaginable .
 In 1938, a German scientist in Berlin had achieved nuclear fission, splitting the atom and releasing tremendous energy . In 1945, the first atomic bomb was detonated in the hands of a scientist in Germany .
 This meant that if a means could be found to split the nucleus of the atom, setting off a nuclear chain reaction, a bomb of enormous destructive power could be built . This meant a means of splitting the atom could be used to build a nuclear bomb .
 During the first years of the war, British and American scientists worked separately on the project .
 In the U.S. scientists who fled the Nazis first discovered that an isotope of uranium could set off the anticipated chain reaction . In the United States, scientists who had fled the Nazi regime discovered the discovery .
 At the same time, Soviet scientists were frantically trying to come up with the atomic bomb . They were several crucial years behind American scientists . The atomic bomb was discovered by Soviet scientists in 1945 .
 In 1945, nuclear theory became reality, and the United States exploded the first atomic bomb in a desert in New Mexico on July 16 . The bomb was detonated in a New Mexico desert .
 President Harry Truman learned of this the day before the opening of the Potsdam Conference in July 1945 . President Truman learned the truth about the events in Berlin in 1945 .
 Stalin informed Stalin of the new weapon the U.S. now had at its disposal . Stalin was impressed with the weapon he was now able to use . He informed Stalin .
 The Potsdam Proclamation of July 26, 1945, warned Japan that it risked “prompt and utter destruction” if it did not agree to unconditional surrender . The declaration of unconditional surrender was made in 1945 .
 U.S. dropped atomic bomb on Japanese port city of Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, engulfing city in a mushroom cloud of fire and radiation . 80,000 people died in the blast, which killed more than 100,000 .
 The Soviet Union then declared war on Japan and Soviet troops moved into Manchuria . Soviet troops then moved into the region .
 On August 9, a U.S. plane dropped a second atomic bomb that destroyed much of Nagasaki, killing 36,000 people in a storm of fire . The second bomb was dropped by the United States in 1945 .
 Thousands more died of radiation sickness in the days, months, and years to follow . Thousands more would die in the wake of the radiation attack .
 On September 2, 1945, Japanese representatives signed documents of unconditional surrender on the battleship Missouri . The Missouri was Japan's first ship of the war to surrender .
 The first Soviet troops arriving at the Nazi death camps discovered nightmarish horrors . Conclusion: Soviet troops arrived at the camps to discover the horrors of the camps .
 Technology harnessed to the task of genocide had created factories of death . Technology harnesses to the . task of . genocide had . created factories for death .
 They came upon piles of corpses and of children’s shoes; and the few lucky survivors—the living dead—were the living dead . 1102 Ch. 2: "The Living Dead" is about to be exterminated by the Nazis .
 The death camps became perhaps the most awful symbol of the total war that was World War II . 6 million Jews perished, including 2 million Polish Jews, during the war .
 At the end of the war, only about 40,000 to 50,000 Polish Jews had survived the Holocaust . At least 40,500 Polish Jews survived the war .
 At least 17 million people were killed in the fighting and another 20 million civilians perished, half in the Soviet Union . Not including those who died in Stalin’s gulags .
 30 million people in China perished in the war begun by Japan in Manchuria in 1937 . About 30 million died in China during the war, including about 30 million who perished .
 Germany lost more than 6 million people, Japan 2 million, and Britain and France lost about 250,000 and 300,000 respectively .
 Husbands, wives, children, and other relatives were often lost forever . Husband and wives, wives and children were often killed .
 Europe became a continent of “displaced persons,’’ as they were called . Europe became Europe's continent of displaced persons . Europe was Europe's first continent of people displaced by war .
 The psychological damage to those who lived through night bombing in shelters, those who spent years waiting for definitive news about missing loved ones, or those who had somehow survived the death camps, cannot be calculated .
 Europe seems haunted by the sad memories of last conversations and letters . Europe seemed haunted by memories of the last conversations, letters and letters.
 After World War II, in contrast to the end of World War I, there seemed little optimism that such a total war could not occur again . One survivor recalled his determination to hold on against all odds “to tell the story, to bear witness; and that to survive, we
 The first was the rising tension even before the war ended between the Soviet Union and the Western Allies . The second was the rise in tension between the two countries .
 The second was the development of rockets, the jet plane, and above all, the atomic bomb, a terrifying weapon for a new age . The atomic bomb was the first weapon of the Second World War .
 The cataclysmic experience of the Second World War weighed heavily on the social, political, and cultural climate of the post-war era . Post-World War II was a major event in the cultural landscape of the world .
 In every country, those who resisted Nazi rule played a major part in the reconstitution of their nations after the war . In all countries, the resistance fighters helped rebuild their nations .
 Politicians, intellectuals, and virtually everyone else would try to come to grips with what had happened to Europe, to assess blame, and to find hope .
 The Soviet Red Army, which had liberated Eastern Europe from the Nazis, became an occupying force . The Red Army became an occupied force in Eastern Europe after liberating Eastern Europe .
 Soviet-backed Communists pushed other parties aside until they held unchallenged authority in each state . In Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and the other states of Eastern Europe, they pushed other political parties aside . The Soviet-led Communist Party Party of the Cold War ruled Poland,
 They nationalized industries and undertook massive forced collectivization of agriculture . Nationalized industries were nationalized and forced to collectivize agriculture .
 Berlin, lying within East Germany, remained divided between East and West . Berlin quickly became a particular focus of Cold War rivalry between the two sides . Berlin was one of the most important battlegrounds in the Cold War .
 Soviet intervention in 1956 to crush revolt against Communist rule in Hungary further strained relations between East and West . Soviet intervention to crush Hungarian revolt in 1956 strained relations with the West .
 Hostile words and strident denunciations were better than war . Yet it was an arena for verbal battles . Yet, it was also a place where it was better than a war .
 Signs of gnawing poverty were not hard to find in every country in the post-war period . Signs of poverty were found in many countries in the aftermath of the war .
 Only half of the houses in France had running water, and only a third of those in Austria, Spain, and Italy had water . Only a third had water running water in Austria and Spain .
 Providing decent housing became a goal of governments in most countries . Provided decent housing was a goal for governments in many countries .
 More and more people lived in cities, with fewer working the land . A burgeoning culture of consumption took hold, increasingly influenced by America's consumption .
 In Britain, Labour government laid the foundations for the modern welfare state . Governments assume increased responsibility for their citizens . In Britain it was Labour's first government to take responsibility for its citizens .
 The welfare state emerged in part out of the experience of state planning and social solidarity during World War II, as many countries began wide-ranging social services to aid and protect their people .
 Other Western states, too, increased the number of social services provided by their governments, as did their Communist counterparts .
 The period between 1950 and 1973 was a period of dynamic economic growth in Western Europe . The period of 1950 to 1973 was one of the most dynamic periods of Western Europe's history .
 The number of people working in manufacturing or the service sector increased dramatically . However, the majority of those working the land fell in the land sector .
 Economic and social planning played an important part in the recovery of the European economy and its rapid expansion . Reflecting the wartime experience, social planning is a key part of the recovery .
 In the post-war period, movements for independence in the Asian and African colonies of the European powers led to rapid decolonization and further loss of European authority .
 France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Portugal also lost their empires, but after nationalist insurrections and bloody flghting, they were able to regain control .
 In Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Portugal, repressive dictatorships gave way to parliamentary regimes . In Greece and Spain, dictatorships have been overthrown .
 Terrorism brought a new, unsettling dimension to political life. But, at the same time, terrorism brought an unsettling dimension . Terrorist terrorism brought new dimension to politics.
 Terrorist groups threatened security in such areas as Northern Ireland and the Basque region of Spain . The Middle East is where militant Arab organizations opposed the policies of Israel toward the Palestinian people .
 In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev initiated a series of economic and political reforms in the Soviet Union . Mikhail wanted to maintain communism by eliminating its authoritarian nature, encouraging greater political participation and bringing economic prosperity .
 1107 ments for reform arose in the countries of the Eastern European bloc, beginning in Poland and Hungary . Gorbachev made clear that the Soviet Union would not intervene .
 Communism collapsed in one Eastern European state after another in 1989 . The collapse of Communism in 1989 led to the collapse of communism in many Eastern European states .
 East Germans pouring through the Berlin Wall in November 1989 symbolized the fall of communism in Eastern Europe . Throngs of East Germans poured through the wall to celebrate the end of communism .
 The Soviet Union itself then broke apart, as one former Soviet republic after another declared independence . The former Soviet Union then became one of the world's most powerful nations .
 The collapse of what has been called the Soviet Unions empire left the U.S. as the worlds only superpower, with an informal empire of its own . The collapse left the United States as the world's only superpower .
 In the former Communist states, the challenges of achieving democratic rule with little or no democratic traditions or a successful market economy were daunting . The challenges were daunting, but they can be overcome with a successful economy .
 The ethnic and religious complexity of these states compounded the difficulties, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The war brought atrocities on a scale not seen since World War II, most of which were perpetuated by Serb forces against Muslims . Most of the atrocities were carried out by Serbs, not Muslims .
 The post-war era also brought about European economic cooperation among Western states . Post-war Europe was dominated by the Cold War .
 European economic cooperation had begun in the years following World War II, with the founding of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation in 1948 . The creation of the Common Market in 1959 and the European Community in 1967 .
 The Treaty of Maastricht was signed in 1992 by the twelve members of the European Community . It created the European Union, which had as a base a partnership between France and Germany . The treaty was signed by the 12 European Community members .
 Romania and Bulgaria were admitted in 2007, with the candidacies of Croatia, Macedonia, and Turkey still pending . Croatia, Macedonia, Croatia, Croatia and Turkey are also pending .
 The globalization of the world economy, reflecting remarkable improvements in transportation and communication, has brought the continents closer together . It has enabled the movement of people, ideas, and products across the globe .
 Migrants from Africa and Asia began to arrive in Europe in ever greater numbers . They were attracted by the possibility of jobs and a better life .
 Many fled political turmoil at home, arriving as political refugees or simply crossing borders without detection . Many fled the country as political turmoil or simply crossed borders to escape detection .
 Even as Europe now enjoys peace, the question of immigration remains a challenge, particularly in Western Europe . Europe's peace is now at an all-time high .
 The world soon learned that more than 6 million Jews had been exterminated by the Nazis . The world learned that 6 million people had been killed in the Holocaust .
 Countries that had occupied or that had been Nazi allies had to deal with collaborators . They also faced the challenge of establishing democratic political institutions .
 In the meantime, intellectuals wrestled with the horrendous catastrophe that had occurred, intellectuals wrestle with the tragedy .
 The shift from a wartime to a peacetime economy would pose a great challenge, says President Obama . "The shift from wartime to peacetime ... poses a big challenge," he says .
 The economies of the Western nations recovered from the war with remarkable speed and entered a period of spectacular economic growth .
 Economic growth came even as superpower competition between the U.S. and the Soviet Union made the other European powers less important in the world . The growing prodigious economic might of Japan and the rise of China as a great power also grew .
 Life expectancy increased as people lived longer due to improvements in medicine and diet . Life expectancy also increased due to better diet and improved medicine .
 Because of what became known as a ‘Green Revolution, more and more rural people left the land for cities, which grew rapidly . Because of the "Green Revolution," cities grew rapidly in the 1970s .
 Over the decades that followed, greater opportunities for women became available. Over the years, women were able to gain more opportunities .
 At the same time, simultaneous revolutions in transportation, communications, and consumerism transformed the way Europeans lived . At the time, Europe was at the center of a revolution in transportation and communications .
 By the time World War II ended in 1945, as many as 60 million people had been killed as a result of the war . By the end of WWII, more than 60 million had died in total .
 Death tolls in Central and Eastern Europe during the Second World War were almost beyond comprehension . Fewer people from France and Great Britain were killed in the war than in the First World War .
 In the Soviet Union, deaths due to the war can only be estimated at between 15 and 25 million people . Even more, if one includes the millions who were victims of Stalin’s purges .
 1,700 cities and towns and 70,000 villages were completely destroyed in the earthquake . 1,7,700 towns and villages were destroyed .
 Poland lost 6 million people, a fifth of the population, including 3 million Jews . More than 90 percent of the Jewish population was wiped out .
 Damage to property from air raids, ground warfare, and reprisals by retreating German forces was incalculable . Damage from air and ground warfare in the Second World War .
 German air raids in the first year of the war devastated sections of London and Coventry in Britain, Leningrad and Kiev in the Soviet Union, and Rotterdam .
 The German army completely leveled Warsaw in retaliation for the 1944 uprising . Warsaw was completely leveled by the German army in response to the uprising .
 Allied bombing runs left Berlin, Dresden, and the industrial cities of the Rhineland in ruins . Key French industrial and port cities were severely damaged as well as the French .
 Only recently have historians become aware of the tragedies stemming from what would in the 1990s be known as ‘ethnic cleansing” during and immediately after the war . Only recently has been aware of what would have been known as 'ethnic cleansing'
 Between 1943 and August 1947 in the territories that would become Communist Poland and the Soviet republic of Ukraine, about 100,000 civilian Poles and Ukrainians were forced from their lands by the invading Red Army .
 Ukrainian nationalists killed Poles in Volhynia and Galicia in 1943, and the Poles committed atrocities when civil war between the two ethnic groups followed the liberation of Poland .
 Decisions taken by the Allies toward the end of the war brought a radical restructuring of the national boundaries of Central and Eastern Europe . The Potsdam Conference took place in 1945 and 1945 .
 The restructuring was largely determined by the Soviet military advance . The restructuring of the Soviet-era Soviet Union was largely made up of Soviet forces .
 By the time of the German surrender in May 1945, the Red Army had occupied all of the states of Eastern Europe except Yugoslavia and Greece . The Red Army occupied Yugoslavia, Greece and Yugoslavia .
 In Germany, Soviet troops controlled what became the eastern zone . British held the industrial Rhineland and Ruhr Basin, as well as much of In the Wake of Devastation 1111 . American and French armies held southern Germany; and four powers divided Berlin .
 At the Potsdam Conference of July 1945, Stalin, Churchill, and Truman considered the fate of defeated Germany . The conference was held in 1945 and ended in 1945 .
 The Allies had already decided to divide defeated Germany into a British, French, Russian and American zone of occupation .
 The Oder and Niesse Rivers would be the new border between Germany and Poland . They created a new border . The border would be between the Oder River and Niedse River .
 Allied leaders agreed that Germany should be reunified, despite the original opposition of de Gaulle . German populations living in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary should be forcibly resettled in Germany, as the new governments demanded .
 The Four Power Allied Control Council (France had joined the Potsdam powers) planned a new, disarmed, and de-Nazified Germany . The Council planned a disarmed Germany and disarmed country .
 The growing mistrust between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union affected the Potsdam Conference . The conference took place in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Stalin's territorial demands included Winston Churchill, Harry Truman, and Joseph Stalin at the Potsdam Conference in 1945 . Churchill, Truman, Stalin, and Stalin met at the conference in 1945 in a bid to win the Soviet Union .
 The Western Allies refused to give the Soviet Union virtual control of the straits of Constantinople . Russian tsars had sought since the eighteenth century to control the strait of Constantinople, which they sought .
 Other territorial adjustments came at the expense of Germany’s wartime allies such as Italy . Yugoslavia acquired a small border region from Italy, from which it acquired a border region .
 As the Allies dictated the new alignments, little attention was paid to the fact that the new borders, as after World War I, left nationalities dissatisfied .
 Hungarians living in Transylvania did not want to be left within the redrawn borders of Romania . The many fewer Romanians who found themselves inside Hungary resented what they considered punishment for having been forced by the Nazis to fight on the side of Germany .
 Austria, which Hitler annexed to his Reich in 1938, had its independence restored . Austria was restored to its own independent state in 1945 . Austria's independence was restored in 1946 .
 Military occupation of Austria by the victorious World War II powers ended in 1955 with the withdrawal of Soviet troops in exchange for Austria’s declaration of neutrality . Austria declared a neutrality in the aftermath of the war .
 Finland retained independence and the Soviet Union accepted Finnish neutrality . In northern Europe, Finland retained its independence and remained neutral .
 As after the end of World War I, the Western Allies disagreed on the question of war reparations . The Western Allies agreed on the issue of reparations after the war, but disagreed on how much reparations were made .
 The Soviet Union demanded that Germany be forced to pay for the costs of the war . Germany had suffered far more than Great Britain and the United States .
 Stalin wanted the equivalent of $20 billion in reparations, as well as German industrial equipment . Stalin wanted reparations for Germany, but also wanted industrial equipment and reparations .
 The Soviet Union eventually received half the amount of money demanded . It received about 25 percent of industrial equipment from the German zones occupied by Britain, France, and the U.S. Soviet Union received half of the money .
 Soviet trains and trucks began to haul German machinery and other industrial materials from the eastern zone back to Russia . In the meantime, Soviet trains began hauling German machinery from the east zone .
 Truman eliminated the Soviet Union from the list of nations eligible for U.S. loans to help with rebuilding their economies . By now fully suspicious of Soviet intentions in Eastern Europe, Truman was fully suspicious .
 The governments of the last three nations were anything but democratically elected . But it was soon clear that the governments of those governments were anything less democratically elected.
 In November 1944, the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington, D.C., planned the United Nations, which would replace the League of Nations . The United Nations and Cold War Alliances were formed in November 1944 .
 In the Wake of Devastation 1113 Allied-controlled zones J Area to Poland Area to Bulgaria Area to Yugoslavia 1939 boundaries 1939 boundaries 1947 boundaries American British Murmansk French Soviet Four-sector cities .
 Territorial changes as of 1947 include American, British, French, and Soviet zones in Germany, as well as boundaries of the Soviet Union, Poland, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia after war .
 The League stood by when Italy invaded Ethiopia and Germany re-occupied the Rhineland . The League did not include the United States, Germany, Japan, or Italy as members .
 The Allies desired a system of international security that would protect the freedom and self-determination of member nations . Now, the Allies wanted a system that protected the freedom of the nations' sovereignty . The Allies wanted to protect their own freedom and their own sovereignty .
 The U.S. and Britain agreed to Stalin’s demand that the Soviet Union would have one of the five permanent seats on the Security Council . The Soviet Union had veto power over the United Nations .
 The United States, Great Britain, the U.S.R., France, and the Republic of China were designated as “permanent members of the Security Council” each with a veto over deliberations . The other five seats (ten after 1965) would be filled on a revolving
 When China was admitted to the UN in 1971, it received the Republic of China’s permanent seat on the Security Council . China was granted permanent seat in the UN Security Council in 1971 .
 The United Nations helped the European state system reemerge after the war . The U.N. helped re-emerge as a result of World War II .
 The UN provided necessary mediation in some cases of disputes between nations . Furthermore, the UN has also been involved in some of the world's most violent conflicts .
 The United Nations could send peacekeeping forces to various hot spots on the globe . However limited its powers, the U.N. could also send peacekeepers to these hot spots .
 The UN provided emergency relief funds in the immediate post-war period to Czechoslovakia, Poland, Italy, Italy and Greece .
 In 1941, the Atlantic Charter had led to agreement that trials for war crimes would follow the war, once national sovereignty had been restored when Germany had been defeated . The Atlantic Charter defined Allied war aims .
 At the Saint James Conference in January 1942 the Allies declared their intention to punish war criminals . At the St James Conference they declared that they would be punished .
 A consensus has emerged that an international order had to be constructed that went beyond state sovereignty . Gradually, consensus had emerged that the international order must be constructed . The international order was built on the basis of international cooperation .
 In 1944, the Permanent Court of Justice in The Hague organized a commission to consider definitions of war crimes . The commission was organized with the assumption that the United Nations would bring such criminals to justice .
 The concept of war crimes that had developed during the war led in 1948 to the UN General Assembly adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The Universal Declaration was adopted in 1948 .
 The document has subsequently served as the basis for efforts to protect the rights of individuals . This document has since been used to protect individuals . It has since led to the creation of the Human Rights Act .
 Universal Declaration proclaimed civil and political rights; the right to a fair trial; the freedoms of assembly, belief, and speech; and the rights to education, an adequate standard of living, and to participation in cultural life .
 Slavery and torture were acknowledged as violations of human rights . Moreover, slavery and torture was acknowledged as human rights violations . The U.S. Supreme Court has acknowledged that slavery is a violation of human right .
 Genocide Convention of 1949 made genocide a crime under international law . Genocide Convention was established under the Genocide Convention in 1949 .
 In the Wake of Devastation 1115, Europe pledged to come to the defense of their allies in case any one of them was attacked . The states of Europe also hedged their bets by establishing military alliances .
 In March 1948, Great Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg signed the Pact of Brussels . Great Britain signed the pact of Brussels in March 1948 .
 It served as the military component of the subsequent Council of Europe to which most of the nations of Western Europe adhered . It was part of the later Council of European nations .
 The treaty bound all of the member countries to defend jointly any of the signatories who were attacked . It created a unified command for a common army and placed NATO’s headquarters in Paris . The treaty was directed against the Soviet Union .
 NATO became the cornerstone of the alliance between the U.S. and Western Europe . NATO is the United States' most powerful ally in the Middle East .
 Europe became a continent of ‘displaced persons’ as well as of widows and orphans . Europe is now a continent that has a population of displaced persons and widows, orphans .
 In all, there were about 50 million refugees in the immediate post-war period . About 50 million people were refugees in all of the immediate aftermath .
 Millions of prisoners of war, such as Germans incarcerated in the Soviet Union, had to be repatriated . Millions of POWs were repatriated from their POWs .
 Germans living in Lithuania, which in 1940 had been incorporated against its will into the Soviet Union, were returned to Germany . In 1940, Lithuania was incorporated into the USSR, and Germans living there were returned .
 Tens of thousands of Germans were forcibly expelled from Czechoslovakia during the period from May to August of 1945 and during the organized transfers of January through November 1946 . In addition to the expulsion of thousands, tens of thousands were forcibly .
 Almost 4 million returned to Germany, most arriving from the U.S. and Poland with virtually nothing . Most of the 4 million who did so did not return to Germany with nothing .
 In Germany, one of every six persons was a refugee and 1. million Germans still lived in camps for displaced persons in 1947 . 1.6 million people were refugees in Germany .
 DP camps brought some normalcy to the lives of their occupants, many of whom had been slave laborers for Germany, including Polish and Ukrainian Jews . The camps were carefully regulated along military lines by the American, British, and French occupiers, with barbed wire .
 Stalin repopulated East Prussia with about 1 million people hauled in from Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, and even distant Kazakhstan . Stalin's "East Prussia" was one of the world's most populated areas .
 Poles whose homeland had become part of the Soviet Union now' moved into western Poland . Poles whose . homeland had . become . part of . Poland now' move into western . Poland .
 At the same time, almost 500,000 Ukrainians were forced by Poland to head eastward to the Soviet Union . At the time of the invasion of Poland, Ukraine was in the throes of the Cold War .
 Several hundred thousand Jews from Eastern Europe who had survived the Holocaust now headed west . Some fleeing new pogroms in Poland in 1946 in response to pograms .
 It erra nea n sea 4oi < HI n«H Map 27. The world's largest island nation is located in Denmark . It is also located in Turkey .
 NATO and the Warsaw Pact were the military alliances that defined the post-war world . Eastern and Western Blocs, NATO and Warsaw Pact was the military alliance . NATO and NATO were formed in the wake of the Cold War .
 In the Wake of Devastation 1117 Refugees waiting for food in a Displaced Persons Camp in Germany . NATO countries Warsaw Pact countries Warsaw pact countries Non-aligned Western countries non-aligned Communist country . In the wake of the disaster 1117 refugees are displaced from Germany .
 The percentage of ethnic minorities living in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Romania declined from 32 percent to 3 percent in the first case . The result was a dramatic decrease .
 Churches, synagogues, and even a few mosques were razed, depending on the location . Towns and streets received new names to reflect the brutal transfer of ethnic minorities .
 In France, resistance forces summarily executed about 10,000 accused collaborators . In the 1930s, the French government executed about ten,000 people accused of being collaborators .
 Marshal Philippe Petain was found guilty of treason, but because of his age and stature as the ‘hero of Verdun’ during the First World War, he was imprisoned on a small island off the western coast of France, where he died in 1951 . He was imprisoned in
 Women who slept with German soldiers had their heads shaved and were paraded through their towns in shame . Women who had slept with soldiers had to shave their heads .
 In countries that had been occupied by Hitler’s armies, people struggled to determine degrees of guilt . In countries occupied by the Nazi regime, people struggle to determine guilt .
 In Belgium, courts prosecuted 634,000 people for their part in the German occupation . The figure is a staggering figure in a country of only 8 million people . Belgium is home to more than 600,000 Germans .
 In Italy, where reprisals against Nazi collaborators a the war’s end had been carried out with speed and efficiency (about 15,00( executions between 1943 and 1946), there were few trials of fascists afte the war . There were few . trials of . fascists af
 This was in part because the Italian fascists had been, at leas when compared to the Nazis, relatively mild in their treatment of thei enemies . The Italian fascists were relatively mild compared to their enemies .
 Millions of people had joined fascist organization or unions because they felt obliged to do so . Furthermore, millions of people have joined fascist organizations or unions .
 In Eastern Europe, purges o former Nazi collaborators took on a high profile, such as in Yugoslavia where Tito’s victorious forces executed thousands of Serbs, Croats, am Slovenes who had collaborated, many of them murderously . Many of Tito's victorious forces
 The most dramatic post-war trial occurred in Nuremberg in August 194' when the Allies put twenty-four high-ranking German officials on trial befor an international tribunal . The trial was the most dramatic event in the world's history .
 The court found twenty-one of the defendant guilty of war crimes, and ten were executed . Ten of the defendants were executed after the court found them guilty .
 Hermann Goring committed suicide in his cell shortly before he was to be executed . Hermann was executed for his crimes in 1953 . Goring was the last man to die .
 Less spectacular tri als of more minor Nazi figures went on in Germany for years . Less spectacular Tri als went on for years.
 Doc tor Josef Mengele had carried out brutal experiments on living patients including children . He managed to escape to Paraguay after being captured by the Nazis in 1945 .
 The U.S. government facili tated the escape of a number of Nazi war criminals in exchange for information about Communists in Germany and elsewhere in Europe . The United States government helped facilitate the escape .
 Growing anti-communism put a brake on purges of wartime collaborators in Western Europe . Anti-Communism put an end to purges in Europe in the wake of the Second World War .
 Other war criminals managed to fade into the chaos of post-war Europe, some with new names and identities . Some of the world's most notorious war criminals are still living in Europe .
 Some did not even bother to change their names, and more than a few eventually served in the West German government . Some even served in West Germany's government .
 In 1959, Israeli agents in South America kidnapped Adolph Eichmann, who had participated in the murder of thousands of Jews . Israel kidnapped him in 1959 . Israeli agents kidnapped him as part of the plot to kill Jews .
 He was put on trial in Israel, where he was convicted and put to death . He was convicted of his crimes in Israel and was executed .
 In the mid1980s, a French court convicted Klaus Barbie, a Nazi war criminal who had fled after the war, sentencing him to life in prison . Klaus Barbie was convicted in the mid-1980s of a war criminal .
 Maurice Papon signed away the lives of hundreds of Jews during Vichy . Papon had a successful career as an official in several French governments . He was finally tried and convicted in 1998 .
 The justice meted out to Nazis and collaborators may have been imperfect, but it was better than no justice at all . The justice was imperfect, and sometimes came very late, sometimes came quite late .
 Economic Recovery and Prosperity, the Welfare State, and European Economic Cooperation . The European economy lay in ruins. The European welfare state is the key to economic recovery and prosperity .
 Bombing on both sides had been systematic, destroying with increasing accuracy the industrial structure of Europe . Bombing was systematic in both countries, destroying Europe's industrial structure .
 Only fragments of Europe’s transportation and communication networks remained in service . Only fragments remain in service of Europe's transport and communications networks .
 In Britain, gold and silver reserves had sunk dramatically, and the government had to take out large loans . The U.S. provided the bulk of these funds to the British government .
 The markets for British manufactured goods, which had all but disappeared during the war, could not be quickly reconstituted . Britain's manufacturing markets were all but wiped out in the war .
 Agricultural production in every war zone had fallen by about half, leaving millions of people without enough food . Millions of people were left without food because of the fall of agricultural production .
 German housewives combed through the rubble of bombed-out buildings looking for objects of value . They combed forests for mushrooms and berries for their families to eat . Housewives picked through rubble looking for items of value, combing forests for berries .
 The U.S. undertook a program of massive economic aid to Western Europe . Great economic turmoil had contributed to social and political instability between the world wars .
 Through the Marshall Plan, the United States contributed $13 billion between 1948 and 1951 toward the rebuilding of the Western Allies’ economies . The Marshall Plan was named after the American secretary of state, George Marshall .
 The Marshall Plan was intended to help Western Europe resist communism . The U.S. pressured the governments of France and Italy not to name Communists to key ministries .
 The European economic recovery was already well under way by the time the Marshall Plan began in 1948 .
 Britain and France had already matched their industrial production of the pre-war period . Italy, the Netherlands, and Belgium followed within a year .
 Monies provided by the Marshall Plan amounted to only 6. percent of Frances gross national product, 2 percent of that of Britain, and 5 percent of Italy . Moreover, the monies . provided by Marshall Plan . amounted to . only 6 percent of the . Gross national product of the
 The Marshall Plan did assist Western European states to purchase raw materials, fuel, and machinery for industry . Western Europe was helped by the Marshall Plan in the 1930s .
 The Soviet Union was excluded from the provisions of the Lend-Lease Act . The U.S. offered loans and credits to a number of European countries with an eye toward encouraging anticommunism .
 The difficult years in the immediate post-war period gave way to a period of considerable economic growth from 1950 to 1973 . The hard times in the 1950s and 1960s were the most difficult years of the period .
 European economies benefited from the globalization of trade, the availability of a labor supply, and the use of oil instead of coal as the principal source of fuel for industrial growth .
 This rapid rise in the demand for oil dramatically increased Economic Recovery and Prosperity 1121 the strategic importance of the Middle East . The Middle East is now the world's most populous region .
 Natural gas, much of which was imported from the Soviet Union, offered another source of energy . Much of the country's energy supply was brought in by Soviet Union .
 Economic growth followed a combination of state involvement in the economy and the liberalization of trade, creating mixed economies . The country's mixed economies were created in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The most successful mix seemed to be a combination of state planning, timely nationalizations and encouragement of private industry . State planning and timely nationalization were key to success .
 Nationalized railroads aided the process of rebuilding and expansion in West Germany, France, Belgium, and Britain . The railroads were nationalized in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In Italy, the role of the state in orchestrating industry, encouraged by Mussolini, survived the war . In Italy it was the state of the war, but it was not until the end of the 1930s .
 The Institute for Industrial Reconstruction, which had been founded in 1933, controlled an increasing number of enterprises . The Institute was founded in 1932 .
 The National Agency for Hydrocarbons emerged as a veritable cartel in itself . The agency drew huge profits from a variety of activities, including construction, chemicals, and textile production .
 Government investment helped the emergence of the Italian steel industry . A state-owned petroleum company provided industry with inexpensive fuel .
 Industrial production reached pre-war levels by 1946 and grew by a third by the end of the decade . Despite increasingly obsolete factories and low rates of investment and savings, production was still booming .
 In France, the state assumed control of the largest banks, the Renault automobile plants (whose owner had collaborated with the Germans), natural resources , steel and electricity, and airlines . The state took over the Renault plants, natural resources and steel .
 French economist Jean Monnet headed Office of Planning, which encouraged and coordinated voluntary plans for modernizing business enterprises and agriculture . Monnet's office of Planning was based in Paris, drawing on capital and expertise of government technocrats .
 Real wages in Italy in 1954 were more than 50 percent higher than they had been before the war . The Italian economy grew rapidly with the help of U.S. financial assistance .
 Norway, Denmark, and Sweden all became more prosperous thanks largely to the development of fishing, agriculture, industry, and booming service sectors .
 The Western Allies recognized that the economic recovery of West Germany was essential to achieving political stability in Central Europe and resisting communism . West Germany's economic recovery was essential for the country's political stability .
 The German Federal Republic reformed its battered currency, the mark . Aided by a stable political life, the country's political life was able to reform its mark .
 This helped restore confidence, which in turn helped fuel the economic resurgence . This helped boost confidence in the economy, which has since recovered .
 Black-marketeering gradually ceased as inflation and unemployment were brought under control . The country's unemployment and inflation were brought to an end .
 An infusion of American aid—$1. billion between 1948 and 1952, primarily through the Marshall Plan—contributed to the rebuilding of key industries in West Germany . West Germany contained most of the nations natural resources .
 The German Federal Republic also had the advantage (one, to be sure, bought at horrific cost during the war) of starting from scratch and building new factories .
 West Germany’s other advantages included the presence of many engineers, a skilled labor force, and protection by the Western Allies . The West Germany did not have to spend much for defense .
 The government of the German Federal Republic took a lesser role in economic planning, but imposed short-term tariffs and encouraged agricultural modernization . The government took a less prominent role in the planning of economic planning .
 The influx of refugees from East Germany contributed to the remarkable growth of the West German economy . West Germany's economic growth was largely driven by refugees from the East Germany .
 West Germany in the 1960s attracted streams of migrant workers from Spain, Italy, Greece, Yugoslavia, and above all, Turkey . Migrant workers came from Spain and Italy, Italy and Greece .
 West Germany’s gross national product tripled between 1950 and 1964 . As a result of the German economic “miracle,’t the West Germany had tripled in the 1950s and 1960s .
 West Germany's imports multiplied during the 1950s by four times and its exports by six times . West Germany’s imports multiplied four times in 1950s and six times in the 1960s .
 German industrial production more than doubled between 1948 and 1951 . Industrial production increased by six times from 1948 to 1964 .
 West Germany assumed pre-war Germany’s role as a major producer of steel and machinery . West Germany assumes pre-WWII role as major steel producer of Germany .
 The chemical industry, strong in Germany since the late nineteenth century, continued to develop .
 By 1960, Germany was the world’s second leading exporter of goods, including machinery, appliances, radios, chemicals, and automobiles . Volkswagens now streamed off the assembly lines .
 Continued concentration of industrial production in large companies characterized the post-war period . The continued concentration of large companies was characterized by large companies .
 A single Belgian company controlled as much as 80 percent of Belgian bank deposits, 60 percent of insurance business, 40 percent of iron and steel produced, 30 percent of coal, and 25 percent of electrical energy . A single company controlled up to 80 percent .
 This monopoly did not seem to slow the development of the Belgian economy, which expanded rapidly . The Belgian economy has expanded rapidly in recent years .
 The proliferation of white-collar jobs lifted the expectations, status, and income of hundreds of thousands of families . With the rapid development of the service sector of Western economies, Western economies have seen a rise in white collar jobs in recent years .
 A more equitable distribution in taxation helped remove some of the tax burden from ordinary people . The tax burden was removed by a more equitable redistribution in taxation .
 In 1960, 5 percent of British population owned about 75 percent of the nation’s wealth . Still, in 1960, only 5 percent owned about 25 percent of Britain's wealth .
 By the end of the 1960s, the German Federal Republic, Switzerland, and Sweden were the most prosperous European countries . Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Spain, and Spain were the poorest in Western Europe . Romania and Albania were poorest Communist states .
 The post-war era also brought international economic cooperation among Western states . Post-war economic cooperation was also brought in by the Cold War .
 The Organization for European Economic Cooperation was founded in 1948 with 17 member states . The United States later joined the organization . It was founded with the United States .
 It was succeeded in 1961 by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . It was expanded to include Australia, Canada, and New Zealand .
 The ECSC was inspired by the French statesman Robert Schuman . It also reflected the influence of United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson and French economist Jean Monnet .
 The ECSC coordinated production of French and German coal and steel in the interest of efficiency . It also was intent on forging a new relationship that ultimately would place France and West Germany at the center of the new Europe .
 ECSC first raised the possibility of serious European economic integration . Despite inevitable problems, the ECSC raised the prospect of serious economic integration in the EU .
 Such economic cooperation between countries also contributed to economic growth in Western Europe . Such cooperation helped boost Western Europe's economic growth, experts say .
 The EEC began in 1958 with six member nations, France, Italy, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Luxembourg and the Netherlands . EEC was formed in 1958 and began with six countries .
 EEC gradually eliminated trade barriers between member states in Western Europe . The EEC established common customs tariffs and worked toward equalizing wages and social security arrangements among member countries .
 The increase in the birthrate after the war more than made up for the loss of hundreds of thousands of emigrants to North America and Latin America .
 Europeans were also living longer, aided by improvements in diet and medicine . Europeans also lived longer than they did in the early 1900s .
 The aging of the population presents major challenges for the twenty-first century . The aging population is one of the biggest challenges of the 21st century .
 As the percentage of people no longer working rises, major strains on national budgets are a certainty . National budgets will be strained because of increased costs for welfare and social security systems . Social security and welfare systems will be under strain .
 In the post-war period, increases in industrial and agricultural productivity, which opened up new jobs, encouraged families to have more children, as did government policies .
 In France, where leaders had openly worried about the low birthrate, special incentives were offered to families that had more than two children .
 Medical advances and an increase in the number of doctors further reduced infant mortality . Medical advances helped reduce infant mortality in India .
 Birthrate increased between 1950 and 1966 in every country in Western Europe . Switzerland, the Netherlands, the German Federal Republic, and France lead the way .
 Europe’s percentage of the world population fell to 16 percent in 1990 . But because of virtually unchecked population growth in India, China, and other Third World nations, Europe's percentage of world population was 16 percent .
 The increase in the birthrate had far-reaching social and political implications . The birthrate is estimated to be the highest in the world's history .
 British, French, and German eighteen-year-olds received the right to vote in the early 1970s . The first time they were allowed to vote was in the UK and France .
 Governments had to increase spending on education to prepare the young for jobs in an economy that is rapidly becoming more complex . Governments must also increase spending to prepare young for complex jobs in the modern world .
 The age until which school attendance was obligatory rose to 14 or 16 years old, depending on the country . School attendance was mandatory until the age of 16 or 17 years old .
 There was relatively little democratization of university enrollment, which remained the preserve of the upper classes . But despite the tripling of the number of university students in Britain, France, and Italy between 1938 and 1960, there was relatively no democratization .
 In 1967, fewer than 10 percent of French university students were children of workers or peasants . Fewer than 10 per cent of French students were the children of peasants or workers in 1967 .
 Working-class and farm families could not afford to send their children to university . In Great Britain, particularly, but also in the other countries of the West, families couldn't afford to pay for education .
 In Eastern Europe and the Balkan countries, the number of students in higher education rose rapidly . Still, in Eastern Europe, higher education is still booming in the region .
 Western European agriculture was transformed by the “Green Revolution/’ Fewer farmers fed a much larger population . The Green Revolution was created in the two decades that followed World War II . The ‘Green Revolution’ was created by the end of the war .
 Commercialized agriculture allowed most nations to produce most of the food consumed by their populations . Large-scale commercialized agriculture permitted most nations' production of most food consumed .
 Agricultural productivity rose by 30 percent between the end of the war and 1962 . Agricultural productivity increased by 30 per cent between 1945 and 1961 .
 In the German Federal Republic, agricultural production increased by two-and-a-half times between 1950 and 1964 . Agricultural production rose by two and a half times in the 1950s and 1960s .
 First, mechanized agriculture was increasingly widespread, particularly use of the tractor . The tractor was the first tractor to be used in agriculture .
 Fertilizers augmented farm yields in northern Europe, while pesticides prevented blight . Pesticides are a mixed blessing because of the long-term ecological costs .
 Advances in types of seeds, animal husbandry (particularly artificial insemination), and irrigation also contributed to greater productivity .
 The size of many farms increased as smaller and less productive plots were consolidated into larger units . Third, the size of the farms increased .
 Government programs encouraged the cooperative use of tractors and provided agricultural information to farmers . Government programs provided information to help farmers .
 In many countries, government assistance facilitated reforestation, electrification, irrigation projects, and road building that would have been beyond the means of private initiatives .
 Agriculture became most efficient in Great Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany, Denmark, and France . Agriculture became more efficient in Britain and the Netherlands .
 Agricultural surpluses helped some countries during the 1970s and 1980s become major exporters of food . Some countries became major exporter of food in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The continued commercialization of agriculture accentuated the exodus from the land to the rapidly growing cities of Europe . Commercialization of farming accentuates the exodus of agriculture .
 Italy's farming population fell from about 40 percent after the war to 24 percent in 1966 . In Italy, the farming population dropped from 40 percent to about 24 percent after WWII .
 Less than 4 percent of the population worked the land by the early 1970s in Great Britain . In Great Britain, the first European nation in which agriculture was substantially mechanized .
 Before World War I, about half the population of Europe worked in agriculture . The figure included fishermen and foresters .
 In 1955, the percentage had fallen to about 24 percent, and it has continued to decline . However, it remains higher in southern Europe than in the United States . The percentage of people in the U.S. has declined since then .
 In every country, agriculture’s share of the gross national product has fallen . Agriculture’ share of GDP has fallen in every country . Agriculture is a major source of income for many countries .
 The old term “Green Revolution” in some ways no longer seems appropriate . The increasing industrialization of agriculture and the use of synthetic fertilizers means that the old term "Green Revolution" no longer appears appropriate .
 In the 1950s, Western European peasants started to join organizations to lobby for assistance and favorable tariffs . In the 1960s, European peasants began to join groups lobbying for favorable tariffs and assistance .
 Peasants blocked traffic of capitals with tractors and farm animals to protest government policies . Protesters blocked traffic with farm animals and tractors in protest .
 In France wine producers have often attempted to block the arrival of cheaper products from Italy and Spain . In France, wine producers often attempt to block cheaper products .
 The protests have come at a time when peasants, because of the rural exodus in Western Europe, have lost most of their political voice . Ironically, such protests come as peasants have lost their political voices .
 State economic planning during World War II helped shape expectations of continued government assistance . State economic and military planning during WWII shaped expectations for continued assistance .
 These included the remarkable British National Health Service that began in 1948 . These included funds for the unemployed, retirement pensions, and assistance for widows .
 It also enacted a series of bills nationalizing the Bank of England, airlines, railways, roads, canals, buses, and the coal and steel industries . London’s subway, London's subway and coal industries were nationalized .
 A quarter of all homes in Britain did not have their own lavatory . After the war, the shortage of homes was apparent and the shortage was apparent .
 Economic growth and a low rate of unemployment made such programs, financed through taxation, easier than they would have been in a period of economic slowdown . Low unemployment rates and low tax rates make such programs easier now than in the past .
 Conservatives in power between 1951 and 1964 expanded the services of the British welfare state . Conservative policy had long been in principle against such strong government .
 In other countries, too, the general appreciation of the sacrifices ordinary people had made during World War II led to a growing consensus that states should provide services to citizens . The general appreciation led to the growing consensus in other countries to provide state services .
 The welfare state also reflected the assumption that the monopoly of wealthy people over the economy had contributed to the rise of fascist movements in Europe between the wars . Welfare state was also thought to have contributed to fascism in Europe .
 European states greatly expanded comprehensive welfare programs that provided social services for their citizens . European states expanded comprehensive social services in order to provide social services to citizens .
 The role of centralized state economic planning was a major part of Communist ideology and practice . This was true in Western states, as well as Communist states, where laissez-faire economic theory held the upper hand .
 Social legislation provides government assistance to the sick and impoverished . In many countries, social legislation provided government assistance for the sick or impoverished .
 Government insurance programs covered health care costs in Britain, Sweden, Denmark, France, Italy, and in the Soviet Union and in other Communist states .
 In Communist states, menial jobs were found for almost everyone . Most countries in the West provided financial assistance to the unemployed . In Communist countries, unemployment was not supposed to be any unemployment .
 States expended four times more funds for social services in 1957 than in 1930 . States spent four times as much on social services as they did in 1930s .
 In most European countries, education was made free, or fees were kept at modest rates . In most Europe countries, it is not free education or fees .
 The prevalence of social programs in most European countries led to the characterization of welfare states as part of a “European” model of society, often contrasted with the United States . Social programs in many European countries have led to social programs .
 Between 1965 and 1981, the proportion of government expenditures in Britain that went to social welfare rose from 16 to 25 percent . In Sweden, social welfare spending rose from 19 to 33 percent and in Britain from 16 percent .
 In 1127 the increase in government services added to the size of bureaucracies . Everywhere, Politics in the West in the Post-War Era 1127 . Everywhere .
 When economies do not grow, social-welfare costs become drains on national budgets . When economies fail to grow, the social costs of social welfare are a drain on the nation's budget .
 Rising medical costs could outstrip the ability of government programs to pay for them . Great Britain, France, and Sweden would later find, for instance, that rising medical costs were outstripping government programs .
 With Germany, Italy, and Vichy France defeated, political continuity with pre-war governments could be found only in Britain among the major Western European powers . The post-war era was dominated by Britain, Italy and France .
 Labour’s victory was a repudiation of the Conservative government's pre-war economic policies and its inadequate reaction to Hitler's aggressive moves in Central Europe in the late 1930s . The Conservative government was not prepared to react to Hitler in the 1930s, Labour says .
 Clement Attlee was a hard-working but uninspiring man who lacked Churchill’s charisma . Attlee lacked Churchill's charisma and lacked charisma, becoming prime minister .
 Britain’s share in international trade declined sharply during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s . Following the economic recovery after the war, the country's share in trade declined .
 Some conservatives blame the welfare state and the strength of the unions for Britain’s relative economic decline . Conservatives say the unions forced the government and private companies to pay higher wages .
 British welfare costs were less than those of France . Yet British citizens paid proportionally fewer taxes than German or French citizens .
 The costs of maintaining the British Empire undercut the government’s quest for austerity as it faced enormous trade deficits and debts to the U.S. The British Empire was a major source of British debt .
 Attlee government had to choose between financing domestic economic recovery and maintaining the British Empire . Attlee had to decide whether to keep Britain's Empire .
 At one time during the government of Conservative Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, thirty-five of his ministers, including seven members of his cabinet, were related to him by marriage . Britain remained governed by an inter-connected elite of wealthy families .
 The Tories were committed to undoing the nationalizations undertaken by Labour after the war . Labour had nationalised nationalisations undertaken by the Tories in the 1930s .
 The iron and steel industries had become unprofitable and failed to attract private interest . But they found it difficult to privatize because they had become profitable . The Iron and Steel industries have been privatized since they failed to find private interest, officials say .
 Charles de Gaulle returns to France after the German occupation and the Vichy years . returned to power in 1964 with the support of the trade unions . remained there until 1970 .
 In some ways, France emerged from World War II in better shape than it had from WWI . Industrial cities and ports had been pounded by bombing raids . The systematic devastation that had taken place in northern and northeastern France during 1914-1918 had not been repeated .
 Charles de Gaulle ruled virtually alone in the eighteen months that followed his triumphant march down the Champs-Elysees in August 1944 .
 In October 1945, the vast majority of French men and women voted against a return to the political institutions of the Third Republic, identified with France’s defeat five years earlier . The vast majority voted against returning to political institutions identified with the defeat of France in 1945 .
 Referendum was the first election in which French women could vote after receiving the suffrage that year . This referendum was first election for French women to vote after they received suffrage .
 The Popular Republican Movement is a new center-right party built on de Gaulle’s reputation and Catholic support . They were followed by the Popular Republican Party, which was formed in 1940 .
 de Gaulle resigned from government in January 1946 . However, he was frustrated that the new regime would have a weak executive authority . He resigned in 1946 after becoming frustrated with the West .
 Voters overwhelmingly rejected the Constituent Assembly’s proposed constitution in May . A second assembly was then elected to write a new constitution . After voters rejected the proposed constitution, a second assembly has now been elected .
 The political institutions of the new Fourth Republic seemed conducive to governmental immobility and instability . Like the Third Republic, the political institutions were conducive to instability, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Between 1946 and 1958, France had twenty-four different governments . Most were based on left-center coalitions of the MRP, the Socialists, and smaller parties .
 The Rally of the French People, or RPF, became the opposition party of the right . While de Gaulle cooled his heels in his village, awaiting a call for him to return to power .
 In June 1946, more than half of those voting repudiated the monarchy . The abdication of the king in favor of his son and the pope’s attempts to influence the election was unsuccessful .
 The new constitution provided for the election of the president by the two houses of parliament, both of which were to be elected by popular vote, now including women for the first time . The new Italian constitution included women for first time in Italy .
 Many Italians feared a powerful centralized state, a continuity of fascism, but also because it seemed antithetical to long-standing regional identities . Many Italians fear a powerful central state, at least partially because it would seem to seem to be a continuation of fascism .
 Fearful of losing influence, the Church vigorously opposed state centralization . The Church opposed the idea of centralization of state powers .
 The new Italy was to be built on values associated with the resistance, which had been active in the north . New Italy would be built in the name of the resistance which fought in Italy's north .
 The Italian south and Sicily were liberated by the Allies with little help from the resistance movement . It remained dominated not only by powerful landowners but also by the Mafia . But the Mafia remained in control of the Italian south .
 Many fascist officials in the south retained their positions, weakening the republic’s prestige . Moreover, many fascist officials remained in their positions .
 Christian Democrats to form coalitions with Socialists . Christian Democrats and Socialists formed coalitions to form government .
 Communist parties gradually eliminated competing parties, beginning with underground resistance organizations that had been created where possible during the war . After first declaring support for the constitution of parliamentary democracies, calling for a union of “anti-fascist” political groups, and participating in elections, in each case Communist
 Communist parties grew in strength in several Western European states . At the same time, Communist parties were growing in popularity in Europe .
 Communists dominated the major trade-union organizations in Italy and France . They entered post-war governments in Belgium and Denmark . Communists dominated trade unions in Italy, France and Belgium .
 Communist resistance against Nazi Germany helped swell the prestige of Communist parties, even as their close identification with the Soviet Union began to engender suspicion among political elites .
 France, Italy, and the German Federal Republic had right-center governments in which Catholic parties played a major role . Catholic parties play a major part in the government .
 The Allies oversaw the development of the political institutions of what became the German Federal Republic . The Allies were responsible for the creation of the country's political institutions .
 Until 1951, all legislation passed by the Federal Republic had to be approved by the Western Allies . The Federal Republic was ruled by the West until 1951 .
 The Nazis carried out a process of de-Nazification, beginning with education, but did not undertake any major social reforms . They carried out an education programme, but didn't undertake major social reform .
 This meant that the powerful industrial cartels remained in place, despite the Allies’ agreement to the contrary at Potsdam . This was despite the Allied agreement that the cartels were not to be kept in place in Germany . The cartels were in place even though the Allies agreed to Pots
 The devastation of the German economy seemed to necessitate leaving what was left of Germany’s industrial base intact . Germany's industrial base was left intact .
 This kept small parties, principally those of the extreme right, out of the parliament . Small parties were kept out of parliament, keeping small parties out .
 The Allies insisted that the German president’s powers be limited to avoid the unrestricted executive power that had existed in Hitler's Germany . The Allies said that the president's powers should be limited, but not unrestricted .
 The president was elected for a term of five years by a federal assembly . The Bundestag is made up of all members of the Bundessag and delegates from each state .
 The chancellor, appointed by the president, became the effective head of state . The chancellor is the chancellor of the state .
 Electoral process also strengthened decentralization of political power in West Germany . Because the upper house could block legislation, this electoral process, too, strengthened the decentralization .
 Konrad Adenauer served as chancellor of the German Federal Republic until 1963 . Adenauer was the Catholic mayor of Cologne, Germany's first mayor .
 His opposition to the Nazis, hostility to the Soviets and to East Germany, and social conservatism reassured the Allies . His social conservatism helped the Allies. His wartime Political Realignments 1131 were 1131 .
 Adenauer handed out positions to former Nazis and bent over backward to help Germans who had endured Allied reprisals for their service to the Nazi cause . Yet at the same time, Adenauer . Adenauer also helped Germans who endured Allied rearrest for their service .
 In West Germany, the Allied program of “de-Nazification’s” had relatively little impact . The Allied program was intended to remove all former Nazis from positions of power and influence .
 "It proved impossible to purge millions of people from government, industry, and education," says President Obama .
 Allies concluded that Germany could not do without tens of thousands of experienced doctors, teachers, and engineers . The Allies concluded Germany could do without .
 It would be difficult to distinguish between different degrees of Nazi commitment and action, he says . Moreover, it would be impossible to distinguish from different levels of commitment, action .
 Adenauer forged a close alliance with France intended to serve as a bulwark against the Soviet Union . The two countries were meant to be a counter-balance to the Soviet Russia .
 The Cold War hastened the acceptance by the Western powers of the German Federal Republic and its rearmament in the Western alliance . In the meantime, the Cold War sped up the acceptance of the West .
 In 1950 the Federal Republic became a nonvoting member of the Council of Europe . The Federal Republic was a non-member of the European Union in 1950 .
 The German Federal Republic achieved full sovereignty and diplomatic respectability, joining NATO in 1955 . The country joined the NATO alliance in 1955 and joined the European Union in 1986 .
 West Berliners looking across the mined ‘death strip’ intended to discourage East Berliners from attempting to cross into the western zone, before the construction of the Berlin Wall .
 He remained, for all practical purposes, head of state until forced retirement in 1971 . He was forced to step down from power in 1972 .
 GDR took over the administration of the eastern zone in 1955 from the Soviets . The GDR continued to follow Soviet instructions from the Soviet Union .
 Many writers and artists left for West Germany, although the talented playwright Bertolt Brecht remained . Brecht was one of the most famous playwrights in Germany .
 The states of Eastern Europe fell under the domination of Soviet-backed Communist parties . As the Red Army stood near, Eastern Europe was under the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Union at first went along with the tide of Eastern European nationalism, supporting, for example, the annexation of Transylvania by Romania, at the expense of Hungary .
 During 1945-1946, coalition governments (in which Communists participated) took over large estates and distributed land to peasants, transferring about half of the land of Poland and a third of that of Hungary .
 From the beginning, parties that had collaborated with the Nazis and other right-wing groups were excluded from power . Right-wing parties that collaborated with Nazis were excluded in power . From the start of the Nazi era, they were excluded .
 The Communists eliminated coalition partners, as in Czechoslovakia and Hungary, including socialist and peasant agrarian parties, or absorbed them . The Communists also absorbed or absorbed all of their coalition partners .
 Coalition governments elected or otherwise constituted at the end of the war disappeared one by one until the Communists controlled each state . Thus, coalition governments elected at end of war disappeared by one .
 In neighboring Romania, King Michael was forced out in similar circumstances . King Michael forced out of his post in Romania . King was forced to step down in 2011 .
 Bulgarian Communists won a contested victory in a plebiscite that established a “Peoples Republic,” which quickly became a single-party state . Bulgaria quickly became one of the world's most single partyless states .
 Communists gradually pushed aside the Socialists, who constituted the other major party . After the first election in post-war Poland, no party had collaborated with the Germans .
 Communist governments controlled bureaucracies that increased in size with state management of the economy . Thereafter, Communist governments control the bureaucracies and implemented strict censorship .
 The Communists benefited from the fact that the Nazis had decimated the political elites of Eastern Europe and the Balkans during the war . In what were rapidly becoming Soviet "satellite" states, the Communists benefited . The Communists were able to take advantage of the loss of political elites in Eastern Europe
 Czechoslovakia alone in Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans had not become a dictatorship between the wars . 1133 Czechsoslovakia was one of only two countries in the world not to have a dictatorship .
 Communists won more than a third of the vote in the first post-war elections there in May 1946 . In May 1946, Communists won the first elections in the country .
 Eduard Benes and Jan Masaryk (18861948) served as president and foreign minister, respectively, in a coalition government . Two non-Communists served as presidents and foreign ministers in the late 1800s .
 In 1948, Communists seized power, shutting down other political parties . But in 1948, they shut down other parties, shutting them down .
 Stalin engineered purges that swept away even loyal party members in the Eastern European nations . Stalin engineered the purges from Moscow, Russia, to sweep them away .
 Political arrests in Hungary have been estimated at 200,000, at 180,000 in Romania, and 80,000 are in Albania . Political arrests have been made in Hungary and Romania .
 Widely publicized trials (including those of popular Catholic prelates in Hungary and Czechoslovakia) followed . Prison sentences, labor camps, and many executions followed .
 Purges included not only fascists but many Social Democrats and even Communists thought to oppose Stalinism . The purges included many thought to be anti-Stalinists .
 Stalin tightened Moscow’s grip on the 14 non-Russian republics in the Soviet Union, purging ‘bourgeois nationalists” in several of them . Stalin also tightened the grip of the fourteen non-Russia republics .
 The Soviet Union and Its Satellites in the Post-War Era . Rebuilding the Soviet economy after World War II was a monumental task .
 After the Soviet Union’s decidedly Pyrrhic victory, those who had managed to flee the war zones returned to devastated cities . Those who managed to escape the war zone were forced to return home .
 Successive years of harvest failure from 1946 to 1947 compounded the extreme suffering of the farmers .
 The highly centralized planning of the fourth Five-Year Plan, which began in 1945, allowed the Soviets to concentrate on key industries like coal and steel .
 Soviet planners benefited from the commandeering of industrial capital goods from Germany and Eastern Europe . The Soviet planners were able to commandeer the capital goods they needed .
 Large-scale industrial production exceeded pre-war levels in 1950 by a comfortable margin . However, such results were only modestly reflected in the quality of life of Soviet citizens . Soviet citizens were less fortunate in 1950 .
 Communist states of Eastern Europe benefited from Soviet technological assistance . Once they recovered from being forced to contribute resources to Soviet economic growth and from buying Soviet products at inflated prices .
 The West had to export raw materials and manufactured goods to the Soviet Union at below market prices . Yet they were prevented from importing technology from the West . The West was not allowed to import technology from Russia and had to import raw materials .
 In 1949, the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies formed the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance . The Council sought to coordinate economic planning . The Soviet Union joined Eastern Europe in 1949 .
 Industrial production rose most rapidly in Eastern Europe in the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia . Industrial production was most rapid in the former Czech Republic .
 Before Soviet occupation, the eastern zone of Germany had had a small industrial base . This industrial infrastructure had suffered the Soviet extraction of raw materials and machinery .
 The collectivization of industrial production then proceeded rapidly, and by 1952 the state employed three of every four workers . By 1952, the state had employed 3 of every 4 workers .
 East Germany emerged with the strongest economy of the Soviet Union’s Eastern bloc . Only Hungary boasted a similar standard of living by the 1960s . Despite the loss of many skilled workers to the German Federal Republic, East Germany remained strong .
 Steel production and shipbuilding expanded rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s . The German Democratic Republic fulfilled its assigned role in the Soviet government’s plan for economic development in Communist states .
 East German conditions of life seemed more attractive in West Germany . However, to many East Germans, conditions were more attractive to West Germany.
 Hundreds of thousands of people voted with their feet and left for West Germany . West Germany was ruled by West Germany in the early 1950s .
 The planned economies of the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies could count some accomplishments . But adequate attention to the desires of their citizens was not one of them, says historian .
 The Soviet gross national product, which had stood at 36 percent of that of the United States in 1957, rose to about 50 percent in 1962 . In the subsequent decades, it edged closer in the subsequent two decades . The United States and the Soviet Union edged closer .
 The housing shortage remained acute into the 1960s, and families still had long waits for better apartments . Families still had to wait for better housing .
 Stalin promoted economic growth in the Communist states of Eastern Europe . Economic policies furthered a division of labor whereby some of the Soviet satellite states produced agricultural products .
 The Soviet Union used Eastern European economies to further Soviet economic interests through unfavorable trade arrangements . The Soviets used these arrangements to further their economic interests .
 The states of Eastern Europe launched five-year plans based on the Soviet model in 1949 . Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia in 1949 were the first countries to follow the model . The Czech Republic and Bulgaria were the last two countries to join the model in the 1950s .
 Consumer goods of all kinds were de-emphasized until the mid-1950s . Consumer goods were sacrificed to drive for heavy industrialization that gave birth to enormous plants that produced steel and iron .
 The collectivization of agriculture began in earnest, but this at first sharply reduced productivity . Collectivization was first to reduce productivity in agriculture .
 Hundreds of thousands of peasants in Eastern Europe resisted by rebellion, arson, sabotage, and simply by dragging their feet . Like peasants in the Soviet Union during the early 1930s, hundreds of thousands resisted .
 By the mid-1960s, state farms accounted for more than 80 percent of the land in the German Democratic Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, and Czechoslovakia . By the 1960s, the land was covered by state farms .
 In Poland, more than 85 percent of the land remained in private hands . The Polish Communist leadership feared open popular resistance to massive agricultural collectivization . In sharp contrast, in sharp contrast to Poland, the Communist Party feared open resistance .
 Tito refused to permit Soviet domination of his multinational country . Tito was a Communist leader who refused to allow Soviet domination in his country .
 Yugoslavia received millions of dollars in Western aid over the next decades . Yugoslavia was one of the most successful countries in the world . Yugoslavia's economy was heavily dependent on oil and gas .
 The Yugoslav economy remained “mixed” in the sense that the private sector coexisted with state planning . The private sector and state planning were closely intertwined in Yugoslavia's economy .
 Workers were permitted more self-administration through workers’ councils or committees . Workers were allowed to self-associate themselves with the government . Workers also allowed to use the power of the state to make decisions .
 In the 1950s, the collectivization of agriculture, which had begun after the war, was abandoned, with farmers retaking their old plots . In the 1960s, farmers were forced to retrace old plots to reclaim the land .
 Yugoslavia’s economy improved, despite shortages and great inequalities among its six republics . Yugoslavia's economy improved despite shortages, despite great inequalities . Yugoslavia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 The ruthless Lavrenty Beria used a gold-plated phone to order arrests . The ruthless head of the omnipresent secret police used it to order arrest .
 Between 1948 and 1952, some prominent Jewish intellectuals and artists were tried and executed or simply disappeared . Some were targeted because some were believed to have had contacts with the West .
 Beria's subsequent arrest, trial, and execution signaled an end to the Stalinist period . Beria’s subsequent arrest and trial, trial and execution, signaled the end to Stalinist era . The death of Beria signaled the beginning of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union entered a period of “collective leadership,” a concept that had been abandoned during Stalin’s personal dictatorship . The Soviet U.S. entered a era of ‘collective leaders’ in the Soviet Union .
 He was part of a “technocratic” faction, but he was also a successful party organizer, he says . He says he was a party organizer and was a successful leader .
 In 1955, Khrushchev, with support from within the Soviet bureaucracy, won the upper hand in his struggle with Malenkov for power . The two men were involved in the struggle for power in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev concentrated on planning and investing in Soviet agriculture, a sector that had never recovered from the effects of forced collectivization . While maintaining an emphasis on heavy industry he also concentrated on investing in agriculture .
 He understood that the production of consumer goods would have to take a more prominent place in economic planning . He said he understood that consumer goods must have a bigger role in the economy .
 The Soviet people were largely unaware of the power struggles fought in secrecy within the Kremlin . The power struggles were fought in secret in the Soviet Union .
 Western ‘sovietologists’ charted the waxing and waning of party leaders’ authority by their ranking or the omission of their names on official lists, or by their placement among the gray heads on the giant reviewing stand in Red Square during the annual May Day military parade
 Such direct criticism was unprecedented in the history of the Soviet Union . Such criticism has never been allowed to be tolerated in Soviet history .
 Khrushchev accepted the fact that different paths to socialism could exist in different countries . He accepted the idea that different countries could have different paths .
 He allowed national republics within the Soviet Union more authority over their own affairs . He allowed intellectuals and artists in the republics more freedom to develop non-Russian cultural interests .
 A brief relaxation of censorship permitted the publication of books that offered brutally frank critiques of the Stalin years . The censorship was relaxed in the 1930s and '60s .
 The party’s authority over the republics remained for the most part in the hands of ethnic Russians . The party's authority over republics was largely in the hand of ethnic Russian .
 The novel was published in Italy and won the Nobel Prize for literature . It offered a nuanced picture of tsarist Russia and implicitly stood as a criticism of the Soviet regime .
 Soviet artists and filmmakers, too, were reined in, but some remained daring and imaginative within the confines of official toleration . Some of the most daring films in Soviet history were made in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev blamed the failure on excessive centralization of planning and administration . The Soviet Union's economic difficulties continued .
 Khrushchev ousted Malenkov, Vyacheslav Molotov, and the premier, Nikolai Bulganin, from key party positions in 1957 . In 1957, the prime minister and prime minister were ousted from the party .
 Since World War II, the economic transformations in Europe have engendered several major social changes . Europe's economic transformation in Europe has engendered numerous social changes in the past .
 Trade and technology led to an increasing interconnectedness and interdependence of global economies . The world's economies are becoming more and more interconnected .
 The workforce changed as the percentage of population working the land fell sharply . More and more women began to work outside the home in careers that had traditionally been off-limits to them .
 Consumerism began to thrive, and goods that might have been considered luxury items just a few decades earlier became readily available . Consumerism grew in the 1970s and '90s, when it was considered luxury goods .
 George Orwell summed up the general feeling when he wrote, “Since about 1930, the world had given no reason for optimism whatsoever.” George Orwell .
 Unlike the period immediately following World War I, few people now believed that another total war was inconceivable .
 Claiming ‘alienation’ from society they increasingly criticized, many Western intellectuals withdrew into introspection . Claimed “alienation from the society they . increasingly criticized . Western intellectuals withdraw from Western society and withdraw from society .
 For some, communism still seemed to offer a plan for the harmonious organization of society . However, for some, it seemed that communism still offered a plan .
 French existentialism became an influential cultural current during the first two decades following the war . The French existentialist movement was influential in France during the early years of the Second World War .
 Jean-Paul Sartre believed that in the wake of the unparalleled destruction of World War II, the absurdity of life was the most basic discovery one could make . The French philosopher believed in the aftermath of the destruction of the war that destroyed the planet .
 existentialists like Sartre posited that life has no meaning . Denying the existence of God, existentialists said that life should not have a meaning .
 Their conclusion was that a person could only truly find any fulfillment while living “a suspended death” by becoming aware of his or her freedom to choose and to act . Their conclusion: A person only truly finds any fulfillment .
 Sartre titled one of his plays Huis clos (No Exit) as he believed there was nothing beyond this life . He believed there were no exits in his plays .
 Sartres novels glorify the individual spirit seeking freedom, not through Enlightenment rationalism, but rather through a comprehension of life’s irrationality . The author's work is published in France and Germany .
 Sartre believed that violent revolution could free the individual from the human condition by allowing him or her to find truth by redefining reality . However, he also believed that a violent revolution would allow him to redefine reality .
 Exterminism slowly lost its grip on French intellectual life, at least in part because of growing disillusionment with the Soviet Union among many leftist intellectuals . However, existentialism slowly regained its grip in France in the 1980s .
 Albert Camus broke with Sartre in 1952 over his enthusiasm for Stalin's Soviet Union . The Algerian-born French writer shared the view of mankind’s tragic situation, but broke with the latter in 1952 .
 Camus’s answer to the dark world of brutality reflected by the war (during which he participated in the resistance) and the frustrations of the post-war period was for the individual to search for meaning in life by choosing a path of action .
 The rebel should act from a personal sense of responsibility and moral choice independent of belief in God or in a political system, says Camus . Camus: The rebel is a person who makes a moral choice independently of belief or political system .
 Dr. Frida Ghitis: The arrival of murderous disease in the Algerian city of Oran . Dr. Ghitis is the author of a new book, The World Health Atlas .
 Camus's The Plague is the central figure in Camus’s The Plague . Rieux does not believe in God or absolute standards of morality, but he nonetheless helps people respond to the epidemic .
 The “theater of the absurd” was centered in Paris from 1948 to about 1968 . It reflected intellectuals’ reaction to the horrors of the war, which also reflected intellectuals' reaction to it .
 The Irish-born Samuel Beckett and other playwrights sought to shock audiences with provocative themes . Beckett stringed together seemingly unrelated events and dialogue to demonstrate that existence is without purpose—absurd .
 Their clownish, mechanical characters are perpetual exiles alienated in a bizarre, nightmarish world that makes no sense . The show is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 They meet night after night in anticipation of the arrival of a certain Godot . It's never clear what difference in their lives his arrival would ever make, if any .
 Anti-Americanism emerged as a current among many European intellectuals in the post-war period . Anti-U.S. nationalism emerged among European intellectuals .
 The United States placement of nuclear weapons in Western Europe, beginning in West Germany in 1955, generated both anti-nuclear organizations and protests . The U.S. placed nuclear weapons on Western Europe in 1955 .
 Intellectuals criticized United States culture as reeking of vulgar materialism . Intellectuals also criticized U.S. culture as being vulgar materialistic .
 There was an economic dimension to this struggle, as U.S. companies and products dramatically augmented their presence in Western Europe . The struggle was economic, as United States companies and . products dramatically increased their presence .
 During the early 1950s, the French government feared the competition that Coke could give the wine industry . Coke was banned in France during the 1950s .
 French government tried to keep Coke from the French market without success . The French government was encouraged by the powerful wine lobby . Coke has been banned from the country for decades .
 Europe continued to embrace some aspects of U.S. culture . Yet Europe also embraced some elements of United States culture .
 World War II brought only a brief hiatus in the export to Europe of Hollywood films, which audiences flocked to see . Hollywood films were exported to Europe only a few years later .
 Western European filmmakers made important contributions to cinema . Western European films were made in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman turned out serious art films . While most American film producers emphasized light entertainment . Fellini (La Strada, 1956, and La Dolce Vita , 1959) and Bergman (The Seventh Seal, 1956)
 French New Wave directors, including Jean-Luc Godard and Francois Truffaut, rebelled against traditional cinematographic techniques, using innovations such as jump cuts and disruptive editing .
 The experimental films explored human relationships and often portrayed antiheroes . Their experimental films explore human relationships . The films were often considered experimental .
 Marcel Orphuls’s documentary about collaboration and resistance in World War II France, The Sorrow and the Pity, helped spur the rethinking of the extent of French collaboration with the Nazis during the Vichy years . The documentary is based on the work of Marcel Or
 Intellectuals of the left were preoccupied by the possibilities of social liberation . Intellectuals had been preoccupied with the possibilities for social liberation in the past .
 Claude Levi-Strauss espoused cultural relativism, moving anthropology away from a Western-centered view of “peripheral’s or “underdeveloped” regions with his work on Brazil and Southeast Asia . The French anthropologist moved away from the Western view of
 Levi-Strauss’s interest in how communities behave, too, led away from the emphasis on the individual that characterized both Freudianism and existentialism, he says . The interest in communities led him to focus on how communities behaved .
 Writers, artists, and filmmakers confronted a state apparatus that made the costs of free expression so high that voluntary adherence to state-dictated norms followed . Writers and artists confronted the state apparatus, which made the cost of free speech so high .
 Stalin gave official approval to the crackpot theories of the geneticist Trofim Lysenko . Lysenko insisted that knowledge or beliefs that were experienced were experienced . 1140 Ch. Ch. 1140 was published in Moscow .
 Stalin’s particular interest in this theory was that it suggested that party members who learned official orthodoxy and experienced conformity in social behavior would pass on the same characteristics to their offspring . Stalin's particular interest was that .
 In the decades following World War II, the status of women in Europe gradually improved . Their situation varied across the continent, although their situation varied .
 Women lost some skilled jobs to men returning from service after the war . Economic expansion and the creation of more white-collar jobs provided new employment possibilities .
 Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex helped mobilize movements for the rights of women in the U.S. and, more slowly, in Europe .
 In Western countries, it is difficult to continue to deny half the population the right to vote . The important contribution of working women made it difficult to deny women the vote, women's rights to vote in the UK .
 After the war, women received the suffrage in France, Italy, Belgium, and Portugal . Women were allowed to vote in many of the world's countries .
 Women were more equal in the countries of the Soviet bloc (where there were no free elections) in terms of employment opportunities . Women bore the dual burden of wage earning and domestic duties in Soviet bloc countries .
 In the Soviet Union and Sweden, women made up more than half of all employees . More than a third in every European country, women make up a third of employees .
 In Western Europe, more and more middle-class women began to work full-time . Women in Western Europe are now more likely to be women in the workforce .
 French women no longer needed husbands’ permission to work . Beginning in 1977, French women began to work in France without husbands' permission .
 In Communist countries, women more easily entered the medical profession, but men dominated the state bureaucracies . Women were more easily able to enter the profession in Communist countries than men .
 Women were most successful in reaching rough equality in the Scandinavian countries . But in the Mediterranean lands, traditional biases remained difficult to overcome .
 At the same time, the number of female university students rose dramatically . The number of women in the professions also rose dramatically in the 1990s . The rise in women in university and the professions has also increased .
 Women received legal protection against job discrimination in England in the late 1960s . In France, the government created a Ministry for the Status of Women in France .
 Feminism, reviving during the 1968 protests, helped the cause of women’s rights . Feminism was revived in the wake of the women's rights movement in 1968 .
 Gay and lesbians gained more rights beginning in the 1970s, even if some countries retained laws permitting discrimination against them .
 Catholicism in Modern Europe has been a major force in European life for centuries . The Catholic Church has been forced to confront pressure for change in Europe .
 Within the Catholic Church, a liberal current of thought and action developed in response to some of the social problems of modern life . The liberal side of the church has been described by some as a 'modern problem'
 The election in 1958 of the more liberal Pope John XXIII signaled a new direction . It was marked by the opening of dialogue with other religions . The election of John XXII signaled a change of direction .
 Pope John presided over council that undertook significant changes in Church practices . Mass to be said in local languages and appointing more cardinals from other places than Europe and North America .
 Pope John s successor Paul VI continued the move toward ecumenism, visiting Istanbul and Jerusalem to meet with leaders of the Eastern Orthodox churches .
 Several notable theologians who challenged Church doctrine drew the wrath of Rome . Rome was angered by several theologians challenging Church doctrine .
 Paul died in 1978, as did his successor, John Paul I, after only two months on the throne of Saint Peter .
 The new pope traveled far and wide across the world, calling for social justice . While remaining conservative on matters of faith and doctrine, the new pope remained conservative . Pope Francis was elected to the papacy in 2009 .
 Percentage of Catholics practicing their religion fell rapidly in France, Italy, and Spain . The Catholic Church retained particular allegiance in Poland, Croatia, Portugal, and Ireland .
 Even solidly Catholic countries legalized divorce, despite ecclesiastical opposition . Yet even these solidly Catholic nations legalized divorce .
 An industrial chaplain speaks with a factory worker in Scotland, in an effort to liberalize the Catholic Church and bring it into modern life . The Catholic Church in Scotland is liberalizing and modernizing .
 In the German industrial Rhineland, it became difficult to tell where one city ended and another began . In the Rhine, Germany's industrial Rhine was known for its industrialism .
 In Eastern Europe, the population living in cities increased from 37. million at the end of the 1940s to 58 million twenty years later . Eastern Europe's population of cities rose from 37 million in the 1950s to a population of 58 million .
 The necessity of housing millions of new urban residents contributed to a uniformity of architectural style . The necessity to house millions of people contributed to the uniformity .
 Tall, drab, uniform towers filled with small apartments sprang up in and around major urban centers, providing adequate lodging, but not much more, in cramped quarters with thin walls .
 By the 1980s, almost 20 percent of the French population resided in Paris and its surroundings . By the 1990s, Paris was home to the largest city in France .
 Only about 3 million lived in the City of Light itself, the rest in sprawling suburbs . Of this 20 percent of population, only 3 million live in the city itself .
 In the early 1960s, the Soviets began to build new suburbs and satellite towns to accommodate the population seeking to live in Moscow . Moscow's population grew from 2 million in 1926 to more than 5 million in 1959 .
 Leningrad’s population increased from 1. million to 3. million during the same period . The city's population grew from 1 million to 1.5 million during that period . Leninggrad's population rose from 1million to 3million .
 Rapid urban growth, closely tied to the concentration of large-scale industries, posed problems of health and safety . Health and safety is a key concern for the city .
 The number of cars on the road increased from 5 million in 1948 to 44 million in 1965 . In 1965, 44 million cars were on the roads in Germany .
 The construction of new freeways and toll roads could not begin to keep up with the increase in traffic . New roads and bridges could not be built to cope with the growing traffic .
 The traffic jam in Europe began, as cities became increasingly clogged with automobiles, which also polluted the air . The traffic jams began in Europe in the 1970s, when cities began to be more clogged .
 Projects of urban renewal enhanced the quality of life in cities and towns . Nonetheless, projects of urban . renewal enhanced . quality of . life in towns .
 West German, Belgian, French, and Dutch cities sported shining urban centers . Some streets reserved for pedestrians tired of dodging onrushing cars and the aggressive chaos of honking horns .
 The transportation and communications revolutions made the world a much smaller place . Living Better: The world is now a very small place .
 With a gradual reduction in the workday and higher wages, families have more time and money for leisure . Families had more time to spend than ever before, according to the study .
 Air travel gradually linked European cities to each other and to other continents . Air travel was first introduced to Europe in the 1930s .
 With the introduction of the passenger jet in the late 1950s, the airplane replaced the passenger ship for cross-Atlantic travel . The plane replaced the ship for the first time in the 1950s .
 The rapid rise of international tourism offers another example of economic globalization . International tourism is one of the fastest-growing industries in the world .
 Jumbo jets greatly increased the number of passengers who could be squeezed into a single plane, reducing the cost of tickets . Jumbo planes were used to carry more passengers than planes in the 1970s .
 Tourists from the U.S. and, beginning in the 1980s, from Japan, arrived in Europe in droves . Changing Contours of Life 1143 is changing the way Europeans look at life .
 North American, Asian, and African destinations became more common for Europeans . European travel was more common in the 1990s and 2000s . North American and Asian destinations were more common .
 An aging fleet, a disastrous crash near a Paris airport, and years of financial losses ended supersonic travel by Concorde in 2003 . However, an aging fleet and financial losses led to Concorde's demise . Concorde was the last aircraft to fly in the world of superson
 High-speed trains began service in France in 1981 . Far more successful, the first high-speed train service began in 1981 in France .
 In 1994, the ‘Chunnel’ opened, a thirty-mile tunnel linking France and Great Britain by trains running under the English Channel . The tunnel puts London little more than two hours away from Paris and Brussels .
 Millions of Europeans began to take to the road in July and August in the 1960s . Many heading toward the sunny beaches of southern Europe in the summer .
 Tourism became essential to the economies of France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, and Greece . Paid vacations became an expected part of the “good life’s”
 American consumerism and popular culture found increasing favor in European societies . U.S. consumerism found to be popular in Europe's most populous countries .
 Tennis shoes and tee-shirts swept Europe, and so did American television shows . Tennis shoes, tee-shirt and tennis shirts were popular in Europe .
 By the late 1970s, McDonalds had begun to dot European capitals and gradually smaller cities as well . McDonalds began to dot Europe's major cities in the 1970s .
 EuroDisney (now called Disneyland-Paris) opened its doors outside of Paris in the 1980s . EuroDisney opened in the same year as Disneyland in Paris, France .
 In the first decade of the new century, Starbuck's cafes began to arrive in Europe in increasing numbers .
 Communications also underwent an amazing revolution in Europe as well as elsewhere . Communications also became more widespread in Europe and beyond .
 Household telephones became more common in the 1960s in most of Western Europe . Household phone use became more widespread in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Forty years later, cell phones had taken over, increasingly putting telephone booths out of business . Cell phones had become increasingly popular in the United States .
 The cost of transatlantic phone calls fell rapidly with the advent of optical fiber in the 1980s . Optical fiber is now used to make calls in the United States and Europe .
 The computer revolution and the Internet put the world of information at the fingertips of Europeans, as well as people almost everywhere . Then in the 1990s the computer revolution put the Internet and computer revolution into the 21st century .
 Television helped shape a mass consumer culture, catapulting entertainers to fame and making household names of politicians who could be heard instead of simply imagined . TV helped shape the world's consumer culture .
 By the late 1960s, a majority of Western European households had a television . By the mid-1970s, relatively 1144 Ch. 1144 was the most popular television show in the world .
 CNN began its global reach in the mid-1980s . CNN is now a global network that reaches across the world .
 During the first years after the war, Europeans read more—and arguably better—newspapers than ever before or since . Europe read more, arguably better, than ever in the early years after WWII .
 As Europeans increasingly received their news and entertainment from television and radio, many newspapers merged and many folded . Many newspapers folded as Europeans increasingly got their news from TV and radio .
 An increasing number of tabloid papers relied upon sensationalism, scandals, and the proclamation of juicy unsubstantiated rumor as truth to attract readers . With the exception of the stately, serious dailies like Le Monde of Paris, the British Manchester Guardian and the German Frankfurter
 In the Soviet Union, the state was the only source of printed news . More than 7 million copies of Pravda were printed every day in the USSR . In the USSR, state was state news source .
 Credit cards and then personal computers transformed the way people make purchases . Personal computers and credit cards have been used to make purchases for years .
 The advent of computer viruses demonstrated the extent to which the world has become increasingly interconnected . In the context of the ongoing revolution in communications, the advent of the virus shows how interconnected the world is now .
 The apparent vulnerability of even the most sophisticated computer systems to hackers has led to fears for national security systems . National security systems are thought to be vulnerable to hackers .
 The Six-Day Arab-Israeli War of 1967 and the 1973 Yom Kippur War both resulted in easy Israeli victories over their Arab rivals . Oil and the global economy are key to the success of the oil industry in the world .
 Israel now holds all of Jerusalem, a holy city for Christians, Jews, and Arabs . Israel now occupies the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and occupied the Gaza strip .
 The plight of the stateless Palestinian people has attracted the attention of Arab states, in particular . The U.S. has almost always supported Israeli actions, but has not always supported Israel .
 The Arab oil embargo led to a rapid rise in the price of oil and contributed to the high inflation that undermined Western economies for the rest of the 1970s . The high inflation in Western economies was the result of the embargo .
 Some European countries, especially France, had already begun to develop nuclear installations to generate more energy .
 The oil crisis helped bring an end to what had been a long period of relative prosperity and stability . The crisis was the end of a decade of prosperity in Saudi Arabia .
 The subsequent rising energy prices undermined British motorists waiting for gasoline during the Arab oil embargo in 1973 . British motorists waited for gasoline in 1973 during the embargo .
 The sign on the left indicates that French motorists are welcome to wait as well . The sign also indicates that drivers are allowed to wait in France .
 The oil crisis also helped cause the economic recession that gripped Western Europe from the mid-1970s to mid-1980s . The crisis was also the cause of Western Europe's economic recession .
 Inflation had been at modest levels during the 1950s and 1960s but had been accentuated by the U.S. war in Vietnam . Inflation then began to soar. Inflation, which had been modest levels, then soared .
 The oil embargo brought unemployment, which also strained European welfare budgets . Oil embargo also strained Europe's welfare budgets, with unemployment .
 World War II engendered two major changes that largely defined international politics for the next decades . Conclusion: The end of the war and the end of WWII engendered major changes in international politics .
 The post-war division of Europe into zones of U.S. influence in the West and Soviet domination in the East brought a Cold War between the two superpowers . Western European states, Soviet Eastern European and Balkan satellites, and socalled Third World, or unaligned countries,
 Second, sacrifices made by the colonies of the European great powers during the war—including military service and considerable loss of life—encouraged national liberation movements . Third, sacrifice made by colonies of Europe's great powers in the war encouraged liberation movements.
 These movements and the resistance they encountered from colonial powers led to a dramatic period of decolonization . These movements led to the introduction of democracy and freedom of expression .
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the Western Allies quickly degenerated into a ‘Cold War’ that on several occasions threatened to become a hot one, and potentially even a nuclear war . The Cold War was the Cold War between the Soviets and the Allies .
 Second, the end of the war accelerated movements for independence in the colonies of the imperial powers . Third, the result of the conflict accelerated independence movements for the colonies .
 During the first two decades following World War II, most of the colonies of the Western powers achieved independence . Sometimes after protracted wars of independence, some of these were fought in protracted wars .
 It greatly expanded the number of sovereign states, particularly in Asia and Africa . The treaty was signed in 1903 and signed by Russia and Ukraine .
 The Cold War and the process of decolonization were linked, as the Western Powers and the Soviet Union and China both sought to make their influence predominant in emerging post-colonial states . The process was linked to the Cold War .
 Churchill lamented that ‘an iron curtain was drawn down upon their front’ In a speech in March 1946, Churchill lamented the ‘iron curtain’ had been drawn down on their front .
 As Europe counted its millions of dead, hot war gave way to the Cold War between East and West .
 The Red Army’s drive into Central Europe in the waning months of the war had left part of Central Europe and Eastern Europe and the Balkans under Soviet domination .
 The division of Europe into two camps was formalized by the creation of corresponding military alliances after the war . Western democracies, under the influence of the U.S., were under the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Union rapidly added to its military arsenal, soon having the second largest navy in the world . At the same time, the Soviet Union added to the military arsenal .
 The failure of the Soviet, British, French, and U.S. foreign ministers to agree on the nature of a peace treaty with Germany in the spring of 1947 began the Cold War .
 In 1943 Stalin officially announced the end of the Comintern, which had been established with the goal of fomenting worldwide revolution, inaugurated its successor organization, the Cominform . That year Stalin had in 1943 officially announced that he had officially ended the organization .
 In 1949, the Soviet-occupied eastern zone of Germany became the German Democratic Republic . The American, British, and French occupation zones of Germany were the German Federal Republic . In 1950, the occupied eastern zone became Germany's first republic .
 The barbed wire and minefields that divided these zones reflected the ideological division between them . The minefields reflect the ideological divisions between the two sides .
 Both the Soviet Union and the Western powers worked quickly to create intelligence agencies of great size to spy on each other . In the meantime, both the Soviets and Western powers created spy agencies of their own .
 Each international crisis between the Soviet Union and the U.S. took on great significance because scientists had developed bombs many . The United States airlift to Berlin, 1948—1949 .
 Cold War 1149 times more destructive than those that had leveled Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Cold War was 11.49 times as destructive as those that leveled Hiroshima, Nagasaki. Cold War had been 1149 more destructive .
 During the 1950s, children in the U.S. participated in mock air raid drills, putting their heads between their knees to practice bracing for the shock of a nuclear explosion .
 The United States and the Soviet Union drew up plans to evacuate American and Soviet leaders into elaborate shelters from which they could order the launching of more missiles and bombs . The U.S. and Soviet Union planned to evacuate leaders from their shelters .
 Cold War focused on a series of crises that, drawing world attention, exacerbated tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cold War was dominated by the Cold War .
 The Soviet Union claimed that the Western Allies had unilaterally broken agreements reached at the Potsdam Conference . The Western Allies were defeated by the Soviet Union in the war .
 In July 1948, Soviet troops blocked trains and truck routes through the Soviet zone of occupation in East Germany to prevent supplies from reaching the Allied half of Berlin . The blockade was the first time supplies were blocked by Soviet troops .
 The Allies began a massive airlift of supplies to West Berlin . Planes landed in Berlin every three minutes, bringing much-needed food, medicine, and other necessities .
 After secret negotiations, Stalin backed down, allowing trucks to roll through the German Democratic Republic beginning in 1949, the year of that state’s creation .
 The Soviet Union held to an agreement made with Churchill in 1944 not to intervene militarily . But it provided the Com munists with considerable material assistance .
 Mao’s Communist forces gradally pushed the nationalist forces out of China . In the civil war that followed, Mao's Communist forces pushed the nationalists out of the country . Mao's communist forces grad ually pushed out of .
 In full retreat by 1949 Chiang Kai-shek’s army occupied the large island of Formosa . There Chiang established a government that claimed to represent all o China .
 On the mainland, Mao proclaimed the People s Republic of China . The Soviet Union quickly recognized the new, giant Communist state . The United States recognized the nationalist government of Taiwan as a China’s legitimate government .
 In the atmosphere of the Cold War, the U.S. worried they would be facing a unified Commu nist front that included China . The United States and its allies worried that a unified front would include China .
 Korea had a Communist ‘people’ republic’ in the north, supported by the Soviet Union, and in the south, a republic created under the patronage of the United States . The Korean War was the Cold War of Korea .
 In June 1950, North Korean troops, upon Stalin’s go-ahead, invaded the southern zone . North Korea invaded the south zone in June 1950 .
 General Douglas MacArthur took command of the United States forces defending South Korea . U.N. resolution had passed a resolution condemning the Communist invasion of Korea .
 For the first time—with the exception of events in Greece—Communist and non-Communist forces engaged in open warfare, a conflict fought with conventional weapons, but with nuclear bombs lurking in the background . The first time in decades, the conflict was fought in a war fought with
 United States forces pushed back Communist forces in 1951 . Although Chinese troops were aiding the northern side, U.S. forces pushed them back .
 To the Allies, the war raised the outside possibility of a Soviet-led invasion of the German Federal Republic, similar to that launched by North Korean troops against South Korea .
 Following Stalin’s death in 1953, East German workers complained loudly about high quotas, low wages, and food shortages . Following Stalin's death, East Germans complained about quotas and low wages .
 East German Communist government realized that state planning had to provide more consumer goods . The East German communist government realized it had to do more to make consumer goods available . The state planning state planning was a success in Germany .
 The Soviet Union sent material assistance to the German Democratic Republic . It wrote off most of the war reparations owed from the eastern zone . Most of the reparations were written off .
 More consumer goods gradually became available in the 1960s . Despite inadequate housing, few automobiles, and occasional food shortages, more consumer goods became available . The 1960s were the most prosperous period of American history .
 Long rows of drab apartments sprang up near the Brandenburg Gate that divided East and West Berlin . East Berlin was divided between the two parts of the city .
 State-sponsored clubs for children provided recreation, as well as ideological indoctrination . The clubs were state-sponsored by the state, providing recreation and ideological training .
 East Germany began in the late 1960s to produce athletes of great accomplishment in international sporting events, particularly in swimming and track and field . Through intensive training and programming, some of the athletes used steroids .
 Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin and the ‘thaw’ in foreign and domestic policies had repercussions in Eastern Europe in 1956 . In 1956, the Soviet Union had begun a "thaw"
 The Communist government of Poland reined in the secret police and gave amnesty to thousands of political prisoners in 1968 . That year the Communist government in Poland gave amnesty for political prisoners . In 1968, the government reined down secret police in Poland .
 In October 1956, Wladyslaw Gomulka returned from oblivion to head the Polish government by the Polish Politburo . In October . 1956, he was a moderate politician imprisoned during the Stalin era .
 A reformer, Gomulka purged Stalinists and reached accommodation with the enormously influential Polish Catholic Church . He was a reformer .
 Independent peasants held three-quarters of the nation’s arable land, a far greater percentage of privately held farms than in any other country in the Eastern bloc . Independent peasants also held three quarters of the country's arable .
 Gomulka reassured the Soviet Union that Poland had no intention of abandoning the Warsaw Pact or turning its back on socialism . Poland also reassured the Soviets that Poland was not going to abandon the Warsaw pact .
 Soviet concessions to Yugoslavia and Poland encouraged a movement for reform in Hungary . The liberal Communists were already eager to turn their backs on Stalinism .
 Hungarian leader sought to move Hungarian manufacturing away from heavy industry . He had sought to increase production of consumer goods to increase consumer goods .
 Nagy tolerated peasant resistance to the implementation Cold War 1153 of agricultural collectivization . Nagy also tolerated peasants' resistance to implementation of Cold War 113 of collectivizing .
 At the same time, workers’ councils sprung up spontaneously, espousing reform . At the time, the workers' councils sprang up spontaneously and espoused reform . Workers' councils were set up spontaneously .
 In 1955, Nagy’s policies drew opposition from Communist hard-liners, and he was ousted from office . Nagy was ousted in 1955 after his policies were opposed by the Communist Party .
 Intellectuals and students held meetings to discuss possible paths to liberalization . Intellectuals, students and government officials held meetings on Monday .
 A defiant response from the new prime minister led to a demonstration of 50,000 people on October 23, 1956 . The demonstration led to the death of the prime minister, who was assassinated in 1956 .
 Hungarian troops sent to rout the demonstrators refused to fire . Some Hungarian troops joined protesters in some cases joining those protesting communism itself .
 The Hungarian Communist leadership requested Soviet assistance but also named Nagy as prime minister in the hope of ending the demonstrations . That night, Hungarian Communist leaders requested Soviet help . Nagy was the prime minister of Hungary .
 Western radio broadcasts heard in Hungary hint that outside help might be forthcoming, firming popular resolve . Western broadcasts hint at outside help may be forthcoming .
 Nagy named a new coalition government that included liberal Communists . Nagy's government includes liberal Communists. Nagy has been accused of corruption in the past .
 He made clear that he intended to end the one-party system by adding several nonCommunists to his government . He began to negotiate with the Soviet government, but he made clear .
 He called for Hungarian withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact and asked that Soviet troops be removed from his country . Furthermore, he called for withdrawal of Hungarian troops from Soviet Union .
 To the Soviet government, Hungary’s defection was unthinkable because it might spark similar movements in other Eastern European nations and destabilize the republics of the Soviet Union . The Soviet government feared the defection might spark other similar movements, destabilizing the country .
 Nagy announced in November that Hungary would withdraw from the Warsaw Pact . Nagy made the announcement on November 4, 2012 . Hungary withdrew from Warsaw Pact in November 2013 .
 The Soviet government sent tanks and soldiers into Budapest and other major Hungarian cities to crush resistance . While the French, British, and United States governments were preoccupied with the Suez Canal crisis .
 Nagy was tried and executed, along with about 2400 other people, perhaps many more . Nagy's execution was one of the most notorious hangings in the world .
 From 1956 to 1961, almost 400,000 people were found guilty of political crimes . From 1956 through 1961, the country's political crimes were committed by more than 1,000 political prisoners .
 Hungarians fled to Western Europe and the United States . More than 200,000 Hungarians are believed to have fled the country .
 Soviet intervention ended hope that Stalins death might bring about change in Eastern Europe and end the Cold War . Stalin's death ended hope of end of Cold War with Soviet intervention in eastern Europe .
 Radar skillfully liberalized the Communist regime, while remaining careful not to antagonize unnecessarily the Soviet Union with any ideological justification for his policies . Radar successfully liberalized Russia in the long run, while avoiding antagonizing it unnecessarily . Radar: "Radar's liberalization of Soviet Union was
 Hungary’s “goulash communism’’ included market-oriented, decentralized reforms and toleration of some degree of entrepreneurship and profit . Hungary's “Goulash Communism’� included tolerance of some degrees of entrepreneurship, profit .
 The result was a higher standard of living than existed elsewhere in the Communist world . The result of living in the Soviet Union was higher than in other communist countries .
 With their hands full with Hungary, the Soviets were in no position to move aggressively against Poland . The Soviets were not in any position to attack Poland .
 In any case, Gomulka was careful to give them no excuse for military action . In any . case, there was no excuse .
 He gradually rescinded some of the relatively liberal policies, including toleration of free artistic and political toleration . 1154 Ch. 1154 .
 In Yugoslavia, despite its determined independence from the Soviet Union, open political opposition was not tolerated . Open political opposition not tolerated in the country .
 Privileged party officials had become a ruling caste, with little common commonality with ordinary people . Party officials had little in common with ordinary .
 In the meantime, in the Soviet Union the liberal agitation in Poland and the Hungarian Revolution in 1956 threatened Khrushchev’s authority . In the meanwhile, in . the . Soviet Union in the . meantime, the liberal . agitation in . Poland and . the Hungarian revolution in 1956
 Soviet aid to stabilize its Eastern European client states undermined economic development at home . Soviet aid also undermined economic growth at home in Eastern Europe .
 The failure of the Western powers to intervene on behalf of Hungary seemed to legitimize the division of Europe into spheres of influence dominated by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . But, at the same time, the West feared nuclear war with Russia, the Soviets .
 The Soviet leader claimed that ‘peaceful coexistence’ was possible between the two political worlds . He claimed that peaceful coexistence was possible in both worlds .
 In 1955, Khrushchev met with United States President Dwight Eisenhower in Geneva, the first of the ‘summit’ meetings between the two great powers . In 1956, the Soviet-U.S. leader met with U.S., President Eisenhower, President Richard Nixon in
 Soviet foreign policy became less contentious and somewhat more flexible in the 1980s . The Soviet Union's foreign policy was much more flexible than its predecessor .
 The Soviet leader courted India, Egypt, and Syria, as well as a number of smaller states, winning their friendship with technical and material assistance . Looking to the Third World for allies, he courted Egypt, Egypt and Syria .
 Soviet foreign policy was carried out with the aim of detaching countries from the direct influence of the United States . The Soviet policy was aimed at detaching nations from the U.S.
 In 1955, the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies countered NATO, the defense organization of the Western powers, by signing the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact offered its members similar guarantees to those of NATO against attack .
 Warsaw Pact provided a new justification for the stationing of Soviet troops in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany . The Warsaw Pact was a justification for stationing troops in the region .
 Soviet armed intervention in Hungary in 1956 increased mutual suspicion between East and West . Rapid advances in Soviet military science further augmented the rivalry with the West .
 Bilateral negotiations between Cold War 1155 the Soviet Union and the United States to reduce their respective nuclear capabilities failed in 1955 and again in 1958 . Bilateral talks between the U.S. and Soviet Union failed to reach an agreement in 1955 .
 The United States won the race to the moon, when American astronauts landed on the lunar surface in July 1969 . The event was seen by millions on television .
 In May 1960, the Soviets shot down an American U-2 plane taking spy photographs from high over the Soviet Union . The plane was shot down by the Soviets in May 1960 .
 The Soviets demanded an apology for this violation of Soviet air space and received none . The Soviets received no apology from the Soviet Union .
 In 1958, Khrushchev threatened to hand over to East German authorities the administration of all of Berlin, but backed down in the face of Allied intransigence . In 1958 he threatened to turn Berlin over to the East Germans .
 2. million East Germans between 1950 and 1962 left for the West, most to the German Federal Republic . In the meantime, streams of East Germans moved to the West . About 2 million people from the East of Germany left for West in 1950s .
 The exodus included many doctors and other trained specialists vital to East Germany . Doctors and specialists left East Germany in the 1980s .
 Between 1950 and 1964, about 500,000 West Germans moved to the East . Some fled persecution of Communists in the German Federal Republic . Others simply wanted to be with their families .
 On August 17, 1961, Berliners awoke to find East German workers building a wall to divide the eastern sector from the western one . The wall was built in the eastern part of Berlin and the rest of Berlin .
 Ground floor windows that permitted escape from East to West were boarded up . Ground floor window windows that allowed escape from the East to the West were closed in .
 Enforcement was brutal, but relaxation of East German controls allowed Germans on both sides to visit their relatives .
 Guards checked car trunks and even the bottoms of cars looking for hidden passengers trying to escape . Guards checked trunks, even the cars' bottoms, to find hidden passengers . Guards also checked the bottom of the cars to check for hidden people .
 Western tourists climbed stairs to have a look at East German guards staring back from watchtowers behind barbed wire on the other side of the wall .
 Batista’s supporters, with the help of the U.S. military, launched an ill-conceived invasion of 1156 Ch. Ch. Batista . Batista supporters then launched an attack on the island .
 In October 1962, American aerial photographs revealed that Soviet missiles capable of being armed with nuclear warheads were stationed on the island of Cuba .
 The United States government demanded the removal of the missiles and threatened to destroy them if this demand was not met . The U.S. government demanded that the missiles be removed from Syria .
 Experts estimate the chances of a nuclear war at between one-third and one-half, dangerous odds indeed . John F Kennedy's advisers estimated the chance of an outbreak of nuclear war was one- third .
 Debates in the U.N. helped buy time while negotiations proceeded . Debates were held in the United Nations to buy time for negotiations .
 The world breathed a collective sigh of relief as Khrushchev ordered the missiles removed . The world breathes a collective relief when the missiles were removed from the USSR .
 Despite the fact that the United States and Soviet Union both signed a 1963 treaty banning nuclear tests, the arms race had accelerated . Despite the treaty, the U.S. and the Soviet Union continued to engage in a nuclear arms race .
 Soviet and American naval vessels and submarines closely monitored each others movements . Soviet and U.S. naval ships and submarines monitored each other movements .
 The Soviet secret police and the American Central Intelligence Agency spread their well-financed spy networks worldwide . The Soviet Secret Police and the U.S. Central Intelligence. Agency spread its well-funded spy networks .
 Periodic spy scandals occurred in the West, most notably in Britain, where several prominent intellectuals turned out to have been spying for the Soviet Union .
 The growing number of colonies receiving their independence from Britain and France fostered increased competition between the two systems in Africa and Asia .
 By the mid-1960s, the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union spread to Southeast Asia . The U.S. and Soviet Union fought in Southeast Asia in the 1960s .
 In 1964, the United States officially became involved in the civil war in Vietnam . The U.S. became involved with the Vietnam War in 1964 .
 When President Lyndon B Cold War 1157 Johnson announced that an American naval vessel had been attacked off the coast of Vietnam, the U.S. Congress passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution against the North Vietnamese government . In fact, the incident never occurred .
 The United States committed more and more men and material in support of the South Vietnamese government against the North Vietnamese Communist troops of Ho Chi Minh and their allies, the Vietcong .
 The costly American role in the civil war came under increasing opposition at home and in Europe, beginning with university students . The costly U.S. role in civil war in the 1960s and '60s came under increased opposition .
 Vietnam War badly divided public opinion in the United States and strained U.S. relations with its allies . The Vietnam War was a major source of tension in America's post-war efforts .
 The alliance between Mao’s China and the Soviet Union, cemented by the Korean War, began to break apart . Khrushchev and Castro meet in Sino-Soviet Rivalry .
 A common Communist ideology could not gloss over issues of power politics between the two giants . The Communist Party of the 1930s and Soviet Union had a common ideology .
 The two nations shared an immense frontier, but certain border regions had long been claimed by both states . Mongolia was one of the most important border regions in the world .
 Growing Soviet influence in India threatened Chinese relations with the subcontinent . In addition, growing Soviet influence also threatened China's relations with India .
 Khrushchev’s turn away from Stalinism angered Mao, as did the Soviet leaders overtures for support among Asian political leaders . Mao was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev’s policy of peaceful coexistence with the West irritated Mao, who used the perceived threat from the West as a means of pushing the Chinese to make more sacrifices to modernize the economy .
 In China, a ‘cult of personality’ focused on Chairman Mao just as one in the Soviet Union had celebrated Stalin . The cult of personality is similar to that of Stalin in the USSR .
 Stalin’s five-year plans had emphasized heavy industry . Attempts to modernize China's economy had been heavily influenced by Stalin's plans . Furthermore, attempts to modernise China’�s economy had also been influenced .
 At the same time, China underwent rapid, ruthless collectivization of all industrial and agricultural production . The Chinese government was ruthless and ruthless .
 Chinese economic growth made the Chinese less dependent on Soviet technical advisers and they were sent home . Economic growth made them less dependent and the advisers were sent back .
 China grew increasingly uneasy about Russia’s nuclear weapons . The Chinese Communist government also grew uneasy about the weapons . China also grew increasingly wary of Russia's nuclear weapons.
 Mao believed Stalin’s contention that war between capitalism and Communism was inevitable . Mao believed the war was inevitable, Mao believed it was inevitable. Mao believed capitalism and communism were inevitable, he said .
 In 1964, Mao accused the Soviet Union of itself being an ‘imperialist’ power because it dominated the smaller states of Eastern Europe . Mao accused it of being an imperialist power because of its dominance in Eastern Europe.
 Chinese and Russian diplomats and advisers now compete as rivals for the ears of Third World leaders . China and Russia have been rivals for decades .
 Albania is a small, isolated, largely Muslim state squeezed between Yugoslavia and the Adriatic Sea . Albania broke with the Soviet Union in the early 1980s . Albania is now a relatively small state in the middle of the world .
 This represented an embarrassing rejection of Soviet authority, particularly when put into the context of the ongoing Sino-Soviet split . This represented a rejection of the Soviet authority .
 Albanian leader Enver Hoxha broke with the Chinese Communist leadership in 1978, criticizing China’s improved relations with the United States . However, Albanian Communist leader Hoxhas then broke with China in 1978 . Albania's communist leader then criticized U.S. relations with
 Some military leaders had opposed Khrushchev’s support of economic planning that emphasized consumer goods over heavy industry . But severe shortages still alienated many Soviet citizens, and severe shortages alienated many .
 Medium-range Soviet strategic missiles displayed in a military parade in Moscow on November 7, 1963, in a Soviet show of strength . Old Stalinists surfaced again, old Stalinists resurfaced again .
 Army commanders accused Khrushchev of having taken too great a risk by establishing missile sites in Cuba . Army commanders, wary of the Chinese situation, accused him .
 In October 1964, Khrushchev returned to Moscow for a meeting called by his enemies only to find out that he was being retired into honorable obscurity . In October of that year, he returned to Russia for a secret meeting with his enemies .
 He affirmed authority and prestige of party bureaucrats and of the KGB, but stopped well short of Stalinism . He affirmed the authority of party officials and the prestige of the . KGB .
 The Soviet leader ordered an increase in the production of consumer goods . While building up Soviet military capability, he ordered a increase in consumer goods production .
 Central planning and agricultural collectivization remained the basis of the inefficient Soviet economy . The Soviet Union economy was inefficient in Soviet times .
 There was little talk of a "thaw" either inside or outside the Soviet Union during the Brezhnev era . The Soviet Union was ruled out of the Cold War .
 Cynicism mounted within the Soviet Union, even among committed Communists . Even committed Communists had long awaited the day when the corner would be turned and prosperity would arrive .
 The phased withdrawal from Vietnam removed one thorny issue between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The withdrawal was followed by the victory of the Communist North Vietnamese and their southern allies .
 Continued tension between the Soviet Union and China eroded the old U.S. view of Communism as a monolithic force, engendering more realistic diplomatic assessments .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union faced daunting economic problems that shifted the focus of government to domestic concerns . Furthermore, both the U.S. and Soviet Union had daunting economic issues .
 The period from 1969 to 1979 brought a period of detente between the Soviet Union and the United States . It led to serious negotiations between the two powers to reduce nuclear arms .
 In 1972, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev and U.S. President Richard Nixon signed an armsreduction agreement known as SALT I . The two sides agreed to maintain parity in nuclear offensive weapons systems .
 Both sides began to defy the spirit of the agreement by developing new systems . Military technology continued to advance rapidly, despite the agreement .
 Both the Soviet Union and the United States deployed new missiles in Europe . Both the U.S. and Soviet Union deployed new missile systems .
 His successors sought to link further arms-reduction talks to issues of human rights in the Soviet Union . His successors tried to link the talks to human rights issues .
 U.S. President Jimmy Carter and Brezhnev signed 1160 Ch. 60 Ch. 1160 in 1979 . President Carter and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorchk agreed to the deal in 1979.
 President Carter had to withdraw the agreement from consideration by the Senate in January 1980 because of political opposition . Conservatives feared that the SALT II agreement would leave the Soviets with greater nuclear capability than that of the U.S.
 As the number of nuclear weapons increased in Europe, anti-nuclear movements revived . Anti-nuclear movement revived in Britain and Germany, particularly in Germany .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 put an end to detente in Afghanistan . The Soviet-Afghanistan war ended in 1979 after the Soviet invasion .
 Soviet troops were sent in support of the pro-Soviet government . The government was besieged by a variety of rebels, including Islamic fundamentalists, who received support from the U.S.
 The United States boycotted the Olympic Games in Moscow in 1980 . The U.S. limited grain sales to the Soviet Union in response to the invasion of the USSR in the 1980s .
 Second World War accelerated the independence movements that had developed after World War I . In the colonies in Africa, Asia, and Southeast Asia, the rise of nationalism led to movements demanding independence .
 European colonies became central actors in some of the dramas of international politics in the 1950s . Europe's colonies were key players in international politics for decades .
 The peacemakers at Versailles in 1919 had espoused nationalism as a principle for the territorial organization of states . Nationalism was a key principle in the organization of nations .
 France and Britain had been unwilling to grant freedom to their colonies . Both viewed their empires as part of their national identities .
 During and after the war, the U.S. government had made clear its unwillingness to support the maintenance of the British and French colonial empires .
 The Soviet Union, too, was in principle against colonial empires, while, ironically, building something of an empire of its own by controlling states in Eastern Europe and the Balkans . In principle, the Soviet Union opposed colonial empires .
 Winston Churchill believed that if Britain was to remain a world power, it had to retain its empire, despite the opposition of Eisenhower to colonialism . For his part, Winston Churchill had believed that . Britain had to keep its empire .
 Successful prime ministers realized that it would be better to grant colonies independence than have to confront massive insurrections .
 The costs of resisting independence movements were high for the remaining imperial powers . With the economies of the Western European nations still suffering the effects of the war, the costs of resistance were high .
 Decolonization 1161 to colonialism came not only from colonized peoples, but also from intellectuals, students, and political parties of the left at home . The opposition to colonialism was led by the colonized people, students and intellectuals .
 The end of the colonial era reflected the relative decline of the European powers in international affairs . The colonial era was a period of European dominance in the Middle East .
 The sun finally set on the British Empire as its colonies became independent states . The British Empire was once the world's most powerful empire .
 Britain's former colonies achieved independence peacefully for the most part . Britain’s former colonies achieve independence peacefully .
 In contrast, France and Portugal battled to retain their colonies even in the face of popular insurgency . Portugal and France fought to keep their colonies .
 The Netherlands and Belgium both resisted nationalist movements briefly before recognizing the independence of their former colonies .
 In many colonies, educated and active groups stood ready to work for independence and, when that was achieved, to become leaders of new states . When that is achieved, they stood ready for independence .
 During the 1960s and 1970s, the United States and the Soviet Union aggressively competed for influence in these young states . U.S. and Soviet Union were competing for influence during the 1960 and 70s .
 India was the largest colony in the world . Decolonization in South and Southeast Asia was a major event in history .
 Hindus formed the largest religion, but there were millions of Muslims as well, particularly in Bengal and Punjab in the north . Millions of Muslims also lived in Bengal, Punjab and Punjab .
 Many Muslims wanted a partition of the subcontinent and the establishment of a Muslim state . Many Muslims were against a partition and wanted to establish a state .
 In 1942, the British government promised them self-government following the war if India cooperated in the fight against Japan . India had provided thousands of soldiers for the fight, but some of them had joined the Japanese .
 Gandhi, who dismissed the offer as “a post-dated check on a crashing bank,” became a powerful symbol of Indian resolution to win independence by peaceful means . Gandhi became a symbol of India’s resolve to win its independence by peacefully means .
 When he threatened a massive campaign of nonviolent resistance to British rule, the British government sent him to jail again . He was jailed again after he threatened to use nonviolent tactics against British rule . The British government has sent him back to jail .
 India became independent, but bitter fighting followed between Hindus and Muslims . Bitter fighting followed in India's first war .
 India would be largely Hindu, and Pak istan, which also obtained independence in 1947, would be Muslim . West Pakistan and West Pakistan, on either side of India, were also Muslim .
 Since millions of Muslims lived in India and many Hindus lived in Pakistan, how ever, it proved impossible to draw state boundaries so that they exactly corre sponded to ethnic and religious differences . The state boundaries were drawn based on religious and ethnic differences .
 About the same number of Hindus and Sikh were expelled from Pakistan . Hindus and Sikhs were also expelled from the country .
 Gandhi was assassinated in 1948 because he had accepted the establishment of Pakistan . A Hindu extremist assassinated Gandhi because he accepted Pakistan's independence .
 India became the world’s largest democracy, but many daunting problems remained unsolved poverty compounded by a phenomenally high birthrate, underdeveloping democratic institutions, and bitter religious rivalries .
 The awkward division of Pakistan into East and West, sepa rated by Hindu India, ended in 1971 when East Pakistan rebelled agains Decolonization 1163 Pakistani authority .
 After Indian troops intervened against Pakistani forces, Bangladesh became an independent state . Bangladesh is one of the poorest nations in the world .
 In Southeast Asia, the end of Japanese occupation during World War II served as a catalyst for decolonization . The end of WWII left the way open for independence movements, leaving the way opened for independence .
 The Japanese occupation had driven the British out of the Malay Peninsula and the Dutch colonists out of Indonesia . The Dutch colonists had also been driven from Indonesia .
 The states on the Malay Peninsula formed the Federation of Malaya after the war . The Federation was formed after the conflict .
 Communists battled British troops off and on during the 1940s and 1950s . Britain granted complete independence in 1957 to what became Malaysia in 1963 .
 In Indonesia, the nationalist leader Sukarno took advantage of the Dutch absence from the region to proclaim Indonesian independence . The Dutch were not in the region for much of the time .
 Negotiations arranged by the U.N. led the Netherlands to grant Indonesian independence in 1949 .
 Sukarno assumed the presidency for life in 1963 . He called his government a “guided democracy,” assuming the presidency . He assumed the post in 1963, calling his country a "guided democracy"
 The Indonesian government accepted large sums of money from the Soviet Union and the United States . The government accepted money from both countries during the Soviet and U.S.
 He consolidated his dictatorship with the support of the armed forces . Undertaking a bloody campaign of terror against Communists, he consolidated his power .
 British influence also declined in the Middle East . British influence in the Mideast also declined .
 Growing dependence on oil as a source of energy has made the Middle East increasingly important in international politics . The Middle East has a history of oil dependence on the region .
 Egypt achieved independence after World War I . Britain still controlled Palestine as a Mandate . Egypt had achieved independence .
 Zionists before World War I considered Palestine the promised land for Jews . Zionists considered Palestine a promised place for Jews.
 During the 1920s and 1930s, many Jews had emigrated to Israel, hoping one day to construct a Jewish state . During the 1930s and 1940s, Jews hoped to build a state of Israel .
 In the wake of World War II, they were joined by hundreds of thousands of Jews from Europe . In the aftermath of the war, they moved from Europe to the U.S. in the 1950s .
 For survivors, the Zionist revival and creation of an independent Jewish state now seemed enormously more urgent . For them, the Zionism revival and the creation of a Jewish state seemed more urgent, indeed becoming an important part of the collective identity of many Holocaust survivors .
 In 1947, the British government, already facing attacks from militant Jews committed to ending British occupation, asked the United Nations to resolve Palestine's future . The British government asked the U.N. to resolve the issue .
 The United Nations called for the division of Palestine into the Jewish state of Israel and an Arab state . In its first major international decision, the U.N. called for Palestine to be divided into Israel .
 Israeli forces took over much of the British Mandate in 1948, achieving independence . Israel became Israel's first state of independent Israel in 1948 .
 Jerusalem, a holy city for Jews, Arabs, and Christians, was to remain temporarily under the control of the United Nations . Jerusalem is to remain under the U.N. control, temporarily under a temporary control .
 Fighting between Palestinian Arabs and Jews began soon after the UN resolution . Fighting between Palestinians and Jews erupted after the resolution .
 Arab forces from Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan attacked the newly established state of Israel in May 1948 . The Arab forces were defeated the following year, but were defeated by Israel .
 The victorious Israeli army expelled large numbers of Arabs from their lands, although about 150,000 Palestinian Arabs remained in Israel .
 At least 700,000 Palestinian refugees fled to Jordan in 1946 . Jordan had become independent in 1946, after Palestine became Israel in 1945 .
 The Arab states refused to recognize the existence of Israel, as well as a separate Palestinian Arab identity . The Arab Arab states have been involved in the conflict with Israel .
 Palestinians retained some rights in Israel, such as being able to vote and to serve in the parliament . Palestinians retain some rights such as voting and serving in Israel's parliament .
 Palestinians believed that they had been relegated to the status of second-class citizens in Israel . They remained under military rule until 1965, but were under Israeli military rule .
 After 1948, no new Arab towns were established in Israel, although the population of Palestinians increased five-fold . Until recently it remained Israeli policy that no land “redeemed” by Jews in Israel could be sold to non-Jews .
 The Suez Canal had been the centerpiece of British interests and defenses in the Middle East since 1882 . British troops first occupied Egypt in 1882 and the canal was the center of British military operations .
 British withdrawal from India in 1947 reduced its strategic importance to Britain . Two-thirds of the oil from the Middle East on which Britain and Western Europe depended was transported through the canal .
 Egypt had been independent since 1922, but Britain maintained considerable influence there . Egypt was independent from 1922, with Britain maintaining considerable influence .
 The canal was owned by the British and French governments, as well as by stockholders, primarily British . Furthermore, the canal was also owned by both governments, including the British .
 In 1952, a group of young nationalists overthrew Egyptian King Farouk in a bloodless coup . In part because the British government refused to allow Egypt to occupy Sudan, the coup took place .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser emerged as one of the most influential figures in rising Pan-Arab nationalism . He emerged as the head of the new Egyptian government . He was one of Egypt's most influential leaders .
 Nasser established Egypt's neutrality in the tug-of-war between East and West . He established Egyptian neutrality between the two sides of the world .
 He refused to sign a treaty with the U.S. and castigated Iran and Turkey for their proAmerican policies . He also castigated Turkey and Iran for its pro-America policies .
 As Egyptian nationalism mounted, the Egyptian government demanded British withdrawal from the narrow zone along the Suez Canal . The Egyptian government had renounced the Anglo-Egyptian alliance treaty of 1936 .
 A Russian cartoon salutes Nassers seizure of the Suez Canal in July 1956 . In 1954, the EgyptDecolonization 1165 was created .
 Sunken ships block the Suez Canal . British troops would begin a phased withdrawal in June 1956 . Troops would begin to leave in June .
 Britain would retain the right to send military forces back if the canal was attacked by the Soviet Union . Britain and Egyptian governments would respect the freedom of navigation through the canal .
 Many Egyptians opposed this agreement, which seemed to maintain some degree of British control over the Suez Canal . Many Egyptians, particularly a radical organization, the Muslim Brotherhood, opposed it .
 Egypt became a pawn in the struggle between the U.S. and the Soviet Union for the allegiance of non-aligned nations . Egypt was a major ally of the Soviet-U.S.-Egyptian alliance .
 Nasser denounced the British and French role in the Middle East . Gradually, Nasser turned toward the Soviet Union for economic and military support .
 The Soviet government signed an agreement with Egypt, promising to exchange weapons for Egyptian cotton . The deal was part of an agreement between the Soviet government and Egypt .
 Nasser planned to construct the Aswan High Dam on the Upper Nile River . Nasser believed the dam would help modernize the Egyptian economy . Egypt planned to build the dam .
 The World Bank had agreed to finance the construction of the dam if Britain and the U.S. contribute . Britain had agreed that the World Bank would finance the project if the two countries contribute .
 The U.S. government was increasingly suspicious of British goals . But the United States government was growing suspicious of Britain's efforts .
 On July 19, 1956, the U.S. withdrew its offer of a loan when it seemed that the Egyptian government 1166 Ch. Ch.1166 was about to collapse . The loan was withdrawn when it was feared that the government would not pay .
 On July 26, Nasser announced the nationalization of the Suez Canal, with the assurance, however, that shareholders would be compensated .
 The British government, pushed by Conservatives, decided on armed intervention . They feared that Nasser would undermine British interests throughout the Middle East .
 France, too, wanted Nasser out of power because of French interests in the canal . France also wanted to oust Nasser because of its interest in canal access .
 Nasser supported the Algerian National Liberation Front, which sought Algerian independence from France . More than this, Nasser also supported Algeria's Algerian national Liberation Front .
 The United States government sought to diffuse the crisis through negotiation . The U.S. government sought the solution to the crisis .
 The government of Israel was also concerned about emerging ties between Egypt and the Soviet Union . Israel was still technically at war with Egypt since 1948 . The government was concerned about the growing ties between the two countries .
 The arrival of Soviet arms in Egypt raised fears of a possible Egyptian invasion of Israel .
 In October 1956, the British government came around to the French view that they should agree to an Israeli invasion of Egypt . This would provide both powers with an excuse to intervene militarily and occupy the Suez Canal Zone .
 A Franco-British ultimatum then demanded that Israeli and Egyptian forces both withdraw to ten miles from the canal . Franco-Britain demanded that Israel and Egypt withdraw from ten miles away from canal . The French and British demanded that the two countries withdraw from each other .
 An Anglo-French force then occupied the Canal Zone after Nasser ordered the scuttling of ships to block the canal . Nasser then ordered the evacuation of the canal after the attack .
 On November 3, the General Assembly of the United Nations called for a cease-fire . A day later, the U.N. authorized a peacekeeping force .
 On November 5, British and French troops parachuted into Port Said, followed by troops put ashore the next day . The operation began on November 5 .
 Pressure on both Israel and Egypt from the United States and the Soviet Union brought an end to the Suez crisis . The U.S. and Soviet Union had reason to be pleased that the world’s attention could be diverted from Hungary .
 United States pressure proved decisive, particularly with Britain, as the U.S. government refused to support British sterling . Britain's currency fell dramatically in the face of fears of a cut-off of oil from the Middle East .
 The Suez Canal crisis had demonstrated that European Western powers could no longer impose their will on the Middle East . The crisis demonstrated that Western powers had no longer imposed their will .
 In Britain, Prime Minister Sir Anthony Eden suffered a nervous breakdown and resigned from office in January 1957 . In Britain he suffered from depression and was forced to resign from office .
 The Suez Canal reopened in April 1957 under Egyptian control . Following the salvaging of the forty ships that Egypt had sunk in the canal, the canal was reopened in March 1957 .
 A year Decolonization 1167 later, British ally King Faisal II was assassinated in Iraq . A year later, the British ally died in the country of Iraq .
 When Cyprus gained its independence in 1960, Britain lost its last base in the Middle East . The island of Cyprus was Britain's last base .
 French Decolonization France, too, lost its colonial empire in the post-war era, but not without bloody struggles .
 The French had begun their conquest of North Africa in 1830, and in Southeast Asia had held modern-day Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since the 1880s . The French conquest began in 1830 .
 French left Syria and Lebanon in 1946 by agreement with the U.S. and Britain . The French left the region in 1946 with the United States, Britain and France .
 French troops put down a massive insurrection in Madagascar in 1947, with an enormous loss of life . In 1947, French forces put down an uprising in the country .
 The island finally received its independence in 1960 . It is one of 14 former French colonies in Africa .
 Ho Chi Minh (Nguyen Tat Thanh or Nguyen Ai Quoc, or “the Patriot/' 1890-1969) emerged as a Vietnamese Communist leader . In Vietnam, he was known as the "patriot" and "the Patriot"
 His father was an official under the French who had resigned from his position because of his Vietnamese nationalism . His father had been a French official who resigned due to his nationalism .
 Ho Chi Minh himself worked as a kitchen helper on a French passenger liner before becoming a Communist activist . He was a French chef before becoming an activist in Vietnam .
 Ho was saved by the refusal of the British government in Hong Kong to turn him over to French authorities . Following condemnation to death by the French government, Ho was condemned to death .
 British arrested him in 1931, and he remained in prison in Hong Kong for two years . Nonetheless, he was arrested in 1931 .
 During World War II, he led the Viet Minh, an organization of Vietnamese Communists . He led the Vietnamese Communist Party during the war . He was also a leader in Vietnam's Communist Party .
 During World War II, Vichy France had held Vietnam as a colony until Japanese forces took control of it in 1945 . During WWII, the country was a French colony until 1945 .
 When Vietnam proclaimed its independence, France attempted to re-conquer its former colony . France was defeated by Vietnam's independence in 1945 .
 In November 1946, the French army attacked the port of Haiphong, killing 6,000 Vietnamese, and captured Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital . The French army killed 6,500 people in the attack on the port in November 1946 . The Vietnamese capital was captured by the French
 Ho Chi Minh's Vietnamese army held most of the countryside, and the French continued . War between the French and the Vietnamese continued .
 The Korean War increased U.S. interest in the ongoing struggles in Vietnam . United States military assistance to the French effort brought in by Korean War .
 In 1954, the French army suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the Vietnamese at Dien Bien Phu .
 At the Geneva Convention that year, France agreed to the division of Vietnam into two states . Vietnam was divided into Vietnam and Vietnam, which was later divided into two countries .
 North Vietnam became a Communist regime led by Ho Chi Minh . South Vietnam was a republic run by a succession of leaders who carried out U.S. policy in exchange for free hand .
 There were 1. million French citizens in Algeria, 300,000 in Morocco, and 200,000 people in Tunisia .
 They were called pieds noirs because of the black boots worn by French soldiers . They were worn by soldiers in France during the Second World War .
 Morocco and Tunisia were French protectorates, although nominally ruled by a sultan and bey , respectively . Morocco was a French protectorate of Tunisia and Morocco . Tunisia was also a French protectorate of Morocco .
 Algeria was directly administered as a colony by French officials . Algeria, in contrast, was administered as an independent colony by the French .
 During the inter-war period, a small nationalist movement developed in Algeria . The Algerian nationalist movement was formed in the 1920s .
 In 1945, French troops put down an uprising in Algeria at the cost of 40,000 Algerian lives . French troops killed 40,500 Algerian people in the uprising .
 During the early 1950s, movements for national independence continued to develop in France’s North African colonies . France's North Africa colonies were still at the center of the movement for independence .
 Albert Camus, born in Algeria, said that if given the choice between justice and his mother, he would take his mother . Camus said if he had the choice, justice and mother would be the most important thing .
 Many of the French living in North Africa had become wealthy, successfully developing land taken from the Arab population over the past century . Many of those who have become wealthy have taken land from Arab population .
 Others included cafe owners in Algiers, government functionaries, and farmers with small plots of land . Others were of modest means, including cafe owners and farmers .
 In 1954, the National Liberation Front (Front de Liberation Nationale, the FLN) called for Algerian independence . The FLN called for Algeria's independence in 1954 .
 An uprising for independence began just four months after the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu . The uprising began four months before the French were defeated .
 Fearing that the movement might spread to Tunisia and Morocco, the French government granted virtual independence to both states in 1956 . Despite the protests of French residents and the vigorous opposition of the French officer corps, France granted both states virtual independence .
 As guerrilla actions and bombings increased and losses mounted, many people in France began to accept Algerian independence as inevitable Decolonization 1169 and desirable .
 In February 1956, French residents in Algiers rioted against the government when French Premier Guy Mollet came to introduce his newly appointed governor of Algeria . Mollet had initially been willing to negotiate with the FLN .
 In October, the newly crowned king of Morocco met with leaders of the FLN, enraging the French right . Morocco's new king met with FLN leaders in October . The FLN is a former French colony of the French Republic .
 Mollet ordered the kidnapping of Ahmed Ben Bella, a leader of the Algerians, and launched a repression in France of critics of the French Algerian policy . Mollet, fearing the political consequences of the war, then ordered the kidnap of Ben Bella .
 In November 1956, France joined Britain in the ill-fated Suez expedition in part because of French anger at Egyptian support for the Algerian insurrection . France joined the British expedition in November 1956 .
 ‘The battle of Algiers’ was fought in the Arab quarters of the Algerian capital . French troops undertook a brutal campaign that included torture against militants and civilians alike .
 In France, the left increasingly demanded an end to the war . intellectuals, like Jean-Paul Sartre and Camus, denounced the torture of Algerians by the French army .
 Throughout the Algerian war of independence, the FLN successfully played off Cold War rivalries . The FLN used mass communication and building support in Algerian communities abroad, while winning international support .
 French riot police throw back stones, as well as tear gas bombs, at demonstrators in Algiers in 1960, during the Algerian war of independence . After humiliating defeats at the hands of the German army in 1940 and by the Vietnamese at Dien Bien Phu in 1954,
 Early in 1958, by which time French troops in Algeria numbered 500,000, French planes attacked FLN camps on the other side of the border .
 A new premier was rumored to be willing to negotiate with the insurgents . The insurgents are believed to be in control of the country .
 On May 13, 1958, a demonstration by French settlers in Algiers turned into a military-led insurrection against the French government . The revolt turned into an uprising against the government in Algeria .
 Charles de Gaulle had been waiting in self-imposed exile for something like this to happen . De Gaulle announced that he was ready to serve France again . The former French president announced he had returned from exile .
 On May 29, 1958, President Rene Coty appointed de Gaulle prime minister . The move was approved by the National Assembly early in June . De Gaulle was appointed by President Coty in 1958 .
 The general accepted on the condition that he could rule by emergency decree for six months . He could then ask the nation to approve a new constitution . The general then asked the nation for approval of the constitution .
 The right was delighted with de Gaulle’s return to power, thinking that he would never allow Algerian independence . The right, which counted many army officers among its ranks, was delighted by the general's return .
 The new constitution greatly increased the authority of the president, whose term was set at seven years . The president's term is set to be seven years, the constitution says .
 Presidents under the Fifth French Republic would conduct foreign policy, appoint prime ministers, and dissolve the French parliament . French presidents would also appoint foreign ministers and dissolve French parliament.
 In September 1958, 80 percent of French voters approved the new constitution . 80 percent approved the constitution in September 1958 .
 He had already decided that the costs of continuing the war in Algeria were too great, too divisive . But he decided to end the conflict in Algeria too soon .
 He removed the generals responsible for the coup in Algeria from their posts . He removed them from his posts after the coup . Algeria has since been ruled out of power in Algeria .
 For a man whose French nationalism underlay his political philosophy, it seemed an astonishing turnaround . For a French nationalist nationalist, it was a surprising turnaround .
 To some officers, de Gaulle’s actions seemed an incredible betrayal, a stab in the back by a fellow military man . The French president's actions were seen as a betrayal by some officers .
 A right-wing anti-democratic tradition survived in the officer corps . As the Dreyfus Affair had revealed in the 1890s and the Vichy years had confirmed, a right wing tradition survived .
 Many officers felt betrayed not only by de Gaulle but also by much of the population in France . Many officers now felt betrayed by the French government, many felt betrayed .
 When de Gaulle recalled General Massu to Paris in January 1960, right-wing riots took place in Paris . Right-wing rioters rioted in Paris in 1960s .
 De Gaulle rallied French public opinion to what had clearly become a policy of allowing Algerians to decide their own future . The Algerian state of Algeria was declared a state of sovereignty in 1961 .
 Negotiations between Algerian leaders and de Gaulle’s government began in the spring of 1961 . De Gaulle's government began negotiations with Algerian government in 1961 . The Algerian and French governments were involved in the negotiations .
 Secret Army Organization determined Decolonization 1171 at all costs to keep Algeria French . In the meantime, a secret group within the army had formed in January 1961 .
 In April it staged a coup d etat and held power in Algiers and in the city of Oran for three days . Yet it did not win support of the entire army . In April, it staged an uprising in Algeria but failed to win support from the army .
 Political parties of the left and center threw their support to de Gaulle . The French president was assassinated in June 1944 .
 The OAS twice tried to assassinate de Gaulle and once nearly succeeded, riddling his car with machine-gun fire . The French president was assassinated in 1953 in Paris .
 Members planted bombs in Algerian cities and in Paris to terrorize the civilian population . Bombings in Algeria and Paris were planted by members of Al Qaeda-linked group .
 The vote for Algerian independence in July 1961 was 15 million to 5 million in France . In France, the vote for independence in France was 15million to 5million . The Algerians opted for independence .
 On March 19, 1962, the Algerian War officially ended, with the French people overwhelmingly ratifying the peace terms . The French people voted overwhelmingly to end the war in 1962 .
 France has maintained considerable prestige in the Third World . However, France continued to maintain considerable prestige .
 At the end of World War II, only Liberia, Ethiopia, and Egypt had achieved independence in Africa . Decolonization in Sub-Saharan Africa began in 1945 .
 Nationalist groups in Africa were less organized than had been their counterparts in India and Southeast Asia . Nationalists in Africa had been less organized .
 British rule ended in one African colony after another . But in the subsequent decades, British rule continued to end .
 Nigeria in 1960, Sierra Leone and Tanganyika in 1961, Uganda in 1962, and Kenya in 1963, followed . Others soon followed, including Nigeria and Sierra Leone in 1960 and 1961 .
 British determination to hold onto its East African colony of Kenya was particularly bloody . It was presented under the guise of the mission to ‘civilize’ people that they considered inferior .
 Many benefited from good land that could be purchased or leased for very little, government subsidies and cheap African labor, working at wage rates set by the colonial government .
 Jomo Kenyatta emerged as an effective, charismatic leader of Map 28 . He had studied in London .
 Map shows movements for decolonization in Africa, Asia, and the Far East . It gives the dates at which each of the colonies achieved independence .
 What became known to the British as the “Mau Mau"" rebellion began in 1952, with violence directed at British settlers, thirty-two of whom were killed in the rebellion .
 Kenyatta’s arrest, trial, conviction, and imprisonment for his role in the Mau Mau insurgency helped make him an international symbol of Kenyan resistance . He was arrested, tried, convicted and imprisoned for his part in the insurgency against the government .
 As many as 1 million people, virtually the entire Kikuyu population, were detained in what amounted to a mass gulag . The British government declared a state of emergency and detained perhaps 1. million people .
 Mau Mau exacted bloody revenge against loyalist Kenyans with guerilla attacks . At the same time, the Mau Mau killed loyalists in the same way .
 The British portrayed the struggle as one between civilization and savagery . The struggle was portrayed as one of civilization and barbarity .
 British forces, including the Home Guard of white settlers recognized as part of the security forces in 1953, killed tens of thousands of people . Not counting thousands who perished in detention camps or were shot when allegedly trying to escape .
 The counter-insurgency included terror, atrocious brutality, and widespread torture, most of which the British government succeeded in keeping secret .
 British authorities enacted collective punishments against villagers who refused to cooperate with them, seizing livestock and closing down markets for months . British authorities seized livestock and closed down markets in response .
 British forces succeeded in breaking apart the Mau Mau armies in 1957 . The bloody struggle lasted until 1957, when British forces finally broke up the armies .
 The British government appeared in an increasingly bad light as word got out of the detention camps and conditions within them .
 Prime Minister Harold Macmillan put together a “balance sheet of empire,” which screamed out in red ink . The British Prime Minister put together the ‘balance sheet’ of empire in the 1960s .
 White settlers were allowed to sell their land under favorable conditions . White settlers sold their land to settlers under favorable terms . The land was sold to settlers by white settlers .
 Kenvatta s Kenya African National Union established a government after an overwhelming victory in elections in 1963 . Kenya's first government was formed after a landslide victory in 1963 elections .
 Kenvatta earned his reputation as “the reconciler” and became president in 1964 . He was known for his reputation for his role as the reconciler .
 South Africa maintained a system of racial inequality and segregation implemented in 1948 . With a white population of 21 percent in 1950 (and 68 percent African, 2 percent of mixed race, and 2 percent Asian) South Africa had a population of just 21 percent white in 1950 .
 Rhodesia declared its independence from Britain in 1965 . Rhodesia had been a self-governing colony of Rhodesia .
 It did so, in part, so that its white minority would not have to share power with the black majority population . In part, it did so so that the white majority population would not share power .
 The British government led a campaign of international economic sanctions against the white regime of its former colony of South Africa .
 Rhodesia was divided into the independent states of Zambia and Zimbabwe in 1980 . In 1980, Rhodesia became part of the Zambia-Zimbabwe state .
 The Belgian government tried to placate nationalists with concessions in the late 1950s . It then tried to repress them following rioting in 1959 .
 The Belgian government pulled out of its former colony a year later, declaring the Congo independent . A year later the Congo’s army retained Belgian officers, but retained Belgian soldiers .
 Civil war began between two nationalist leaders, a bloody conflict complicated by ethnic and tribal loyalties . Civil war in Afghanistan began in 1992, Afghanistan was the focus of the conflict in Afghanistan .
 Soldiers mutinied against their Belgian commanders and began to attack Europeans remaining in the Congo . Soldiers mutineered against their commanders and attacked Europeans remaining .
 The Congo’s wealthiest province, Katanga, declared its independence in 2009 . Katanga has great mining resources such as cobalt, copper, and uranium .
 At the request of the Congo’s premier, the U.N. sent troops to restore order . The Congolese government has been fighting a rising tide of violence in Congo .
 Colonel Mobutu Sese Seko imposed military rule in Congo between 1971 and 1997 . The Congo was then known as Zaire, which was ruled by the military . It is now known as Congo .
 Mobutu set about amassing enormous personal wealth after nationalizing his country’s wealthy mines . He nationalized his country's wealthy mines and amassed a fortune in the process of nationalizing the mines .
 It faced insurrections in its African colonies of Angola and Mozambique, which lie on the southwestern and southeastern coasts, respectively, beginning in 1961 . In 1961, the British colonialist government was overthrown in its colonies of Anglia .
 Following years of bloody fighting, the Portuguese government recognized the independence of Angola and Mozambique . A year earlier, the new' Portuguese government had overthrown the dictatorship that had ruled Portugal for decades .
 In both new states, horrendous civil war raged between left-wing and right-wing groups . In both states, the war was raging between the left and right .
 In Angola, Cuban funds and soldiers helped the left-wing Popular Conclusion 1175 Movement, which emerged victorious . Cuban funds were used to help the Popular conclusion 1175 movement .
 In Mozambique, too, the left won, despite assistance to the right by the South African government and a campaign of terror . The left won despite assistance from the government, despite the right's terror campaign .
 Independence in many cases proved to be no panacea for the new African nations . Independence in Africa was not a panacea, but it was a step up to independence .
 Many post-colonial administrations proved unable or unwilling to provide a decent quality of life to their people, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 Some new states, like Angola and Mozambique, fell into bloody and debilitating civil wars . Others, like Sudan, have fallen into bloody civil wars, including Sudan .
 These conflicts were compounded by the multiplicity of ethnic groups, tribalism and tribalism, and a lack of political experience . Problems still stand as major impediments to the construction of modern political systems in developing nations .
 European companies still controlled valuable natural resources . Even with the departure of colonial governments, European companies controlled valuable resources .
 Some African rulers have abused their power by enriching themselves at the expense of their people . Some rulers have used anti-colonial rhetoric to justify their plunder, says the author .
 Appalling poverty and inadequate health care remain daunting challenges . The world's poorest people are still struggling to cope with poverty .
 The end of European overseas empires was accompanied by significant political changes on the European continent as well . Conclusion: End of overseas empires coincided with significant political change in Europe .
 The late 1960s brought waves of student protest in many Western European countries . The movement for reform in Czechoslovkia threatened Soviet orthodoxy before being crushed by Russian tanks .
 Communism collapsed in Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans in 1989 . The break-up of the Soviet Union itself in 1991 led to the collapse of Communism in 1991 .
 The social, political, and cultural revolts that exploded that year seemed to pit young people, especially students, against those entrenched in power . The social and political revolutions that exploded in that year seem to pit students against those in power.
 Many ‘baby boomers’ born after the war saw their revolt as one of an entire generation against its elders . Many “baby boomer’s” revolt was a revolt against the elders, many saw it as a revolt .
 They blamed them for a world that seemed unresponsive to demands for social justice and political change on behalf of the underprivileged and the oppressed . They blamed the world for not responding to demands .
 Many felt alienated from materialistic, industrial, bureaucratic society, and from the universities where they studied . Many felt alienation from materialism, industrial and bureaucratic society .
 Feminism, too, was a significant undercurrent during the protests of 1968, but it largely remained a movement of middle-class intellectuals and students .
 The turmoil in France ended amid government repression and a conservative show of force . The violence in France was the result of a government crackdown on protesters .
 Demonstrations subsided elsewhere in Western Europe, although they continued in the U.S. against the war in Vietnam . Demonstrators continued to demonstrate in the United States .
 Conservative or centrist parties dominated Western Europe for most of the 1970s and 1980s . Socialists held power in France between 1981 and 1995, while Socialists in France held power between 1981-1995 .
 In southern Europe, democratic rule came to Portugal, Spain, and Greece . Portugal, Greece, Spain and Portugal were the first countries to have democracy .
 A period of detente between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the 1970s was followed by a chill . The chill began as a result of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979 . The Cold War ended in 1979 after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan .
 In 1176 Transitions to Democracy and the Collaipse of Communism 1177 Eastern Europe . Then in 1989, dramatic change occurred in 1989 . In 1992, Eastern Europe began to be democratic .
 Mikhail Gorbachev had undertaken a series of reforms in the mid-1980s that liberalized the economy and political life in the Communist state . Mikhail's reforms were part of a dramatic series of liberalizing the Soviet Union .
 His bold moves encouraged further demands for reform and stimulated nationalist movements in the Soviet Unions republics . His bold move encouraged further reforms in Russia .
 As campaigns for liberalization revived in Poland and Hungary, it became clear that the Soviet leadership would not intervene to crush movements for reform . Gorbachev indicated that he viewed reform in Eastern Europe as desirable .
 Throughout Eastern Europe, one Communist government after another fell . Communist governments throughout Eastern Europe fell out of control .
 The fall of communism was achieved through a remarkably peaceful process of change . Overall, the fall of Communism was achieved by a remarkably peacefully process of . change .
 George Kennan’s prediction in 1947 that the Soviet system “bears within it the seeds of its own decay” turned out to be correct . U.S. official Kennan: The Soviet system is “sustained within it’ll have its
 Mikhail Gorbachev in Stuttgart, West Germany, for his bold moves toward reform and liberalization in the Soviet Union . The former Soviet Union leader was praised by West Germany and West Germany for his reforms .
 Youth increasingly trumpeted sexual freedom, aided by availability of birth control and abortion in some countries . Birth control and the legalization of abortion are key factors in youth's sexual freedom .
 The student-age population in the U.S. increased from 16 million in 1960 to 26 million in 1970 . The youth revolt challenged long-established hierarchies, party politics, and even consumerism .
 Students protested against U.S. involvement in Vietnam's civil war . Despite government claims of a high-minded struggle against communism, the United States seemed to be supporting a corrupt political regime against determined nationalists .
 The movements of the 1960s were closely tied to the civil rights movement . In the U.S., students protested against social injustice and racism .
 Long hair, sexual freedom, rock music, and marijuana seemed part of the idealistic youth rebellion against the state and capitalism . Long hair and sexual freedom was part of an idealistic rebellion against capitalism .
 The Beatles, Mick Jagger and the Rolling Stones, and the Who, among other rock groups, became phenomenally popular across much of the globe . The British impact on popular culture was never greater than in the 1960s, when the Beatles and Rolling Stones were popular .
 In France, student demonstrations, insurgency, and strikes shook the country, challenging the government of President Charles de Gaulle . Student demonstrations, insurgents, strikes and student demonstrations shook France in the 1960s .
 Demonstrations also rocked Italy, West Germany, and other Western European countries . Demonstrators also rocked West Germany and Italy .
 Western European states began to turn away from U.S. foreign policy domination . Western European nations turned away from United States foreign policy .
 De Gaulle feared the domination of Europe and France by Britain and the U.S. He believed that France had a special historic mission and never doubted for a moment he was to play in it .
 France’s first nuclear bomb was tested in 1960 . He insisted that France maintain an independent nuclear capability . France's first nuclear test was in 1960.
 Germany and France formed the cornerstone of the new Europe, ending decades of animosity . The close partnership between the two countries is a cornerstone of Europe's new Europe .
 France left NATO’s military command in 1966, forcing it to transfer its headquarters from Paris to Brussels . In 1966, France left the military command, forcing NATO to relocate its headquarters in Brussels .
 De Gaulle angered the United States government by refusing to support its policies in Vietnam . He angered the U.S. government by not supporting its policies .
 Although de Gaulle remained vehemently antiCommunist, he wanted France to provide leadership as a third force between the Soviet Union and the U.S. He wanted to stand between Russia and the United States .
 Other European governments also no longer automatically accepted U.S. Cold War rhetoric, which had encouraged the arms race .
 They reasoned Politics in a Changing Western World 1179 that if the two superpowers went to war, the battlefields (in conventional warfare) or the targets would be in Europe .
 In the spring of 1968, demonstrators took to the streets of Paris, protesting the rigid, overcrowded, and under-funded French university system . Protests were largely the preserve of the elite .
 Intellectual ferment heightened by opposition to the war in Vietnam . Intellectual ferment was heightened by anti-war sentiment .
 In France, students rebelled against those in power, inequality, and even modern technology, which seemed to them dehumanizing . Students rebelled in France against political power and even technology .
 In protest, students and some young faculty members occupy university buildings at the Sorbonne . Students and faculty members occupied buildings in protest .
 Demonstrators fanned out and were joined by more students . After the police entered the university and began arresting students, the demonstrators began to walk out .
 Several students were killed and hundreds injured when police attacked hastily improvised barricades . Hundreds were injured in clashes between police and students .
 French workers took to the streets in support of students . Most workers found student demands too radical and supported U.S. participation in the Vietnam War .
 A general strike began on May 13 in protest against police brutality . It is the largest wave of French strikes since 1936 . The French general strike is in response to the police brutality of recent months .
 Strikers demanded raises, better working conditions, and rights of self-management . Strike began in 2009 at the start of the year .
 Trade union and Communist leaders tried to bring the movement under their control in its first days . If anything, trade union and . Communist leaders . tried to . bring it under . their control .
 Gaullist Prime Minister Georges Pompidou hurriedly returned from a state visit to Afghanistan to confront the growing crisis . Gaullists Prime Minister returned from state visit in Afghanistan to face the crisis .
 de Gaulle dissolved the National Assembly on May 30 and announced that new elections would be held on June 23 . After a hurried flight to West Germany, he flew to assure himself of the loyalty of French army units stationed in West Germany . After the dissolution of the Assembly, he announced that
 Gauilists organized counter-demonstrations in support of the government, capitalizing on the hostility of many middle-class citizens and peasants in traditionally conservative regions to the turmoil in Paris . Gauilist groups organized counter demonstrations against government .
 The strike movement ebbed in part because the government and many companies agreed to raise wages . The government and companies have since agreed to increase wages .
 After dismissing Pompidou as prime minister, de Gaulle won what amounted to a referendum on his rule . De Gaulle's victory in France was seen as a referendum against the French president .
 Speeches about national “grandeur rang hollow as French influence in the world declined,’s prime minister said . Speeches of national ‘grandeur’ rang hollow, he said, as France's influence in world declined . “Speeches about grandeur rang
 De Gaulle's answer to a general crisis of confidence was to call for more “participation” in the 1180 Ch. de Gaulle . De Gaulles' answer to the general crisis was to ask for more "participation"
 In 1969, the president announced another referendum, this one on local administrative reform . The referendum was held in 1969, and the result was a result of a referendum .
 De Gaulle lost what turned into a plebiscite on his government and retired from political life . He lost the vote in a referendum on the French government .
 The contentious year 1968 also brought student demonstrations and riots in Italy and West Germany . Berlin was the center of the student movement .
 University graduates frustrated because they could not find jobs . Thousands of university graduates were frustrated because of their lack of jobs .
 Italian students found no support from workers, and the movement quickly collapsed . But Italian students find no support for workers .
 During the 1970s, European domestic politics underwent a shift from the right to centrist governments . Shifts in Western European politics after 1968 .
 Labour was in power from 1974 to 1979 in Germany, France and France . This change was apparent not only in the German Federal Republic and Britain .
 In Italy, the strikes of 1968 and 1969 generated Politics in a Changing Western World 1181 further political instability . Christian Democrats, forming a series of center-left coalition governments, continued to dominate Italian politics .
 In West Germany, the Christian Democrats refused any negotiations of consequence with the German Democratic Republic or the Soviet Union . The Christian Party refused to negotiate with the West or Russia .
 Social Democrats came to power in 1969 following waves of student protest . Social Democrats bucked the tide and won the election in 1969 . Following waves of protest, Social Democrats became the party's main political party .
 They were helped by an alliance with the centrist Free Democrats, who abandoned their Christian Democrat allies . The Free Democrats are helped by the alliance with Christian Democrats .
 Willy Brandt, who had fled Nazi Germany and fought with the Norwegian resistance during the Second World War, took office as chancellor . Brandt was mayor of Berlin before becoming chancellor . He had fled Germany during the war .
 Brandt signed a nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union in 1970 . The pact paved the way for the development of trade between the two states . Brandt's trade deal with the USSR was the first of its kind in Germany .
 He signed the Treaty of Warsaw, which recognized the frontier between Poland and East Germany as redrawn after the war . The treaty was signed by the Polish president in 1945 .
 Millions of people were allowed to cross the wall to visit the other side, overwhelmingly most were West Germans allowed to visit East Berlin . Millions of West Germans visited East Berlin in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Brandt resigned in 1974 following the discovery that one of his aides was a spy for East Germany . Brandt quit in 1974 after the discovery he had been spying for the East German government .
 Helmut Schmidt, a more conservative Social Democrat, became chancellor . Schmidt was a more liberal Social Democrat .
 Schmidt weathered political storms, but drew the wrath of environmentalists and anti-nuclear groups in 1979 . He asked the United States to station medium-range nuclear missiles on West German soil to counter similar Soviet missiles .
 Schmidt and French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing believed that Germany and France had to become the center of Western Europe . Schmidt and France believed that they had to be the centers of the continent .
 Schmidt’s refusal to reduce welfare payments led to the return to power in 1982 of the Christian Democrats . However, economic recession, rising unemployment, and rising unemployment led to a rise in welfare payments .
 They were led by Helmut Kohl , who cut taxes and reduced government spending . They were known for cutting taxes and reducing government spending in the 1970s .
 In 2005, Angela Merkel became the first female chancellor of Germany . Merkel was a Christian Democrat who had grown up in the Communist Germany .
 In Britain, under the pressure of the oil crisis and following bitter mining strikes, the Conservative government fell in 1974 . The Conservative government was overthrown in 1974, under pressure from miners' strikes .
 Labour governments of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan were buffeted by soaring inflation . The inflation was exacerbated by a series of major union victories in prolonged strikes during the Callaghan government .
 Upperand middle-class Britons turned against Callaghan, claiming that the unions now held their country hostage . The unions now hold the country hostage, according to the Labour leader .
 She was the first woman to hold the position, although she vociferously repudiated feminism . She was also the first female president of the country .
 The Conservative government eliminated some of the health and education measures Labour had implemented . Labour had been in power for more than 30 years .
 The government sold off some nationalized industries, notably the rail system, with disastrous results for service . The rail system was sold off by the government, but the service was never fully operational .
 Without government subsidies, many factories closed down and unemployment continued to rise . The government has been unable to find a solution to the problem .
 Cuts in housing subsidies left hundreds of thousands without adequate places to live . Hundreds of thousands of people were left without adequate housing .
 Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands in 1982, seeking to reverse a decline in its popularity at home . In May 1982, the military government invaded the islands . Argentina's Falklands was invaded by the military in response to a public outcry .
 The British economy began to recover in the early 1980s and inflation slowed down . Inflation slowed down in the 1980s .
 Blair emphasized a commitment to economic progress and to practical policies in place of shrill rhetoric . Blair emphasized the importance of practical policies and not rhetoric .
 Blair made clear that he believed Britain’s future lay with Europe . In sharp contrast to most Conservatives, Blair said he believed that Europe was the future .
 The sweeping victory of ‘New Labour’ in 1997 brought Blair to 10 Downing Street as prime minister, where he remained for ten years . Blair's victory of 'New Labour' in 1997 saw him become prime minister of Britain .
 Blair's policies increasingly could have been confused with those of his Conservative rivals . Blair’s policies increasingly can be confused with that of his Tory rivals .
 The death of Princess Diana in a highspeed car crash in a Paris tunnel on August 31, 1997, plunged Britain into mourning . In the meantime, Princess Diana's death in Paris was the death of a Paris car crash .
 This was just the latest of a series of reverses for the British monarchy . Diana’s separation and then divorce from Prince Politics in a Changing Western World 1183 Charles in 1996 .
 To some British subjects, the monarchy seemed an expensive and irrelevant atavism . Despite attachment to many people to the monarchy as an institution, some people thought the monarchy was an expensive, irrelevant thing . Despite the attachment to the institution and the fascination with the royal family perpetuated by coverage
 Prince William and his younger brother, Harry, offered hope for the future of the British royal family . The prince and his brother, Prince Harry, have been married for more than 20 years .
 In France, the economic slump that began with the oil crisis of 1973 and financial scandals undercut the presidency of the centrist Valery Giscard d’Estaing, a technocrat committed to economic modernization . In 1973, the economy began to be in a slump .
 In 1981, Socialist Francois Mitterrand won election as president . In 1981 he became the first French president .
 As in Britain, Socialist and other leftist governments in France and other countries governed with moderation, abandoning traditional agendas of the left in the interest of practical politics .
 In the meantime, the influence of unions declined along with the number of industrial workers . In the 1980s, unions were seen as the most powerful unions in the world .
 Abandoned factories in the German Ruhr region, northeastern France, northern England, and the Czech Republic stood as rusty symbols of an industrial world that was disappearing . The abandoned factories stood as rusting symbols of a disappearing industrial world .
 French President Mitterrand confronted determined opposition from the business community . He nationalized large corporations and more banks and initiated social reforms .
 The French franc plunged on the international currency market; people of wealth began to remove their assets from France . People of wealth begin to remove assets from the country .
 A year after taking office, the Socialist government was forced to devalue the franc and freeze prices and wages . The Socialist government has been forced to freeze prices, wages and unemployment rates .
 Pressure from the right mounted from the Gaullists and their ambitious leader, Jacques Chirac . The mayor of Paris was forced to step down from his post . The Gaullist Party was led by the mayor .
 The inability of the Socialist government to revive the economy undercut its popularity . The Socialist government has been unable to revive its popularity with voters .
 Mitterrand selected a rightist premier, Chirac, with ministers drawn from the right and center . The French prime minister was chosen from the left to the right .
 The new government sold off some nationalized banks and businesses and ended wage and price controls . New government sold some banks off some businesses .
 Mitterrand was given a slight majority in the elections for the National Assembly in 1988, but the right swept into power in 1993 . He appointed Socialist prime ministers, but his government was overthrown by the right .
 He began his presidency by authorizing the resumption of French nuclear testing in the South Pacific, leading to considerable international opposition, particularly 1184 Ch. Ch. 1184 .
 Facing a high unemployment rate and a growing economic deficit, reductions in health, retirement, and other benefits followed . Facing high unemployment rates and growing deficit, cuts in health and retirement benefits followed.
 Chirac called elections a year early in 1997 in hopes of receiving a sweeping mandate . In 1997, however, he called the election a year earlier in hope of winning a broad mandate . The French president is expected to win the presidency in 2008 .
 Socialists dominated the elections, forcing Chirac to name the Socialist Lionel Jospin as prime minister . The Socialist president and Socialist prime minister are now in an uncomfortable period of "cohabitation"
 In Italy, instability and corruption continued to characterize political life . Italy's political instability continued to define political life in the country .
 Despite a general increase in prosperity, inflation and high unemployment left many Italians still dissatisfied with all political parties . Italy's economy has seen a rise in recent years, but unemployment remains high .
 The government of Bettino Craxi from 1983 to 1986 was the longest and in many ways the most stable of the post-war period . Bettino's government of the 1980s to 1990s is the longest of the period .
 Socialists replaced Communists as Italy’s second largest party, forcing the Christian Democrats to accept them as coalition partners in 1986 . Christian Democrats accepted Socialists as a coalition partner in 1986 after they replaced Communists .
 Craxi himself was convicted of corruption, but fled in 1993 to Tunisia . Craxi was convicted in 1993 of corruption and fled to Tunisia, where he was convicted .
 Giulio Andreotti accused of arranging the murder of a journalist who had uncovered evidence of wrongdoing . Andreotti was prime minister on six different occasions . He was found guilty of arranging murder of journalist who uncovered evidence .
 More than 2,500 Italian politicians and businessmen were arrested for corruption over an eighteen-month period . More than 1,500 people were arrested over the same period .
 Silvio Berlusconi became prime minister of Italy in 1994 . In 1994 elections, he became the first Italian prime minister to win the presidency .
 Cynicism and mistrust of politicians became even more prevalent in Italy . Cynicism became more prevalent among Italians in the 1990s .
 In the German Federal Republic, the Greens, Europe’s largest environmental party, were alarmed by industrial pollution, which was slowly killing their country's forests . The Greens are the biggest environmental party in Europe, Europe's largest .
 Environmental parties opposed nuclear power before Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986 . Chernobyl was a deadly Soviet nuclear disaster at Chernobyl . Environmental parties oppose nuclear power .
 Greens helped push for agreements that have led to some cleaning up of the Rhine River and Mediterranean beaches . Greens pushed for agreements with the government to clean up the river and beaches in Germany .
 In almost all Western states, economic slumps have accentuated complaints that state-subsidized programs are too expensive . Western states have been hit hard by economic downturns .
 In Sweden and Denmark, Social Democratic parties were ousted after decades of rule by conservatives calling for sharp reductions in the tax rates that financed social programs . Social Democrats were ousted in both countries after decades in power .
 Western European governments reduced social benefits, such as unemployment payments . With the recession of the early 1990s reducing tax revenue, governments reduced benefits . Unemployment payments were also reduced in the early 90s .
 Greece had been controlled by a series of right-wing governments since its civil war in the late 1940s . Greece, the cradle of democracy, was controlled by the right since the 1940s.
 In 1967, military officers overthrew Greece’s first post-war government of the left . They ruthlessly crushed dissent, and imprisoned, and tortured political opponents . In 1967 they overthrew the first post war government, overthrew its first government .
 The military dictators planned to seize the island of Cyprus, which lies off the coast of Turkey . Both Greece and Turkey had claimed the island for centuries . Both countries had claimed it for centuries.
 Bitter disagreements over the form of a new constitution in Cyprus led to fighting between Greeks and Turks . Now bitter disagreements have led to clashes between the Turks and Greeks .
 At the same time, the Cypriot Turks defeated the Greeks and declared the northeastern, predominantly Turkish part of the island to be independent . At the time of the Greek-Turkish invasion, the island was still in the hands of the Turkish Turks .
 The power of the generals, who had not sent help to the Greek Cypriot insurgents, collapsed in 1974 . Meanwhile, in Greece, in 1974, the generals' power collapsed in Cyprus .
 Greece became a republic in which conservative and Socialist parties took turns in power . Greece is now a republic of democracy .
 In Portugal, authoritarian leaders, notably Antonio Salazar, struggled inefficiently with economic backwardness . Salazar was a dictator from 1932 to 1968 .
 Thousands of Portuguese went abroad as seasonal workers each year or emigrated permanently to other countries in Western Europe or in the Western Hemisphere . Portuguese emigrated to Europe or the Americas in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The dictatorship was determined to hold on to Portugal’s African colonies at all costs . At the same time, the dictatorship became entangled in a long, bitter 1186 Ch. Ch. The dictatorship became embroiled in a series of bitter conflicts with the government .
 In 1974, a group of liberal army officers overthrew the dictatorship . In April 1974, the government overthrew a dictatorship in Egypt .
 The Portuguese transition to democracy occurred without bloodshed . Despite another coup two years later by a group of officers, the Portuguese transition was without bloodshed.
 Political turmoil forced the government to abandon a program of state nationalizations and some agricultural collectivization in 1976 . The government abandoned the program in 1976 after a decade of political turmoil .
 Mario Soares took office as the first democratically elected prime minister in Portugal in fifty years . He dominated Portuguese political life into the 1990s . Soares dominated Portuguese politics until the end of the 1980s .
 General Francisco Franco survived as dictator long after his friends Hitler and Mussolini had gone to their graves . Franco survived in Spain long after the deaths of his friends Mussolini and Hitler . Franco was a dictator in Spain until his death .
 The United States prevented the United Nations from imposing economic sanctions against Spain because of Franco’s support of the Axis powers . After World War II, the United States stopped the U.N. from imposing sanctions on Spain .
 While repudiating secular values, he accepted economic modernization, with the help of the U.S. The United States helped him accept modernization .
 In the late 1960s, opposition to Franco’s regime mounted in Catalonia and the Basque country . Each of the regions had an entrenched separatist movement . In the 1970s, the Basques and Catalonia were the most industrial regions in Spain .
 Franco struck hard against Basque and Catalan separatists . The Catalan language, for example, remained illegal in print .
 Franco retained popularity in traditionally religious regions, such as Navarre and Galicia . Franco's popularity in traditional religious regions is high in Spain .
 Franco agreed that Juan Carlos would succeed him as head of state . Juan Carlos was the son of the heir to the throne before the civil war . Spain would remain an authoritarian state .
 Within the Spanish government, however, many officials already believed political reform inevitable, even desirable . Many officials believe political reform is inevitable or desirable .
 He accepted the transformation of Spain into a constitutional monarchy with a democratic political structure . The king accepted the change of Spain's constitution into a democratic state .
 Adolfo Suarez kept a series of governments afloat through skillful political negotiation, even without a parliamentary majority . Suarez's government was able to keep the economy going strong even though there was no majority .
 The charismatic Felipe Gonzalez and the Socialists swept Suarez aside in the 1980s . Suarez was a key figure in Spain's political scene .
 In 1996, Jose Maria Aznar became Spain’s first conservative prime minister since the time of Franco . Aznar was the first prime minister to be conservative since Franco's reign in Spain .
 Compared to the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, religious conflicts have diminished in modern Europe, with several notable exceptions .
 In Northern Ireland, the bitter centuries-old rivalry between Catholics and Protestants brought violence . Catholics and Protestant Protestants have long been rivals in Northern Ireland .
 Northern Ireland is primarily Protestant and remains part of Britain . The Republic of Ireland obtained independence in 1922, but Northern Ireland remains Protestant . Northern Ireland was part of Ireland in 1922 .
 The Irish Republican Army claimed to represent Ulster Catholics . It struck at the British army and Protestants alike . The IRA claimed it was representing Ulster Catholics and Protestants .
 Several weeks of disturbances in 1969 unleashed decades of violence, ‘the troubles’ that took at least 3,500 lives . The troubles took place at least three weeks of unrest in 1969, killing more than 3,000 .
 Protestant paramilitary organizations struck back against Catholics . They claimed that the British army inadequately protected Protestants . Protestant paramilitary groups struck back at Catholics .
 Ian Paisley, a Protestant clergyman, heightened tension by speaking out provocatively against any compromise . He heightened tensions by speaking provociously against any . compromise .
 On January 30, 1972, British troops killed 13 demonstrators in the Northern Irish town of Londonderry . The massacre took place on January 30 .
 The economic crisis of the 1970s compounded Northern Irelands problems, making Catholics even more disadvantaged compared to Protestants . Catholics were more disadvantaged than Protestants in Northern Ireland .
 The IRA, buying guns on the world weapons market with money stolen from banks or contributed by sympathetic Irish Americans, struck not only in Northern Ireland but also in England . The IRA bought guns in Europe with money from banks, or contributed from sympathetic American Americans .
 Cease-fires in 1994 and 1996 could not still still the violence that continued periodically . Violence continued periodically, particularly during the 1990s .
 Protestant and Catholic representatives signed the Belfast Agreement (or Good Friday Agreement) on April 10, 1998 . Agreement provided for a National Assembly for Northern Ireland in which both religions would be represented . Agreement was signed in 1998 .
 The people of Northern Ireland and of the Irish Republic overwhelmingly approved the Belfast Agreement . The agreement was approved by the Northern Irish and Irish Republic . The Belfast Agreement was signed by the Republic and Northern Ireland .
 In December 1999, the British Parliament granted substantial power to the Northern Ireland Assembly . David Trimble, a Catholic moderate as deputy first minister and a Protestant, was first minister .
 In February 2000, the British government suspended the Catholic and Protestant power-sharing government of Northern Ireland when the IRA refused to establish a timetable for the disarmament of its members .
 The IRA gradually abandoned the tactics of violence, and the Catholic political organization Sein Fein emerged as a force for conciliation . The IRA eventually abandoned tactics and became part of a political party .
 The expanding economy in Northern Ireland, as in the Republic, gave more people a stake in peace . Northern Ireland's expanding economy helped more people in the region, as well as the Republic .
 Even Paisley now accepted compromise, becoming first minister of Northern Ireland in 2007 . He became first minister in 2007 after becoming Northern Ireland leader .
 Demands by ethnic minorities for independence surfaced in several countries in recent years . Demands for independence have surfaced in some countries .
 Basque separatists have moved across what they considered an arbitrary frontier to attack Spanish government, army, and police installations and to carry out assassinations . In Spain, sometimes hiding in the French Basque country, they have attacked government installations .
 Popular support for the separatists in the Spanish Basque region waned in the 1980s . The constitution of 1978 recognized “autonomous communities” within Spain .
 On the Mediterranean island of Corsica, violent groups opposed to French rule have planted bombs and carried out occasional assassinations . The groups feuded among themselves even as they feuded between themselves .
 In 1975, the leaders of European states gathered in Helsinki, Finland, to sign the Helsinki Accords, which concluded the first Conference on Security and Cooperation . The fall of Communism was the first European country to fall from communism .
 The thirty-five signatories also pledged to respect human rights and to cooperate in economic and scientific matters . Thirty-five signed the agreement, which also includes respect for human rights .
 Helsinki Accords seemed to recognize Soviet domination of Eastern Europe since the war . To some critics, some critics said it seemed like it was recognition of Soviet domination . The Accords were signed in 1953 .
 The heads of Communist states agreed in principle to respect human rights . To some observers, they were a significant step forward . To others, they said they were significant steps forward .
 Accords seemed a healthy pause in renewed tension between East and West . The accords seemed to seem to be a good pause in the renewed tension .
 Hardly anyone at the time could have anticipated the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe . Two years later, the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union would end .
 The Fall of Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, 1989-1991 . With the fall of communism came the reunification of Germany and the breakup of the Soviet Soviet Union . The fall of Communism came with the collapse of communism in eastern Europe .
 Countries affected by boundary changes are countries affected by the changes . Countries affected include Norway, Sweden, Estonia, Germany, Finland, Sweden and Latin America .
 The euphoria that arose from the realization that the Cold War had suddenly ended proved to be brief . However, the euphoria was brief . The euphor was shortlived .
 New challenges and problems, among them those that had beset Europe for centuries, presented themselves . New challenges were among them, with new challenges and new problems .
 Decades of Communist rule had prevented the emergence of parliamentary political structures . Decade of Soviet-era Soviet-Russian rule prevented the formation of parliamentary parties .
 Civic society in most Communist countries remained seriously undeveloped . Civic society was left in the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 Changing from planned economies with varying degrees of collectivization to free-market economies would prove extremely difficult . The world of planned economies would be extremely difficult to change from planned to free market economies .
 Ethnic divisions complicated the fall of communism in Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria . In Yugoslavia, ethnic conflicts exploded, and ethnic divisions also complicated the end of communism .
 Calls for change echoed loudly in Communist Czechoslovakia in 1968 . The Czech Republic was ruled by the Soviet Union until 1968 . Calls for a change echoed loud in the Czech Republic .
 Dubcek tried to implement “socialism with a human face” during the ‘Prague Spring,” by instituting reforms . As he did so he glanced anxiously over his shoulder toward Leonid Brezhnevs Soviet Union . During the 'Prague
 Crucial to these reforms was a democratization of decision making and greater freedom of expression . Crucial was the democratization and freedom of speech and decision-making .
 The Soviet leadership feared that Czechoslovakia might attempt to move away from the Warsaw Pact . Dubcek’s assurances to the contrary were not true, despite the assurances .
 On August 21, 1968, Soviet tanks and troops moved rapidly across the border and rolled into Prague, ending the Prague Spring . The Prague Spring was the end of the Soviet invasion of Czech Republic .
 The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia initiated another chill in Soviet-Western relations . The invasion was the first of its kind in the Soviet-Czechoslovakia .
 Communist parties of Italy and France denounced the invasion . The Communist Party of Italy, France and Italy were among those denouncing the invasion.
 They stressed their independence by collaborating with Socialists and other left-wing parties . They stressed that they were independent .
 Euro-Communism proved unable to slow the decline in membership in the Communist parties of Western Europe . Euro-communism proved to be unable to stop the decline of membership of Western European Communist parties .
 Under the “Brezhnev Doctrine,” the Soviet leadership tried to justify the invasion of Czechoslovakia . The Soviet leadership left open the possibility of future intervention in any of the satellite states of Eastern Europe . Under the Brezhnevs Doctrine,
 With the exception of Albania, only Yugoslavia retained real independence . Albania remained closed to virtually all foreign contact during the rigid dictatorship of Enver Hoxha . Yugoslavia was the only country to retain real independence during the dictatorship .
 The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia disenchenchanted liberal Communists in Eastern European countries . The invasion disenchanted liberals in Eastern Europe . Czechsoslovakia was one of the most liberal countries in the world .
 Opposition to Communist rule and Russian influence grew in all of the Eastern European states during the 1980s . Opposition to the Communist rule grew in Eastern European countries .
 Communist leaders meet shortly before the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia . The overwhelming economic The Fall of Communism was the overwhelming economic .
 Soviet armies occupy Prague, 1968. failures of the Communist regimes grew ever more apparent . failures of Communist regimes became more apparent.
 Television and radio carried images of the consumer culture of the more prosperous people in the West . TV and radio were used to carry images of a more prosperous West .
 Eastern European Communist states continued to borrow massively from the West, which merely patched over huge problems without bringing economic reform . In the meantime, the West patched over massive problems without reform, the Communist states said .
 Debt owed by Eastern European countries in hard currency rose from 6 billion dollars in 1971 to 66 billion in 1980 . Eastern European debt rose from 66 billion dollars to more than 95 billion in 1988 . Eastern Europe owed more than $100 billion in U.S.
 Welldeveloped social services could not compensate for economic inefficiency and massive demoralization . Well developed social services would not compensate inefficiency of the social services, says the president .
 In 1976 a variety of opposition groups unified, publishing underground books and newspapers and organizing strikes and demonstrations . In 1976, opposition groups published underground books, newspapers and organized strikes, demonstrations .
 Massive unrest led to strikes in Poland in 1970 and the organization of a Committee for the Defense of Workers . Massive unrest in Poland led to the Organization of Workers in Poland .
 By 1976 Poland had lapsed into economic stagnation, and another wave of strikes followed . However, despite massive foreign loans and credits, by 1976 Poland again lapsed in economic stagnation . Poland was hit by strikes and strikes again in 1976 .
 The Catholic Church helped mobilize opposition to the Communist government, particularly after the election in 1978 of Polish Pope John Paul II and his visit to his homeland in 1979 . In the meantime, the Catholic Church retained considerable influence .
 Strikes began in July 1980, and the following month Solidarity, a new illegal organization of trade unions, organized . Solidarity organized . The following month, Solidarity was organized .
 Solidarity’s membership reached 10 million and came to represent opposition to communism . Much more than a trade union, Solidarity represented opposition to the Communist Party .
 Underground publishing had since the late 1970s emerged as a huge dissident industry undertaken by Polish intellectuals, who published more than 2,000 titles . In the meantime, underground publishing had become an underground publishing industry .
 In 1980, strikes and riots in protest of living conditions spread rapidly in industrial areas, particularly in the vast shipyards of Gdansk . Strikes and riots spread rapidly, especially in the huge shipyards .
 Polish government agreed to tolerate the creation of new unions as long as they did not engage in political activity . The Polish government said the new unions would not be allowed to engage in any political activities .
 Solidarity represented the first major challenge to the Communist system since the ‘Prague Spring’ of 1968 . Solidarity was the first challenge to Communist system in Czechoslovakia since the 'Prague spring' of 1968.
 In September 1980, the Communist Central Committee forced Gierek to resign as head of state . The Communist Party Central Committee responded to the ongoing crisis by forcing him to resign .
 The government officially recognized Solidarity’s existence . Two months later, Solidarity was officially recognized by the government .
 Solidarity members called for free elections . However, accommodation between the government and the non-Communist trade unions did not last long .
 He suspended Solidarity and put hundreds of leading dissidents under arrest, including Walesa Walesa . Walesa was arrested by the Polish Communist Party in 1979 .
 Troops brutally crushed strikes that broke out in response to the repression . Troops brutally crushed strikes against the government in the past .
 The murder of a militant priest by policemen by policemen in 1984 generated enormous popular anger and protest . Although martial law ended a year later, the murder of the priest by police generated enormous protests and anger .
 East Germany, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia were the Eastern European nations that were most loyal to the Soviet Union . East Germany and Bulgaria were the three most loyal countries to the Soviets .
 The German Democratic Republic’s chief, Erich Honecker, proved absolutely intransigent to reform . Erich came to power in 1971 . He was the leader of the country's communist regime .
 The Stasi, the East German secret police, employed 90,000 people and had about twice that number as informers . They employed about twice as many informers as the Stasi . Stasi was based in East Germany's East German capital .
 The Lutheran Church provided a center for some dissidents, organizing weekly “prayers for peace” in Leipzig . The church was a center of some dissidents .
 In Czechoslovakia, the state campaign against dissidents was more intense . Czechs had a history of anti-communist violence .
 In 1977, about 1,200 writers, philosophers, intellectuals, intellectuals and musicians signed a protest against government limitation of freedoms in an attempt to force the government to respect the Helsinki human-rights convention it had signed .
 Members of the ‘Charter 77’ group suffered repression . Despite the fact that this was anything but a revolutionary document , members of the "Charter 1977" suffered repression.
 Hungary is the second most prosperous of the Eastern bloc countries . Gradual economic liberalization helped make Hungary the most prosperous country in the history .
 The gradual development of a market economy and a private agricultural sector helped stabilize the Communist regime, with the help of Soviet subsidies . Soviet subsidies were used to stabilize the Soviet regime .
 Hungary became the first Communist state to declare political pluralism to be an ideal in 1985 . Hungary was the first communist state in Hungary to declare it was an ideal for political plurality .
 Hungary had no organized and tested opposition force such as Solidarity. However, Hungary had . no organized . force such an opposition force . Solidarity .
 In sharp contrast, no liberalization of any kind took place in Romania . The Fall of Communism 1193 was the country's first democratic revolution .
 Ceaufescu forged ahead with grandiose plans to generate industrial development . Ceauaescu was the first Romanian leader to take office in the 1970s .
 The dictator ordered 1,500 villages in Transylvania razed to the ground . The dictator also razed 1,000 villages in the region .
 Romania's anti-Hungarian leader was trying to garner support from Romanians with nationalist appeals . These were largely in areas where many Hungarians resided, which he targeted .
 He also ordered some of old Bucharest torn down to forge enormous boulevards that would lead to his reviewing stand . Bucharest's reviewing stand was built in the 1930s .
 The Soviet Union poured more money into the manufacture of arms, like its rival, in response to U.S. relations with the United States . The Cold War was the Cold War .
 After Brezhnev died in 1982, he was succeeded by Yuri Andropov . Despite his long years in the KGB, the KGB was somewhat more liberal than the late leader .
 Andropov acknowledged that there was widespread inefficiency and corruption in Soviet economic planning and government . The Soviet leader acknowledged that he was aware of inefficiency in Soviet planning .
 He called for greater popular participation in economic decision making . He purged incompetent party hacks from important positions . He also purged party hacks .
 Following Andropov’s death in 1984, his successor, Konstantine Chernenko was quite ill when he came to power, and both he and the Soviet state treaded water until his death the following year .
 Both his grandfathers had been arrested on false charges during the Stalin era . Both grandfathers were arrested during Stalin's rule of Soviet Union .
 He was the first Soviet leader since Lenin to have a university degree . Less instinctively xenophobic than other Soviet leaders .
 Artists and writers brought forth new work, including strident criticisms of the Soviet regime . The Soviet regime was the subject of many of the country's most famous works .
 The Soviet leader spoke openly about the failure of economic planning without sufficient material incentives for workers . He spoke openly .
 Centralized state agricultural planning would have to be scrapped in favor of a free-market economy . Centralized agricultural planning has been scrapped in favour of free market economy .
 He summarily cashiered some corrupt or incompetent local party officials . He launched a full-fledged campaign against alcoholism, which had taken on epidemic proportions in the Soviet Union .
 Gorbachev remained convinced that communism could be rescued by necessary reforms . The inefficiency and brutality of Stalinism had been completely eliminated, he said .
 His model may well have been Lenin’s implementation of the New Economic Policy in 1921, which had revived the Soviet economy without sacrificing Communist authority . Lenin's model may have been that of his own, but it may not have been his model .
 In 1987, he reduced the role state corporations played in the Soviet economy . The move paved the way for increasing economic privatization . In 1987 he cut the role of state corporations in the economy .
 Economic inefficiency would clearly have to be overcome, but decades of economic inefficiency must be overcome . The UK is one of the world's most powerful economies .
 The enormous costs of social programs weighed heavily on the sagging economy . Social programs were a major factor in the economy's decline .
 Eastern Europe represented an expensive drain on Soviet finances because of subsidy commitments and the cost of maintaining Soviet bases there . The Communist countries of Eastern Europe had been exploited to economic advantage during the immediate post-war period .
 In 1988, Gorbachev began to sponsor a series of remarkable political reforms . The reforms include the creation of a state of democracy in the USSR .
 He expressed determination to renew the “thaw’s” with the West that had ended during the Brezhnev era . The Russian president expressed his desire to renew a "thaw" with the west .
 Three factors converged in the late 1980s to prepare the fall of communism and the end of the Soviet Union . Three factors converge on the fall and end of communism in the 1980s .
 In 1989 soldiers bludgeoned to death 19 demonstrators demanding independence in Georgia . In 1989, soldiers killed protesters demanding independence from the Soviet Union . Nationalist movements gained momentum in Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Estonia .
 Nationalists in Ukraine celebrated their culture by passing manuscripts written in Ukrainian from hand to hand . Nationalists passed manuscripts from hand-written manuscripts to hand in Ukrainian hands .
 These movements were encouraged by the growing vulnerability of the Soviet state to a weak economy . They were not placated by the belated toleration of greater cultural autonomy .
 In some of the republics, long-festering conflicts between nationalities began to surface violently, further undermining Soviet author The Fall of Communism 1195 ity . In Azerbaijan between Muslim Azerbaijanis and Christian Armenians .
 Second, in 1989, a forceful democratic opposition emerged, led in Russia by the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Andrey Sakharov (1921 — 1989), who had helped develop the hydrogen bomb . The opposition emerged in Russia in 1989 .
 Gorbachev’s encouragement of participation in public life increased the ranks of Soviet citizens demanding reform . The Soviet leader encouraged citizens to take part in his reforms .
 The campaign for human rights, led by Sakharov, discredited the regime, even if the Gulag itself no longer existed . Moreover, the campaign for rights discredited the government, even though the regime no longer exists . The Gulag is no longer in existence .
 The Helsinki Accords, signed by the Soviet Union as well as by the Western powers in 1975, encouraged dissidents . They were signed by Soviet Union and by Western powers .
 The Russian opposition reached a large audience through the circulation of handwritten, typed, or clandestinely printed manuscripts, as well as through the medium of Western radio broadcasts . Increasingly, the Russian opposition .
 The aggravation of the economic crisis beginning in 1988 increased the number of Soviet citizens convinced that a Communist government simply could not bring about a meaningful improvement in the quality of their lives . Third, the aggravation . of the . economic crisis began in 1988, the increase in Soviet citizens .
 TV broadcasts from Finland day after day showed the advantages of a free-market economy . At the same time, television broadcast from Finland showed advantages of the free market economy .
 Gorbachev vacillated between free-market policies and traditional Communist state controls . Gorbama vacillates between free market policies and state controls in the 1980s .
 The result was a further weakening of the economy, replete with shortages and undermined by enormous military spending . The result of the military spending has been seen as weakening the economy .
 Gorbachev determined that the Soviet Union could not afford to continue the arms race with the U.S. Gorbache decided to pull out of an arms race . The Soviet Union did not want to engage in a war with the United States .
 President Obama has moved to improve relations with the United States government . He has been criticised for his policies on foreign policy .
 In the early 1980s, Soviet-U.S. relations had continued to sour dangerously . The Soviet Union and the United States were at odds with each other .
 The United States had tried to prevent the Soviet Union from constructing a long pipeline that would bring Siberian natural gas to Central Europe . The U.S. government had threatened sanctions against any state or company that assisted the endeavor .
 Ronald Reagan backed a plan to construct a space-based missile-defense shield, dubbed ‘Star Wars’ The plan provoked an outcry by the Soviet Union and by some U.S. allies as well .
 The Soviet Union boycotted the 1984 Olympics, which were held in Los Angeles, as the United States had done four years earlier in Moscow . The U.S. had done the same in Moscow, four years before the Olympics .
 Gorbachev resumed arms-limitation negotiations with the United States . He refused to sign an agreement because Reagan would not include the ‘Star Wars’ experiments in negotiations .
 The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to reduce the number of medium-range missiles . Two years later they signed another arms-control agreement . The U.S. and Soviet Union also agreed to cut number of missiles .
 In 1988, the Soviet Union recalled troops from Afghanistan after nine years of bloody fighting against rebels there . The Soviet Union recalls troops from the country in 1988 . In Afghanistan, the Soviets recall troops after years of fighting with rebels .
 Government publications admit economic and social problems that troubled the Soviet Union . For the first time in anyone's memory, government publications admitted the problems . The Soviet Union was in the grip of a Soviet state of depression in the 1980s .
 The Soviet Union began to allow Soviet Jews to emigrate abroad in greater numbers than ever before . Soviet Jews emigrated abroad in a greater number of years than before .
 In 1989, almost 70,000 Jews left, most for Israel or the U.S. Most Jews went to Israel or Israel, most of them to the United States . In the 1980s, Jews left the country .
 In 1986, a nuclear reactor exploded at Chernobyl, near Kiev, sending radioactive material into the atmosphere . The most serious nuclear accident in history occurred in Ukraine, when a reactor exploded .
 Thousands of people in the vicinity were killed or suffered grave illnesses . Thousands in the area died or suffered a grave illness .
 A nuclear cloud passed over Ukraine, Russia, and the Scandinavian states, among other countries . The cloud also passed over Scandinavia, Russia and Ukraine .
 Gorbachev discussed the situation with unexpected openness . Following an initial official attempt to deny the seriousness of the disaster, the Soviet Union tried to minimize the damage .
 Some reform-minded government officials joined opposition leaders in Poland and Hungary in the belief that economic and political liberalization was urgent in 1989 . Poland's prime minister and prime minister among those who pushed for liberalization .
 Communist rule slowly floundered under the weight of economic decline and popular dissatisfaction . Communist rule of Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 after a decade of Soviet-era stagnation .
 In Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, and Albania, Communist leaders sought desperately to hold on to power . In the 1990s, Czechs, East Germans, and Czechsoslovakia and East Germans were among the countries in the middle of the Cold War .
 The East German and Czech governments reverted to force in an attempt to halt popular movements for change . The East Germans and Czechs have been known for their use of force in the past .
 Even if the Communist leadership in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Romania were determined to overwhelm dissent, Soviet tanks would no longer back them up . Soviet tanks were no longer used by the Communist leaders in those countries .
 Gorbachev rejected the ‘Brezhnev Doctrine’ that had brought Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 . In a speech to the Council of Europe in July 1989 in Strasbourg, he made clear that he rejected the Brezhneev Doctrine .
 Poland became the first test case for the new Soviet relationship with its former satellites . Transition to Parliamentary Government in Poland and Hungary was the first step in the process .
 Since its creation in 1980, Solidarity had virtually achieved the status of an unofficial opposition party . The trade union organization has been virtually an unofficial party since 1980 .
 Catholic Church remained a source of organized opposition to communism . The Catholic Church was a major source of opposition to the Communist Party .
 It was the continued pitiful performance of the economy that fatally undermined communism . Communism was fatally undermined by pitiful economic performance .
 In 1987, the government held a referendum, asking Poles to support price increases . Poland's government held the referendum in 1987, asking for price increases in Poland .
 When they were overwhelmingly voted down, the government imposed them anyway . They were overwhelmingly rejected by the British Parliament .
 Demonstrations and strikes followed, and renewed calls to legalize Solidarity were made, amid widespread shortages and a grotesquely inflated currency . Solidarity was legalized in 2008, but the currency has been inflated .
 The government could no longer meet the interest payments on its massive debt to Western banks . The government was forced to withdraw from Western banks to pay off interest payments .
 The opposition agreed to participate in exchange for government recognition of the legal status of Solidarity as the legitimate representative of Poles opposed to Communist rule . Solidarity is the Polish opposition to the Communist regime .
 Negotiations between Solidarity representatives and the government in 1989 led to the creation of a senate and the position of president of Poland .
 Solidarity candidates swept to victory in the Senate in the first relatively free elections in Poland since the immediate post-war period, Solidarity .
 In the lower chamber, 65 percent of the seats were reserved for Communists and 35 percent for candidates of Solidarity .
 General Jaruzelski confidently believed he could orchestrate liberalization on his own terms . Still, he said he would not give up on liberalization in the country .
 Communist candidates won only two of thirty-five seats in elections in which they ran unopposed . The Communist Party won two of 35 seats in the House of Representatives .
 The Communists could not put together a government acceptable to Solidarity . The Communists were unable to put together an acceptable government . The Communist Party could not agree to a deal with Solidarity.
 Poland had the first non-Communist government in Eastern Europe since 1948 . Solidarity leader Tadeusz Mazowiecki was elected by parliament .
 Solidarity leaders still wary that popular momentum once again could lead to heavy-handed repression . However, they supported the election by the Polish parliament of General Jaruzelski .
 In the wake of a split within Solidarity between the followers of Mazowiecki and those of Lech Walesa, the latter was elected president in December 1990 . In the aftermath of the split, Poland's president was elected by the Polish government .
 The Democratic Union, formed by Mazowiecki’s followers within Solidarity, won the largest number of seats in the lower house and the senate . The party won the most seats in both the lower and senate .
 Economic reforms, aimed at introducing a full-fledged free-market economy, were slow to take effect, however . Economic reforms aimed at bringing free-markets into the country's economy, however, have been slow to arrive .
 Poland began a long struggle for economic stability with mounting unemployment and a dramatically increased crime rate . Poland's economy has been hit hard by rising crime and unemployment .
 The Hungarian Democratic Forum and several smaller opposition groups began to emerge in 1988 out of cafe and living-room gatherings of longtime dissidents . Hungary's main opposition group is the Hungarian Democratic Party .
 Liberal Communists ousted longtime leader Janos Radar from power, intent on reforming Hungary . But with the economy floundering under declining productivity and rampaging inflation, Radar was ousted from power . Radar was the leader of the Communist Party .
 Opposition groups hesitated to call the legitimacy of the Communist regime into question . The memory of Soviet intervention in 1956 still lingers large .
 Faced with continuing popular mobilization, the Communist leadership decided to try to outbid the Hungarian liberals by initiating reforms . The Communist leadership tried to . try to . outbid . Hungarian liberals .
 In May 1989, the government ordered the removal of barbed wire that defined the border with Austria . The border was removed by the government in May 1989 .
 Former premier Imre Nagy reburied with national honors . Nagy had been executed after the 1956 uprising in Ukraine .
 It espoused democratic principles and encouraged the development of opposition parties . Accepted a new constitution later that year . It was proclaimed later in the same year .
 The transition from communism to multiparty parliamentary rule in Hungary was peaceful . The transition was peaceful, with the Hungarian Democratic Forum leading a coalition government .
 The Fall of Communism 1199 The Collapse of the Berlin Wall and of East German Communism . East Germans fled the German Democratic Republic in record numbers . Pressure for change mounted in Poland and Hungary .
 Many traveled to the German Federal Republic via Czechoslovakia and then Hungary, whose government in May 1989 had opened its border with Austria . Many traveled via the Czech Republic and Hungary to Germany .
 About 150,000 East Germans reached the West during the first nine months of 1989 . About 15,000 people from East Germany reached West during that period .
 East German Communist leader Honecker praised the Chinese army and police for crushing the prodemocracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989 .
 East German leadership stood firm until it was too late . East German leaders negotiated with determined reformers but stood firm . The East German government refused to negotiate with reformers .
 Honecker demanded that Hungary return fleeing East Germans to their country, as specified in an old treaty between the two Communist states . The treaty was between Hungary and the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 East German government gave permission to East Germans on a train through Dresden and Leipzig to emigrate to West Germany . Other East Germans frantically tried to climb aboard the train to escape the government .
 When Gorbachev visited East Berlin early in October 1989, demonstrators chanted his name . His name had become synonymous with opposition to the East German regime . Gorbachachev's name was chanted during his visit .
 When demonstrations spread to other major cities, Honecker ordered the police to attack demonstrators, but Egon Krenz, responsible for state security, refused to do so . Egon was responsible for security at the time .
 On October 18, 1989, Honecker, old, ill, and ignored, was forced out in favor of Krenz, more moderate, but no reformer . Honeckcker was old and ill, but ignored, forced out of the country .
 In Leipzig, anxious opposition leaders and fearful Communist officials had met and resolved that peace must be maintained at all costs . An anxious opposition leader and Communist officials met and decided to maintain peace .
 Such words encouraged demonstrations and meetings in East Germany . Such words further encouraged demonstrations .
 On November 4, Krenz announced that East Germans were free to leave for West Germany via Czechoslovakia . East Germans are now able to move to West Germany from the Czech Republic via the Czech-born route .
 On November 9, Krenz capitulated to the inevitable, announcing a sweeping change in government . He promised to initiate legislation that would grant East Germans the right to travel where and when they wanted .
 Berlin Wall had divided East Berlin from West Berlin since August 1961 . Berlin Wall was torn down by President of West Berlin in 1961 .
 Around 3 million East Germans poured over the demolished wall, or crossed into West Germany at once-forbidden checkpoints .
 An East German poet remarked, “I must weep for joy that it happened so quickly and simply.”
 Egon Krenz announced that East Germans could travel where they wanted . East Germans gathered at Berlin Wall to forge openings with whatever tools they had .
 Krenz still hoped that his promise to hold free elections would keep the Communists in power . He said he hoped that the Communists would continue to hold elections .
 Krenz’s government fell on December 3 and was succeeded by a series of committees until elections were held in March 1990 . But lacking popular support, the government fell .
 A number of East German leaders already expressed eagerness for reunification . The East German leader has expressed an eagerness to reunify .
 There would be no Russian opposition to what had seemed for decades to be unthinkable . Russian fear that one day a united Germany might again threaten the peace .
 The West German mark became the currency of both Germanys . In the meantime, the German Democratic Republic began selling off state-owned companies . West Germany mark became currency of the two countries .
 In September, Britain, France, and the United States renounced their rights in Berlin . The U.S. and Britain, viewing reunification as inevitable, renounced the rights .
 In December, the first elections in the newly unified Germany returned the Christian Democrats to power . The Christian Democrats were returned to power in December .
 In Czechoslovakia, the Communist leadership resisted the forces for change as vehemently as their counterparts in East Germany . The fall of Communism was swept aside in ten days . The Fall of Communism 1201 The "Velvet Revolution"
 As news arrived of the fall of the Berlin Wall, the number of determined dissidents rapidly swelled . The number of dissidents in Berlin swelled as news of the collapse of the Wall fell .
 On November 17, 1989, students staged a demonstration in honor of a student executed by the Nazis fifty years earlier . The demonstration was held in memory of the student who was executed .
 Speakers quickly ignored program censors had approved and began to call for academic freedom and respect for human rights . But speakers quickly ignored censors' approval and called for freedom of expression and freedom of speech .
 A squad of riot police moved in, throwing canisters of tear gas and beating students with clubs . Riot police threw tear gas, threw clubs and tear gas at students, beating them with clubs, police say .
 The next day, a crowd assembled on the spot where police had beaten protesters . Protesters gathered at the site of the police brutality .
 Without the support of the Soviet Union, the Czechoslovak Communist government took no steps to repress the movement for freedom . The Czechoslovakia's Communist government did not take any steps against the movement .
 Havel had been imprisoned several times for dissent, once nearly dying from mistreatment . Havel, who was jailed several times, had been nearly killed for dissent .
 Crowds poured into the streets almost every day calling for freedom of speech, the release of political prisoners, and the end of communism . Crowds waved national flags and called for political prisoners to be released .
 Czech students lay wreaths on spot where Czech student burned himself to death in 1968 . Student burned himself in protest of Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . Czech students burned themselves to death to protest the invasion of the Soviet Union .
 On November 24, 1989, the Communist Central Committee narrowly voted against using the army to put an end to demonstrations . The Communist Party Central Committee voted against the use of the army .
 In Slovakia, intellectuals formed an organization called “Public Against Violence,” the Slovak equivalent of the Czech Civic Forum . The organization was formed by intellectuals in the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
 The Communist government now had no choice but to negotiate with its opponents who demanded free elections . The government now has no choice to negotiate .
 There were virtually no reform-minded Communists in 1202 Ch. Ch. Yet, unlike Poland and Hungary, where political opposition was well developed within the constraints of the system, the system was not so open .
 From Moscow, Gorbachev advised Czechoslovak leaders not to use force . Czechoslovakia was ruled out of use of force by the Soviet Union .
 Negotiations between the government and Havel and other representatives of Civic Forum began on November 26 . Havel is a former Czechoslovakia president .
 More than half of the top leadership within the party was purged that day . That day, more than half a day, the party had purged its top leadership .
 Civic Forum demands formation of new government . Civic Forum demanded formation of a new government. Civic Forum has been in power for two years .
 The Communist-dominated Federal Assembly voted to end the party’s domination of political life . The Communist Party has been in power for 18 years .
 On December 10, the first cabinet in Czechoslovakia since 1948 not dominated by Communists was sworn in . The first cabinet since 1948 has been sworn in in the Czech Republic since 1948 .
 The Federal Assembly unanimously elected Havel president of Czechoslovakia . Havel was elected president of the country in 1961 .
 What Havel called a ‘velvet revolution’ had succeeded, led by writers, actors, and students . Havel’s "velve revolution" had succeeded in the wake of the Velvet War .
 Havel quickly announced that Czechoslovakia “must return to Europe,” suggesting that its future lay with the West . Havel: "Czechoslovakia must return to the West" Havel later announced that the West was the future of the Czech Republic .
 Czechoslovakia faced the problem of creating viable democratic institutions and establishing a market economy, but also of tensions between Czechs and Slovaks . The new government faced not only the problems of creating democratic institutions but also the tensions between the Czech and Slovak population .
 Although the two peoples shared seventy years of common political history, much separated them . Much separated them from each other .
 Czech part of the state was more urban, prosperous, and Protestant than Slovakia . Slovakia was more rural and Catholic . Czech part was more prosperous, prosperous than Slovakia, which was Catholic .
 Slovak nationalists, particularly on the right, called for the creation of an inde . Vaclav Havel was the first president elected under free elections in Czechoslovakia after fall of Communists in 1989 .
 Communist regimes also fell in Bulgaria, Romania, and Albania . The three Eastern European states were without significant reform movements .
 In Bulgaria, long-suppressed unrest began to emerge in response to pressure for reform in other Eastern European countries . The unrest began in Bulgaria in 2010 after a decade of repression was suppressed .
 Zhivkov ordered that his jet leave at once for his Black Sea vacation, flying over the burning plane . Zhovkov was flying over a burning plane in Sofia, Bulgaria, when the plane crashed .
 Bulgarian secret police had achieved international notoriety, blamed by some for an attempt to assassinate Pope John Paul II in Rome in 1981 . They were also blamed for a James Bond-like murder of a Bulgarian dissident killed by the deadly jab of a poison-tipped umbrella .
 Bulgarian exports (principally agricultural produce and light manufactured goods) had difficulty finding markets, particularly as the economic crisis deepened in the Soviet Union . Bulgarian exports were mainly agricultural and light-manufactured goods .
 Rural migrants poured into Sofia and other Bulgarian cities in search of work . Rural migrants pour in to Sofia to find work in Sofia, Sofia .
 As the economy deteriorated, Zhivkov and the Communist leadership sought to displace popular anger in the direction of the country’s large and rapidly growing Turkish minority . The country's rapidly growing minority of Turkish immigrants is a major concern .
 After launching a harsh campaign against Turkish customs, Zhivkov’s government encouraged the ethnic Turks to emigrate to Turkey, which further destabilized the Bulgarian economy . The campaign against ethnic Turks also destabilized Bulgaria's economy .
 Many returned to Turkey disappointed that conditions in Turkey seemed worse than in Bulgaria . Many soon returned, however, disappointed that life in Turkey was even worse .
 The Bulgarian Politburo surprised Zhivkov by suddenly demanding his resignation in November, the day after the Berlin Wall had fallen . The decision was made in response to news of dramatic political changes occurring in the other Eastern European states .
 The ease with which this was accomplished suggests that some party bureaucrats, army officers, and even members of the notorious government 1204 Ch. Ch. 1204 were involved in the crime .
 The new government purged Stalinists and welcomed back Turks, contributing to a nationalist backlash among many Bulgarians . Many Bulgarians have a strong anti-Turkish sentiment toward the government .
 Zhivkov was tried for misuse of government funds and sentenced to prison . He was found guilty of misusing government funds . He has been sentenced to life in prison .
 The former Communists capitalized on resurgent ethnic rivalries and fear of change in the countryside . However, in June, they won a majority of seats in the New National Assembly .
 In Romania, the fall of the Ceaufescu clan and communism was anything but bloodless . The fall of communism in the country was anything from bloodless to bloodless, but it was anything more .
 His wife, Elena, fraudulently claimed to be a brilliant chemist, presenting papers at academic conferences that had been prepared by Romanian scientists, and then refusing to answer questions about them . Elena presented papers at conferences that were prepared by academic conferences .
 Ceaufescu and his wife virtually pillaged a suite at London’s Buckingham Palace, carting away everything of value they could . On the occasion of a state visit to Britain, the Queen of England knighted the Romanian leader .
 In order to begin paying back $10 billion in foreign loans, Ceaufescu cut back food imports, increased food exports, rationed electricity, and banned the sale of contraceptives in the hope of increasing the Romanian population .
 Ceaufescu’s downfall began in 1989 in the Transylvanian town of Timisoara, where ethnic Hungarians resented second-class status . The former Prime Minister's downfall came in 1989 .
 Ceaufescu had ordered the razing of 8,000 largely Hungarian villages and the relocation of their residents . The villages were razed by the Romanian dictator .
 Crowds rioted, smashing store windows and burning Ceaufescu’s portraits . Crowds smashed store windows, smashed portraits of the former leader .
 Three army officers were shot for disobeying orders and firing on crowds . The feared security forces stepped in, shooting three army officers . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Hungarian and Yugoslav television showed events rapidly transpiring in other Eastern European countries . As another cold Romanian winter approached along with the usual severe food and fuel shortages, food shortages were common .
 Ceaufescu called for a massive demonstration of support in Bucharest in December . In December, he called for massive demonstrations of support .
 Orchestrated cheers from the crowd soon became jeers, drowning out the dictator’s pathetic speech blaming riots on Hungarian nationalists . The dictator blamed riots on Hungary's nationalists .
 From the safety of his palace, Ceaufescu ordered troops to fire on the crowds below . From the safe of his . palace, the troops fired on the . crowds below, killing the protesters .
 Most units refused to obey and, as a result, the minister of defense was executed on Ceaufescu’s orders . But most units refused and most of the defense units refused .
 The Fall of Communism 1205 was staged in a scene reminiscent of Beijing’s Tiananmen Square earlier that year . The hated secret police eagerly fired on the assembled crowds, and tanks crushed protesters .
 Soldiers battled security forces outside the presidential palace . Hundreds of bodies lay in the streets of the streets .
 Several of the dictator’s top officials now decided that Ceaufescu's days of iron rule were numbered . The dictator's days were numbered, according to officials . Several of his top officials decided to step down .
 Ceaufescu and his wife left their stately residence on December 22, 1989, through secret tunnels, and then commandeered a helicopter . The former Prime Minister left his stately home in secret tunnels on December 23, 1989 .
 They were captured and immediately charged with murder and embezzlement of government funds . The pair are accused of killing a man and stealing government funds from the government .
 On Christmas Day, they were tried by a hastily convoked tribunal and condemned to death . The tribunal had no legal authority, and condemned them to death on Christmas Day . The trial was convoked, and the defendants were executed .
 Their bloody bodies were left lying stiffly in the snow for a worldwide television audience to see . They were then taken behind the building and shot, leaving their bloody bodies lying stiff in the cold .
 More than 1,000 died during the revolution that overthrew Ceaufescu and ended communism in Romania .
 Communism swept away even in Albania, which had remained largely isolated from change by sealed borders . Communism was swept away in Albania even though it had remained isolated from Eastern Europe .
 The fall of Ceaufescu in December 1989 emboldened dissidents . Food shortages had generated sullen anger in Europe’s poorest country .
 President Ramiz Alia announced greater openness in the selection of government leaders . Alia also announced a larger role for workers in choosing managers .
 A group of Albanian intellectuals demanded the end of the Communist monopoly on power . Students went on strike against the Communist Party in Albania .
 Alia believed he could maintain control by placating Albanians with minor reforms . Like other Communist leaders, he believed that he could placate Albanians . Alia was a leader of Albania's Socialist Socialist Party .
 In February 1991, a crowd of 100,000 demonstrated in Tirana, pulling down a large statue of former strongman Hoxha, who had died in 1985 . In 1991, the crowd pulled down the statue of the former president, who died in the same year .
 In early March, 20,000 Albanians tried to force their way onto boats departing for Italy . Albanians are trying to make their way to Italy . Albania has been hit by violence in recent months .
 A Romanian prays for countrymen executed on the orders of dictator Nicolae Ceaufescu in Timisoara, Romania . This event, which focused international attention on Albania, produced a photo .
 Former Eastern European satellites of the Soviet Union abandoned communism . Unhappy with the system became more vocal within the Soviet Soviet Union itself .
 In March 1990, the Communist government voted to permit non-Communist parties in the Soviet Union . The office of president was created in March 1990 . The Communist government created the office of the president .
 Pressure for the breakup of the Soviet Union mounted from the republics . Pressure was mounting for the break-up of Soviet Union from republics.
 In Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, a human chain of more than 1 million people formed to support the independence of their nations . In Estonia and Latvia, more than a million people supported their nations' independence .
 In 1990, Russia declared that laws passed by its legislature could override those of the Soviet Union . In June 1990, the Russian Republic declared that such laws could override Soviet Union laws .
 Gorbachev’s attempt to enhance government decentralization fell short of what nationalists in the republics sought . The Soviet-era Soviet Union sought decentralization of government powers .
 In June 1990, Lithuania unilaterally declared its independence from the Soviet Union . Gorbachev responded by ordering an embargo on Soviet oil and gas shipped to the Baltic state .
 He probably still believed that Soviet influence over its former satellites in Central and Eastern Europe could continue even after the fall of communism .
 In 1990, he appointed several hard-line government officials and ordered a crackdown on nationalist movements in the Baltic states . The Baltic states have been hit by nationalist movements .
 This led to the dramatic resignation of Shevardnadze, the popular foreign minister . This led him to the resignation of the country's most popular minister .
 Claiming that Gorbachev was not truly committed to reform, he challenged the latter's authority and the legitimacy of the Soviet state . He challenged the former Soviet leader's authority, saying he was not committed to reforms .
 As chair of the Supreme Soviet, the state’s highest legislative body, he announced that henceforth Russia would be a sovereign, independent state . Russia would become an independent, sovereign state .
 Yeltsin had no illusions about the survival of communism . He had grave doubts that the Soviet Union itself would survive . The Soviet Union was not expected to survive .
 When reactionary Communists attempted to unseat Yeltsin as chairman in the Russian Parliament, several hundred thousand Moscovites turned out to express their support for him . Several hundred thousand people turned out in support of Yeltsins .
 The hard-line group had begun putting pressure on Gorbachev in September 1990 . The army began mysterious maneuvers around Moscow around Moscow .
 In January 1991, Gorbachev may have approved an attempt to overthrow the democratically elected government of Lithuania . The attack began with an attack on a television installation in the capital of Vilnius .
 The clumsy plot involved army and KGB agents pretending they were a Lithuanian dissident group . It failed miserably . Army and KGB officers pretended to be Lithuanian dissidents .
 90 percent of those voting in Lithuania expressed their support for independence . A month later, in a referendum deemed by the Soviet government to be illegal, 90 percent voted for independence in Lithuania . The difference explained by the fact that more Russians lived in Estonia and Latvia .
 Yeltsin called for Gorbachev to resign in a nationally televised speech in February 1991 . Yeltsins called for the resignation of the Soviet leader in 1991 .
 Gorbachev ordered troops to surround the Kremlin in a show of force in a Soviet-era show of strength . The Kremlin was surrounded by troops in the wake of the break-up of the Cold War .
 Yeltsin had begun to undermine the army and security forces, where he had followers . However, Yeltsins' followers had followers, but he had been undermining the army . He had begun undermining the security forces with his followers .
 In April, he abandoned his commitment to preserving the Soviet Union at all costs . In April he accepted the idea of autonomy for the republics . The former Soviet Union leader has been criticized for his stance .
 Atop a tank in front of the Russian Parliament building, Boris Yeltsin urges the Russian people to resist the coup detat of August 1991 . In June 1991, Yeltsins was elected President of Russia .
 The Communists now had little support in Russia, by far the Soviet Union’s largest republic . Russia is now Russia's most populous state .
 Intransigent Communists were now firmly convinced that Gorbachev’s policies threatened the existence of the Soviet Union . Intrinsigent Communists now firmly . convinced . that Gormachev's policies . threatened to the existence .
 Setting up an “Emergency Committee,” the conspirators apparently hoped that they could convince or force Gorbachev to use his prestige against reform by declaring state of emergency .
 Gorbachev agreed to do so, but only if such a move were approved “constitutionally” by the Supreme Soviet . The Supreme Soviet Council of Soviet Union approved the move, but it was later overturned .
 In Moscow, Yeltsin stood on a tank outside the Russian Parliament and encouraged resistance . In Moscow he encouraged resistance to the government's decision to step down .
 The coup fell apart, its leaders having underestimated the strength of both Yeltsins and Gorbachev’s popular support . The coup was the result of a failed coup by the Soviet Union in 1986 .
 Yeltsin mobilized people in Moscow by calling for resistance and the restoration of Gorbachev as the legitimate Soviet leader . Yeltsins called for resistance to the overthrow of the Soviet government . The Soviet Union was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 This appeal to constitutionality revealed how much had changed in a very short time . It was appealed to the constitutionality of the law by the Supreme Court .
 In August, Gorbachev returned to Moscow a hero, and again took a more reformist stance . In August he returned to Russia a hero and took a new stance .
 Some KGB officers were pensioned off, and television and radio were freed from the constraints of censorship . TV and radio was freed from censorship .
 The Soviet government recognized the independence of the Baltic republics, just months after Gorbachev had insisted on retaining the structure of the Soviet Union . The Baltic Republics became independent in 1991 .
 One by one, the republics left the Soviet Union, where Russians had constituted only about half of the population . The republics were left by Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 90 percent of the population voted to leave the Soviet Union in December 1991 . In December 1991, Ukraine followed, after 90 percent voted to exit . Ukraine is the only country in the West to leave Russia .
 By the end of the year, thirteen of the fifteen Soviet republics had declared their independence . The Soviet Union was one of the largest economies in the world .
 Yeltsin and the presidents of Belarus and Ukraine declared the Soviet Union dissolved . The Soviet Union was declared a stateless state of Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The Fall of Communism 1209 bachev acknowledged that the Soviet Union no longer existed . Gor Gor Gor: The fall of Communism was the end of Soviet communism . Gor: Bachev, too, acknowledged that that Soviet Union was no longer exists .
 Symbolically, Leningrad again assumed its old name of Saint Petersburg . Symbolically symbolically, the city was re-named Saint Petersburg after the fall of communism .
 On December 25, 1991, Mikhail Gorbachev resigned, closing one of the most remarkable political eras in modern European history . On that day, the Soviet Union closed its doors to Russia .
 The end of communism in Europe did not guarantee an easy transition to parliamentary democratic rule . It was not easy to end communism and end of democracy in the West .
 The lack of democratic traditions, the economic turmoil, and the deep ethnic rivalries posed daunting challenges, said CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Nowhere are the stakes higher for a peaceful transition to democracy in Russia than in Russia . The stakes are high for the transition to Russia's democracy .
 Yeltsin declared a “special presidential regime” in 1993, dissolving the legislature and overriding opposition to his reform program . In 1993, Yeltsins declared a special presidential regime, which dissolves the legislature .
 In 1996, Yeltsin became the first democratically elected president of Russia . Yeltsins was elected in 1996 . He was the first Russian president to be elected to power .
 In ill health, his resignation at the end of 1999 led to the election of Vladimir Putin as president of Russia . Putin is a former KGB officer who served as a KGB officer .
 Putin provided some badly needed stability to Russia after considerable turmoil during the 1990s . Putin provided Russia with stability during the turbulent years .
 The story of the disintegration of Yugoslavia most tragically illustrates the complexity of national identity, the impact of ethnic politics on the postCommunist era in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, and the challenges and hopes for the future .
 Marshal Josip Broz, a Croat, believed that communism in Yugoslavia could end ethnic rivalries and Serb domination . Marshal Broz believed that the end of Yugoslavia would end ethnic rivals .
 Tito’s death in 1980 led Yugoslavia to a collective presidency that rotated every year among the republics governed Yugoslavia . Tito's death was followed by the collective presidency of Yugoslavia's republics . Yugoslavia was one of the world's most prosperous countries .
 Serbs and Croats are the country's two largest ethnic groups . But tensions persist between Serbs, Croats, the country’s two largest .
 Serbs enjoyed disproportionate representation in the Communist state bureaucracy . Serbs were disproportionately represented in the communist state bureaucracy. Serbs had disproportionate representation, according to the Communist Party .
 Regional disparities in economic development and prosperity compounded ethnic divisions . Ethnic divisions have been fueled by economic disparities in the region .
 Slovenia was by far the most ethnically homogeneous of Yugoslavia’s republics . In the north, Slovenia enjoyed a standard of living not far below that of its neighbors, Austria and Italy .
 In the south, Macedonia and Bosnia remained backward and relatively impoverished . In the north and south of the Balkans, the region remained backward .
 Within Bosnia, 85 percent of the population of the territory of Kosovo was Albanian and Muslim . The territory of Bosnia and Kosovo was also Albanian .
 The minority Serbs viewed Kosovo as sacred Serb soil, because the Ottoman Turks had defeated them there in 1389 . Kosovo had become part of Serbia 1210 Ch. Ch. 1210: The Ottoman Turks defeated the Serbs there in the 1389 and Kosovo became Serbia .
 Ethnic Albanians claimed the right to be the seventh Yugoslav republic . Ethnic Albanian republics were formed in Yugoslavia in the 1960s .
 In the mid-1980s, the Serb-run Yugoslav government launched a brutal repression of Albanians living in Kosovo . The government claimed that Albanian nationalism posed a threat to communism .
 He undertook what amounted to a military occupation of Kosovo, ending its administrative autonomy . He ended the administrative autonomy of the country .
 In 1989, fighting broke out in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and Serbs and Montenegrins, inflaming Serb nationalism . Fighting broke out between Serb and Albanians in Kosovo .
 New parties formed in each of the six republics, including Serbia, where Communist leaders still opposed reform . Serbia's Communist leaders opposed reform, but new parties formed .
 Non-Communists won a majority of the parliamentary seats in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Slovenia, Slovenia and Macedonia . The non-Communist party won a large majority of parliamentary seats .
 In Croatia, the nationalist Franjo Tudjman won a clear electoral victory, accentuating tensions between Croatia and the Yugoslav state . In Croatia the nationalist won the election in a clear election victory .
 Milosevic loudly espoused the creation of a Greater Serbia that would include all territories populated by Serbs . The Serb nationalist leader was assassinated in 1998 .
 In May 1991, Serbia prevented the succession of a Croat to the rotating presidency of Yugoslavia . Serbia prevented succession of Croat to presidency of the rotating Yugoslavia presidency .
 In Slovenia, intervention by the Yugoslav army was met by determined resistance and was short-lived . Intervention by the Slovenian army in Slovenia was met with determined resistance . Yugoslavia's intervention in Slovenia ended in a defeat in Slovenia .
 Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia from Yugoslavia in June 1991, as did Slovenia . Violent conflicts between Croats and Serbs intensified when Croatia became independent in 1991 .
 Serb militias, supported and armed by Yugoslav army units, began occupying large chunks of Croatia that had sizable Serb populations . Serb militia was supported by the Yugoslav army, backed by the army .
 Within several months they held about one-third of Croatian territory, driving Croats from their villages and killing thousands of people . Thousands of people were killed by the Croatian army in 1992 .
 Serbs shelled the walled Croatian city of Dubrovnik on the Adriatic coast, severely damaging one of Europe’s most beautiful cities . From the heights above, Serbs fired at the city from the heights .
 Croatia became independent in January 1992, although parts of Croatia remained under Serb control . Croatia became an independent state in 1992, but parts of the country remained Serb-held .
 The Yugoslav army occupied parts of Bosnia, allegedly to protect Serbs, in the 1990s . Serbians were allegedly protected by the Yugoslav army . Bosnia was occupied by the army in the early 1990s, allegedly by the Serbic majority .
 In March 1992, a majority of Bosnian Muslims and ethnic Croats voted for the independence of Bosnia-Herzegovina . The Bosnian Muslim majority voted for independence in March 1992 .
 Bosnian Serbs refused to recognize the legality of the plebiscite . Bosnia's Serbs are still fighting for independence from the Bosnian peninsula .
 The fall of the Communists in Yugoslavia led to the breakup of the Yugoslav federation and to civil war between Croats, Serbs, and Bosnian Muslims . The collapse of the Communist Party in Yugoslavia was the trigger for civil war in Bosnia .
 This map reflects the settlement reached in the Dayton Peace Accords, signed in November 1995 . The Dayton peace accord was signed in 1995, and the United States signed in 1994 .
 Bosnian Serb militias perpetuated atrocities against Bosnian Muslims, including rapes and mass executions . Bosnian Muslim Muslims were raped and murdered by Serb forces .
 They massacred 8,000 men and boys in fields outside the town of Srebrenica . They were massacred in fields in fields near the town . The Bosnian Serbans were fighting for Bosnian Muslims in the Bosnian war .
 In predominantly Croat parts of Bosnia, Croats carried out brutal measures against Muslims, some of whom reciprocated against Serbs and Croats . Croats also carried out atrocities against Muslims in predominantly Croat parts of the country .
 Bosnian Serb forces, supplied by the Yugoslav army, surrounded Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, from the heights above and killing civilians . Although Yugoslav armies withdrew, fearing international intervention, the Serbs withdrew . The Serb's forces lobbed mortar and cannon shells from
 U.N. placed an economic embargo on what was left of the Yugoslav state . Milosevic’s government was overthrown by the Bosnian Serbs in 1992 .
 NATO alliance failed to act, allowing Serb nationalists to conquer more than 70 percent of Bosnia-Herzegovina . NATO alliance did not act, thus allowing Serbs to conquer over 70 per cent of the country .
 Croats and Muslims in Bosnia now began to fight each other . To make things even worse, Croat and Muslims now began fighting each other. Croats, Muslims and Croats in Bosnia are fighting .
 Bosnian conflict took a terrible toll, creating hundreds of thousands of refugees . Hundreds of thousands still live in the Bosnian capital .
 Croatia entered the conflict with an eye toward taking Bosnian territory that nationalists considered Croatian . Croatia also entered Bosnia with a view of taking over territory that was considered Croatian territory .
 Bosnian Muslim and Croatian leaders met in Washington, D.C., forming a Muslim-Croat Federation within Bosnia-Herzegovina . Bosnian Muslims and Croatians will be represented in the Muslim majority in Bosnia and Croatia .
 Bosnian Serbs refused to respect either the cease-fire or an international plan for peace . The Serbs are still fighting in the Bosnian conflict .
 The arrival of blue-helmeted UN peacekeepers in the first international attempt ever to stop ethnic cleansing at first made little difference . UN peacekeeping was the first attempt to stop the first ethnic cleansing attempt ever .
 In August 1995, the Croats recaptured Krajina, contested territory bordering on Bosnia that Croatian Serbs had declared to be independent in 1991 . Croatian Serbija was declared an independent republic in 1991, but Croatia was declared independent in 1992 .
 Tens of thousands of Serbs from Krajina took to the roads as refugees, heading toward Serb strongholds in Bosnia . Now tens of thousands are fleeing the Bosnian peninsula .
 By the Dayton Peace Accords, Bosnia was to be a single state that included a Bosnian-Croat federated federation and a Serb republic . By the end of the 1990s, Bosnia had been a one-state state . The Dayton Peace Accord was orchestrated in 1995 by
 This agreement would be supervised by a NATO peacekeeping force, including U.S. troops . The deal would be overseen by NATO peacekeepers, including United States troops .
 Bosnian Serbs overran free zones that NATO forces had established to protect Bosnian Muslims . NATO forces established free zones to protect Muslims from Serbs . Bosnian Muslim Muslims were killed by Serbians in 1992 .
 Mass murders perpetrated against Muslims in 1995 led to the indictment of Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic by the International Criminal Tribunal, a UN tribunal that was established in The Hague (in the Netherlands) to judge those accused of crimes against humanity .
 Ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, overwhelmingly by Serbs, took more than 200,000 Bosnian lives . By the end of the war about 2. million Bosnians were without homes .
 Albanians formed the Kosovo Liberation Army with the goal of obtaining freedom from Yugoslavia . In Kosovo, Albanians had formed the Albanian Liberation Army . Albanians were fighting for independence from Yugoslavia in the early 1990s .
 In 1998 and 1999, Milosevic unleashed Serb forces against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo . In 1999, the Serb government unleashed Serbs on ethnic Albanian refugees in Kosovo.
 Milosevic refused to allow NATO peacekeepers into the province . A cease-fire arranged by the U.S. in October 1998 quickly collapsed .
 Serb troops began ethnic cleansing, killing thousands of Muslims, and drove 860,000 Albanians into Albania and Macedonia . Thousands of Muslims were killed and thousands of Albanians were driven from Serb territory .
 NATO began attacking military targets in Serbia from the air in 1999 when Serb forces did not withdraw from Kosovo . NATO forces in March 1999 began attacking Serb military targets from air .
 The bombing campaign forced Serb forces to withdraw from Kosovo and allowed 50,000 NATO peacekeepers into Kosovo . Serb troops were forced to withdraw after the bombing campaign . NATO forces also withdrew from Kosovo .
 About 720,000 ethnic Albanian refugees have been returned to Kosovo . They were part of the return of about 7,000 refugees to the country .
 Milosevic's government in Yugoslavia collapsed in October 2000 in the face of mass demonstrations . Milosev's government was overthrown by mass demonstrations in the 1990s .
 Serb leader was arrested six months later to face charges of crimes against humanity and genocide . He was arrested at the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague . Serb was arrested on suspicion of genocide in 2010 .
 New Yugoslav government worked quickly to end the international isolation brought about by Milosevic’s policies . New Yugoslavia worked to end international isolation by the end of the former Yugoslavia .
 The United States and other states ended economic sanctions against Yugoslavia . The U.S. ended sanctions on Yugoslavia in 1998 . Yugoslavia was one of Yugoslavia's most prosperous countries .
 In 2003, Serbia-Montenegro became Serbia-Serbia, the only two of the six republics of Yugoslavia that remained together . The remnants of Yugoslavia were Yugoslavia's only two remaining republics . Serbia and Montenegro are now Serbia-Bosija .
 The assassination in March 2003 of the prime minister of Serbia, Zoran Djindjic, attested to the continuing volatility of Serbia . Djindiic was one of the forces behind the ouster of Milosevic in 2000 .
 Kosovo proclaimed its outright independence from Serbia in 2008, a move that Serbia and Russia refused to recognize . In 2008, Kosovo declared outright independence, but Russia and Serbia did not recognize the move .
 The West breathed a sigh of relief after the collapse of communism in Europe . The existence of nuclear weapons in several of the former states of the Soviet Union became a considerable concern .
 The 1986 Chernobyl disaster clearly demonstrated the vulnerability of the rest of Europe to 1214 Ch. Ch. Nuclear Reactors . Chernobyl was the heart of Europe's nuclear plants .
 Ukraine’s nuclear arsenal and its claim to the remnants of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet docked in Crimea raised tension between Russia and Ukraine . Ukraine also claimed to have nuclear weapons and claim to Black Sea fleet docked there .
 In 1992, Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, Belarus and Kazakhstan all agreed that nuclear weapons stored on their territory would either be destroyed or turned over to Russia . Ukraine and Russia all agreed to destroy or hand over nuclear weapons in 1992 .
 The problem of preventing the theft and sale of nuclear materials, particularly to potential terrorists, remains one of the most important concerns for the future . However, the problem of stopping the theft of nuclear material is still a concern .
 The rapid industrialization in East Germany, Romania, and Czechoslovakia under communism left horrendous pollution from coal-burning furnaces and virtually unregulated factories .
 Acid rain destroyed forests, killed rivers, and compromised public health . Acid rain killed forests, poisoned rivers, compromised health, killed public health.
 Newly-independent states faced the challenge of putting their own foreign relations on a firm footing .
 For many of the former Soviet republics, relations with Russia are complicated by centuries of animosity . Ukraine and Georgia are the two countries with centuries of hostility toward each other .
 Eastern European Communist states were largely atomized societies of one-party rule without political infrastruc . Like the Soviet Union, the Eastern European . Communist states .
 The Fall of Communism 1215 tures, traditions of political parties, civic cultures, or . adequately developed voluntary associations . The fall of Communism was the fall of communism in 1968 .
 Only in Poland and Hungary had non-Communist political leadership gradually emerged in the 1980s . The basis for the emergence of party politics following the dismantling of one-party rule was the basis .
 Civic Forum in Czechoslovakia served the same function, and in Hungary a series of right-center and left-center coalitions implemented far-reaching economic reforms . In 1989, Civic Forum helped implement reforms in Hungary .
 In some former Communist countries, the problem of creating political institutions in which basically only party members had experience in public life was daunting . The problem in some former communist countries was daunting. The problem was to create political institutions where only party leaders had experience .
 First free elections held in Eastern Europe since the late 1940s . Two distinct trends were seen in the 1990s . Free elections were the first in Eastern European elections since the 1950s .
 Nationalist right-center parties emerged victorious in eastern Germany, Poland, and Hungary . The parties of the left, including those formed by former Communists, fared badly in those countries .
 In Poland, Solidarity was defeated in 1991 in the first free elections held since 1926 . Solidarity defeated in Poland in 1991, leading to the arrival in power of several center-right coalitions .
 In Bulgaria and Romania, former Communist parties came out better than any other parties . On the other hand, they came out ahead of any other party in both countries . Former Communist parties were quickly renamed and claiming the mantle of reform .
 Communist officials maintained prestige as they were identified with the modest increase in living standards that had occurred during the decades since the war . They did particularly well in the countryside, where reform movements had been largely absent and reform movements were largely absent .
 Six years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Bulgaria, Hungary, Lithuania, Lithuania and Poland, were now led by former Communists . Poland's Lech Walesa was turned out of office in 1995 .
 Many of them benefited from being familiar faces able to draw on old political networks and from protest votes from people exasperated by growing economic disparities . Many of those who voted for President Obama benefited from familiar faces .
 Former Communist states moved to create modern economic systems based on private enterprise . The former Communist states are now free to own their own businesses .
 Western economic advisers provided some of the expertise as the nationalized sector of Eastern European economies was drastically reduced . Western economic advice was provided by the West .
 The process proved easier in the more northern countries than in the Balkans, where elected leaders in the 1990s tended toward authoritarian rule amid continuing corruption . This process proved to be easier in northern countries, than the Balkans .
 With the exceptions of Poland and Hungary, economic privatization was not easy in post-Soviet Central and Eastern Europe and particularly in the Balkans . With the exception of Poland, Hungary, it has been not easy to privatize in the region .
 As in the former Soviet Union, weak economies and a relatively low standard of living continued to generate political instability . Weak economies and relatively low standards of living generated political instability in the country .
 The utilization of free-market “shock therapy’s’ end of price controls on most consumer goods at first brought economic chaos to Russia and Poland . Communists were returned to power in 1993 .
 In the region as a whole, industrial production fell by between 20 and 40 percent . Industrial production in the region fell by as much as 40 percent in 2013 .
 Widespread unemployment and the sudden end of the massive welfare system under which entire populations had grown up left hardship, bewilderment, and anger . Unemployment and the loss of the welfare system left people bewildered .
 In Hungary, foreign conglomerates bought up property that had been held by the Communist state . Foreign conglomerates are buying up property held by communist state .
 Former owners of property collectivized by Communist regimes demanded their lands back . Former owners were forced to collectivize their land under Communist regimes .
 The attraction of joining the European Union itself encouraged economic and political reform in the former Soviet satellite states . Yet, at the same time, the attraction of the EU itself encouraged political reform .
 In some countries, members of the former Communist elite managed to get hold of valuable assets . In some cases, former Communist leaders managed to hold on to valuable assets.
 Poland's Western creditors canceled half of the debts owed by Poland in March 1991 . The economic outlook in that country seemed bleak . Western creditors in Poland canceled half its debts in 1991 .
 The Russian economy virtually collapsed in the 1990s, and by the end of the decade about 30 percent of the population of Russia was classified as impoverished . About 30 per cent of Russia's population was classified impoverished at the time .
 Russia barely avoided bankruptcy in 1998 by postponing paying off $43 billion in short-term loans . Russia avoided going bankrupt by delaying paying off some of the money . Russia's debt to taxpayers was too much to blame .
 Romania, Bulgaria, and Albania were confronted by the ravages of decades of Communist economic policies . Heavy industry, compounded with old technology, combined with an inefficient agricultural sector .
 In 1997, the new Romanian government undertook major economic reforms with the help of loans from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . Romania's economy was heavily dependent on oil and gas exports .
 These included the reduction of state subsidies to companies and the privatization of many state-run businesses . State-run companies have been privatized in recent years .
 Nation-states have not always turned out to be liberal and tolerant, liberals say . Nation-state is necessary before constitutional rights and equality can be assured, they say . The U.S. has not always been a liberal state, liberals argue .
 Tensions still remain between Turks and Bulgarians in Bulgaria, Hungarians and Romanians in Romania, Slovaks and Hungarians in Slovakia, and Albanians and Macedonians in Macedonia .
 In Hungary and Romania, too, right-wing racism has focused on Roma, as well as Jews . Right-wing racist attacks have targeted Jews and Roma in both countries .
 The potential for ethnic violence in Russia and the other former Soviet republics also remained, experts say . Russia and other ex-Soviet republics remain at risk .
 Twenty-five million Russians lived in other republics within the Soviet Union at the time of the disintegration, 17 million of whom were in Ukraine . The majority of those living in Ukraine were in the Ukraine .
 The Fall of Communism 1217 governments established language tests to determine who was a “real” Estonian . It was telling that in Estonia, no sooner had Communist rule ended than new .
 The newly independent Baltic republics established laws that classified Russians as foreigners . The laws were established in the Baltic Baltic Republics of Latvia and Estonia .
 Aggressive nationalism and xenophobia have become more in evidence in Russia . The country has seen a rise in xenophobia in recent years .
 Azerbaijanis and Armenians battled in the Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in the early 1990s . Azerbaijanis, Armenians and Azerbaijanis fought in the enclave in Nagorno Karabakh .
 The revolt, which has taken the lives of thousands of civilians, has generated harsh Russian repression . It has generated terrorist attacks orchestrated by rebels inside Chechyna and inside Russia .
 Russian government proposed greater Chechen autonomy, but not independence . Russian government proposes greater autonomy for Chechen . Chechen rebels want greater independence .
 Russian troops captured Grozny, the capital of the breakaway republic, in February 2000 . The Russian capital was the capital city of the Russian-held breakaway Republic .
 Chechen rebels on several occasions took hundreds of hostages, many of whom were killed when Russian troops stormed a theater and a school . Many of the hostages were killed by Russian troops when they stormed the theater and school .
 Putin oversaw a vigorous resurgence of Russian presence and assertiveness on the international scene in 2004 . Elected to a second term in 2004, he oversaw a resurgence of Russia's assertiveness .
 In Ukraine, tensions between those who wanted close relations with Russia and those who did not destabilize the government have been high .
 The status of Crimea, which became part of Ukraine during the Soviet break-up, remains highly contentious because of the importance of Sebastopol as a Black Sea naval port . Crimea is still considered Russian by the Russian government .
 Russia ended its participation in the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty in 2007 . The treaty was signed in 1990 at the very end of the Cold War . In 2007, Russia stopped participating in the treaty .
 Putin’s chosen successor, Dimitri Medvedev, was elected president in 2008 . In 2008, he was chosen to become Putin's chosen successor . Putin was elected to power in 2008, but has not been in office since then .
 Putin named Putin prime minister, leaving the latter’s enormous influence in Russia virtually intact . Putin kept open the possibility that Putin might one day again be president again .
 Russian forces invaded South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Georgia, in 2008 . They were allegedly to protect the minorities, some of whom had been provided with Russian passports .
 Russia pushed into Georgia itself before a cease-fire was signed . The Russians pushed into the country itself before the ceasefire was reached .
 Russia declared that its troops would remain as ‘peacekeepers’ in the contested zones . Russia declared its troops will remain as "peacekeepers" in the disputed zones .
 A sign of modern times, the offensive against Georgia included Cybernet attacks intended to destabilize Georgian web sites . The attacks included cybernet attacks aimed at destabilizing Georgia web sites. The attacks were aimed at disrupting the web sites in Georgia .
 Russian actions drew virtually unanimous international condemnation, chilling relations with the United States . The U.S. counted the pro-American Georgian government as an ally and had encouraged Georgian defiance .
 Russian military action and official recognition of both enclaves as independent states reflected Russian anger at the recognition of the independence of Kosovo by the U.S. and other Western nations .
 In January 2009, Russia cut off the supply of natural gas to Ukraine after a bitter dispute over prices . Russia seemed to flex its muscles by cutting off the supplies in January 2009 . Russia is rich in energy resources, but also has a history of cutting gas supplies to Ukraine .
 The shutdown had the immediate effect of leaving many countries in eastern and southern Europe without much heat during a very cold winter until the dispute was resolved . The shutdown left many countries without much heating during a cold winter .
 The cooperation between states in the former Soviet bloc and the West is reassuring . The West failed to act effectively to resolve the Bosnian crisis, but the cooperation between the West and the ex-Soviet bloc .
 Russia and the U.S. signed an arms treaty in 2002 and have cooperated in space ventures, notably the space station . The two countries signed a space pact in 2002 .
 In 1997, NATO announced that it would expand its membership to include eventually Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary . NATO hoped that the adherence of former Communist states would help consolidate democracy .
 A Permanent Joint Council in Brussels will bring together NATO members and Russia to consider joint actions, including arms control and peacekeeping . The council will also discuss arms control, peacekeeping and arms control .
 NATO was originally established with the goal of containing the Soviet Union . NATO now includes twenty-six nations . This is a remarkable turnabout .
 After centuries of sending millions of European emigrants to other continents, the trend was reversed . The trend of emigrating from Europe was reversed after centuries of emigrants .
 Asians and Africans seeking a better life began to arrive in Western Europe in the 1960s . Asian and African migrants began arriving in Europe in unprecedented numbers in the 1970s .
 With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, tens of thousands of immigrants began arriving in Western Europe .
 While immigrants have contributed enormously to the economies of many European states, their presence and cultural differences they bring with them have generated xenophobia in many states . Many states have increased the political influence of nationalist parties of the extreme right .
 Immigration poses a challenge to the new Europe, raising difficult issues of identity and identity . Immigration raises the very question of what it means to be European . Immigration is a challenge for the new European Union .
 The financial crisis that began in 2008, the worst international economic crisis since the Great Depression, itself reflected dimensions of globalization . For example, the financial crisis—indeed the near collapse of the financial sector— itself reflected the global financial crisis .
 The subprime lending crisis, the result of irresponsible mortgage lending, was followed by the bankruptcy of several major financial giants and the propping up of others by national governments . Then the subprime . lending crisis followed by bankruptcy of major financial . giants, the . propping-up of
 In the United States, hundreds of thousands of houses were foreclosed upon when purchasers could not make payments . In the U.S., hundreds of thousand of houses have been foreclosed .
 This had an immediate catastrophic impact on the world economy, and thus on ordinary people who have reason to fear for the safety of their money . The world economy is in danger, writes David Frum .
 The financial meltdown revealed the scale of global interconnectedness . The collapse of the global financial system was the result of the meltdown .
 As the world economy went into recession and economic growth slowed down in the U.S. and Europe, China and India faced lower demand for their goods . The world's two new booming economies are facing lower demand .
 In Europe, despite considerable economic integration provided by the European Union, the absence of comparable political integration made it difficult for the leading states to come up with effective comprehensive policies that cut across national boundaries .
 Some EU countries provide subsidies to certain industries to protect certain industries . The EU has a single European Union market with a single EU market .
 Tensions emerged between the states whose economies were doing relatively well and those like Spain, Ireland, and Greece who were suffering the most . Older member states feared an increased economic burden being placed on them .
 Europe has ceased to be the center of global political concern and conflict, a title that has arguably passed to the Middle East . Europe is no longer the world's center of political concern .
 Globalization has made Europe vulnerable to the tensions linked to conflicts in the Middle East . Europe has been hit by a wave of instability in the region since the fall of communism .
 Terrorist attacks have carried the struggles in that part of the world to Europe itself . Terrorists have carried their struggles in the region to Europe's borders .
 European unity and the traditional Western alliance have been challenged by the domination of the United States . The collapse of the Soviet Union has challenged the Western alliance, says Vladimir Putin .
 The European Union in the 1990s carried cooperation between European states to a level barely imaginable a decade or two before . Yet cooperation between EU states was barely imaginable in the 90s .
 Within the European Union, a single market led to the inauguration of a single currency -- the “euro” - in 2002 . Within the EU, the euro was created in 2003 . The euro is now the largest single currency in the world .
 More than ever before, the worlds population has been on the move . Immigration to Europe has been a huge problem .
 Africans, Asians, Turks, and people from the Middle East have arrived, legally or illegally, in Western European countries . Europeans have arrived in Western Europe, legal or illegal .
 Immigration to Europe 1221 larly from the poorer countries of southern and eastern Europe, has also continued to be significant .
 The mass movement of people from the Third World, particularly from Africa and Asia, must be seen in the context of the rapid growth of the worlds population . The world's population has grown rapidly in recent years .
 Population of Africa in 1950 was half that of Europe; by 1985, the two populations stood about even . Within several decades the population of Africa will probably be three times that of European . Africa's population is now three times Europe's .
 In some cases, newly independent colonies sent immigrants to their former colonizers . Indians and Pakistanis moved to Britain and of North Africans to France .
 Beginning in the late 1960s, foreign-born ‘guest workers’ (as they are called in Germany) made up an increasing proportion of the workforce in Western European states .
 European governments concerned about labor shortage took up a variety of skilled but mostly unskilled work . Encouraged by European governments, they took up skilled work .
 The government of the German Federal Republic established recruiting offices in southern Europe and North Africa, hoping to encourage immigration . The recruitment offices were set up in the hope of encouraging immigration .
 The number of foreigners living in Western Europe tripled in thirty years . It's the first time in 30 years that foreigners have lived in Europe's most populous countries .
 In Switzerland, foreign workers make up about a quarter of the workforce . Foreign workers are in Switzerland, making up about 25 percent of the population .
 Turks have settled in Germany in great numbers because of the relative proximity and historically close ties between Turkey and Germany . Turks have moved to Germany in large numbers due to the proximity of the country .
 Portuguese make up the largest non-French ethnic community in the Paris area . North African immigrants captured by a patrol boat after trying to enter Spain illegally .
 The percentage of ethnic minorities living in Britain rose from 6 percent to 9 percent in the decade between 1991 and 2001 . Ethnic minorities live in Britain now at 9 percent .
 1 million Muslims live in England and Wales, representing more than 3 percent of the population . In the latter year, 1. million Muslims lived in the UK and Wales . In 2012, more than 1 million people were Muslims in the country .
 In 2007, 2 million of London’s 7 million residents had been born outside of Britain . London has a population of 7 million people born outside Britain .
 Following the collapse of communism, the opening of Eastern European borders and the elimination of border controls between many Western European states increased the number of people trying to reach Western Europe .
 Kurds fled Iraq and Turkey for Europe . North Africans left Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco, trying to reach France via Spain, if they did not drown first .
 Between 1990 and 1993, 200,000 Albanians crossed the mountains to reach Greece . Between 1990 to 1993, more than 100,000 crossed the mountain peaks to get to Greece .
 Thousands of people have made the dangerous trip across the Adriatic Sea to Italy . Thousands of others have also tried to flee violence and economic ruin in their country .
 Between 1980 and 1992, 15 million immigrants arrived in Western Europe . 15 million people arrived in Europe in the 1980s and 1990s .
 By the early 1990s, at least 3 million clandestine immigrants were living in Western Europe, and probably many more . By the mid-1990s, there were at least three million clandestine migrants in Europe .
 Western European governments have turned increasingly to new strategies and laws to try to reduce the number of immigrants . They have established tougher tests for claims of political asylum and sending illegal immigrants back to their countries .
 The percentage of asylum seekers whose cases are judged favorably by government authorities has been decreasing . The government has been criticized for not treating asylum seekers as refugees .
 Children born in France to non-French parents must apply for citizenship between ages 16 and 21 . 60 percent of France's population is now made up of foreigners, 60 percent are non-European .
 The government has also made it more difficult for foreigners to acquire French citizenship through marriage . The government also has made it harder to obtain French citizenship .
 The Austrian director of immigration put it memorably: “There are no distances any longer in this world.” Referring to the smuggling of migrants into his country, the Austrian immigration chief said: ‘There is no longer in the world. There is no distance .
 When economic recession sharply reduced the number of available jobs, the political tide began to turn even more against foreign workers .
 The British government put laws restricting immigration in place in 1968 and 1971 . The laws were put in place by the British government in 1971 .
 Austria 724,000 people were born in Austria, Belgium 910,000 in 1995 . Denmark 223,000 were also born in Denmark, which was 4.5% of the population . Denmark is 4.7% of foreign-born population .
 When the economic recession began in the mid-1970s, other European states began to enact more restrictive immigration policies . Other European states enacted more restrictive policies in the 1970s .
 Many foreign-born workers recruited as single young men before the economic recession . Hundreds of thousands of undocumented clandestine clandestine workers were joined by hundreds of thousands .
 Nations put into effect stricter border controls in an attempt to reduce illegal immigration . Nations put in effect stricter measures to reduce the number of illegal immigrants entering the country .
 EU nations have continued to build on the Schengen Agreement . The agreement began with the exchange of information about immigration . EU nations are moving toward common policies of border policing .
 At the same time, birthrates of many countries continued to decline . The birthrate in many countries has also declined .
 14 countries are no longer reproducing their populations early in the twenty-first century . Italy and Spain lead the way, followed by Germany and Sweden . In other countries, population growth is zero, or not far above that .
 At the end of the twentieth century, economic uncertainty was closely related to the continued fall in the number of births . The number of people born in the UK has declined steadily in the last century .
 Many Western European countries will lose population without significant immigration . Western European economies will continue to require the labor of immigrants, legal and otherwise .
 In 1987, foreign and minority prisoners accounted for one-third of those locked up in France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Switzerland . Foreign and minority inmates account for one third of all prisoners .
 In the 1990s, riots by—but also against—immigrants (principally Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, and 1224 Ch.i. Ch.is, were riots by immigrants .
 As in the inter-war years, economic weakness has encouraged hostility to those some consider to be outsiders . A perceived lack of security against crime became a central focus of electoral campaigns .
 Polls reflect fears that the quality of education declines when too many immigrants and asylum seekers are present in the classroom . Polls have reflected popular fears that education quality declines when many immigrants are in the class .
 Many Europeans believe that immigrants abuse existing social welfare programs . Most of those asking for political asylum were fleeing economic hardship, not political persecution that would make them eligible .
 At the same time, emigration of many educated people with special training deprives poor countries of muchneeded talent . The emigrants are often sent to poor countries with special skills .
 Rising intolerance, racism, and xenophobia have become apparent in Europe, orchestrated by extreme right-wing nationalist parties . Rising intolerance is reminiscent of the rise of fascism during the inter-war years . It is directed against foreign workers and their families .
 Brutal and even murderous attacks against foreigners proliferated in Germany, France, Britain, Belgium, and Russia .
 Right-wing political parties such as the National Front in Britain and the party of the same name in France adopted aggressive anti-immigrant stances . The National Front and the National Party in France are both right-wing .
 In Germany, the German People’s Union denounced legal changes in 1999 that made it somewhat easier for longtime foreign-born residents to become citizens . In 1999, changes were made to make it easier to become a German citizen .
 Xenophobia has also been seen in such liberal, openminded countries as Sweden and Denmark . Xenophobia is also seen in traditionally liberal countries such as Sweden .
 In Belgium, the right-wing Vlams Belang has made anti-immigration a central part of its appeal . The party has challenged Belgian unity, while challenging Belgian unity .
 Russia has seen a spate of murderous attacks on foreigners, particularly those from Central Asia and Africa . The attacks have been carried out in Russia, mainly in Central Asia, Africa .
 In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen emerged as the leader of the farright National Front . Jean- Marie Le Pen is a former member of the National Front in France . The far right-wing National Front has been in touch with France's far-right movement for years .
 Le Pen won as much as 17 percent of the vote as a candidate in three presidential elections . Le Pen had been accused of torture after a stint in the army in Algeria . He described the death camps as “a minor detail” of WWII .
 Nicolas Sarkozy borrowed the anti-immigrant language of the National Front and appeared to make it respectable . Sarkozy was elected president of France in 2007 by borrowing the language of France's National Front .
 In Immigration to Europe 1225: Muslims protest opposition to the construction of a mosque in Nice, France . A prayer demonstration by Muslims to protest against the construction in Nice is an example of cultural tensions across a multicultural Europe .
 While some foreign workers have assimilated in their countries of residence, many have maintained customs of their homelands while living in ethnic enclaves in their new countries .
 In the first years of the twentyfirst century, more than 12 million Muslims lived in Western Europe . The majority of Muslims are Muslims .
 In Britain, France, and Germany, Muslims have been viewed with suspicion . In Britain and France, Muslims are viewed as Muslims with suspicion.
 Difficulties in learning the language of the new country of residence have made it harder to find work . Discrimination and language discrimination have also made it hard to find a job .
 This has often put the younger generation of foreign workers, born in their countries of residence, in the uncomfortable position of being excluded from mainstream life where they reside . Many feel no real connection to their parents’ country of origin .
 In France, when Muslim schoolgirls went to school wearing the traditional headscarf, they were expelled . They were expelled from school in France when they wore it . Muslim school girls were expelled for wearing the headscarfs .
 Riots in 2005 in French suburbs reflected the isolation and alienation of North and West African Muslim minorities, particularly young people .
 The European Community was created in 1967, when the European Atomic Energy Community, the European Coal and Steel Community, and the European Economic Community (the EEC, or European Common Market) merged . The EEC was created to enhance economic cooperation .
 Great Britain feared flooding of its internal market by less expensive agricultural produce . The government of Great Britain had first been disinclined to join the EC . Great Britain was initially reluctant to do so .
 French president Charles de Gaulle had forcefully opposed Britain’s membership . The French president also opposed Britain's membership .
 There were other reasons, as well, to argue against Britain seeking to join the EU .
 Britain feared that the pound, once considered “as good as gold,” might suffer . The pound was considered ‘as good . as gold” once considered as good .
 The government did not want to be necessarily constrained by policies favored by other European states, it said . The government said it would not be constrained by other EU policies .
 Voters overwhelmingly approved their country’s application for membership in 1973 . Britain joined the EC in 1973 and joined the European Union in 1979 .
 Heath’s Labour successor as prime minister sought to renegotiate the terms of Britain’�s membership . However, Harold Wilson sought to renegotiate the terms of the membership with the UK .
 The advent of Margaret Thatcher as British prime minister in 1979 put her country’s membership at risk . An urgent EC meeting agreed to reduce British financial contributions to the EU in 1979 .
 Denmark and Ireland had also joined the EC in 1973, followed by Greece and Greece in 1981, and Spain and Portugal in 1986 . Greece and Portugal joined the European Union in 1986, and Denmark joined in 1973 .
 The EC eliminated troublesome tariffs, aiding the most efficient producers, who were able to sell their products abroad easily . The EC eliminates troublesome tariffs for the most efficiently producers .
 The Danish dairy industry profited greatly from sales of milk and cheese to other member countries, as did their French counterparts . But dairy farmers elsewhere often found that they could not compete with larger competitors .
 The problem of wine revealed the challenges posed by EC agricultural policy . The EC has been criticised for failing to tackle the problem with wine .
 Spain and Portugal produce great amounts of wine, threatening vintners producing inexpensive wine . New members Spain, Portugal and Russia produce great quantities of wine . Subsequent members Map 30.70 .
 The original six members of the European Community were later joined by twenty-one other countries . France, West Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and Italy were among the original six .
 Wine producers protested the arrival of Italian wine by blocking roads at the frontier . Wine producers blocked roads at frontier to protest arrival .
 Jacques Delors became president of the European Commission in 1985 . Delors was a former minister of finance and finance . He was the first member of the Commission from France .
 Delors led the campaign for a unified Europe that could compete with Japanese and U.S. economic strength . Delors: "Europe can compete with Japan and United States economic strength"
 It pointed to the anticipated establishment of a single market within member states . Calling for the termination of all obstacles to the free movement of capital, goods, workers, and services, it pointed .
 Delors believes that the EC should include a “social dimension” that would protect the rights of ordinary people . Delors: EC should also include a "social dimension" that protects ordinary people's rights .
 Delors had in 1988 indicated his hope that in the future a single currency could be used by member states, further accentuating trade within the EC while eliminating fluctuations in the value of individual currencies . Delors said in 1988 he hoped a single euro would be used to accentuate trade within
 Thatcher and Conservative “Euro-skeptics” opposed the plan, partially out of fear that Germany’s then-booming economy and currency would dominate the other EC members . Thatcher and British Conservative ‘Euro-Skeptics.’ opposed the idea .
 Thatcher’s departure from office in 1990 did not end vehement opposition from British Conservatives to any thought of abandoning sterling . Thatcher left office in 1989, but there was fierce opposition to abandoning sterling in 1990 .
 The Treaty of Maastricht was signed in 1992 by the twelve members of the European Community . It transformed the EC into the European Union . The treaty was signed by the 12 European Community members .
 The new name took effect in 1993 when the single market began operation . The single market is the largest in the world .
 France barely approved the treaty in a referendum called by President Mitterrand in late 1992 . It took a second vote to obtain the same result in Denmark in a second referendum .
 The European Community committed the European Community to ‘economic and monetary union” by 1999 . The European Union opened all borders within the EU and committed the EU to “economic and Monetary union’ by 1999.
 In 1995, Austria, Norway, Sweden, and Finland joined, while Norway turned down membership . Austria and Norway joined in 1995, but Norway refused membership .
 The European Commission became the executive body of the European Union in 2004 . The Commission was created by the European Parliament in 1998 .
 Brussels is based in Brussels and consists of members appointed by each member state . Headquartered in Brussels, it is based on members of each country's parliament .
 It is headed by a rotating president and proposes legislation to the Council of Ministers . Each member state has a rotating presidency and a rotating council of ministers .
 Each participating state elects representatives to the European Parliament, which has its headquarters in Strasbourg . The European Parliament can reject a proposed budget .
 The European Court of Justice rules on disputes between member states and individual plaintiffs and the European Union . The European court of justice rules in the EU .
 The European Council consists of the heads of each member state and meets twice a year . It meets with the president of the European Commission . The European Parliament is the largest body in the EU .
 The European Union even has a small army, established by virtue of the Amsterdam Treaty of 1999 . The EU even has an army of small soldiers, established in 1999 .
 One of the most daunting challenges of creating a single market has been to establish an effective agricultural policy that takes into account the tremendous variety of agricultural production within the member states .
 EU subsidies to farmers accounted for nearly half of the annual budget in 1995 . As part of the common agricultural policy, EU subsidies accounted for almost half of annual budget .
 Subsidies have protected member states by limiting the importation of products from outside the EU . But they also have generated overproduction, such that many farmers are paid not to produce, or for the surpluses they produce . Subsides have protected members of the EU by limiting
 European Union funds are diverted in the attempt to aid the development of the poorer member states, including Greece and Portugal, and disadvantaged regions .
 Admission of Poland requires sizeable subsidies for Polish agriculture, which in terms of efficiency lags considerably behind its Western counterparts . Poland's economy has been booming in the first decade of the new century .
 An infusion of funds from the European Union has brought new roads and other benefits to new members of the U.S. state .
 One could travel from Estonia to Portugal without being stopped at any border . Some national authorities worry such openness might aid illegal immigration and organized crime .
 The problem of how the European Union can create a sense of legitimacy within the member states remains daunting . The EU is struggling to find a way to create legitimacy within member states .
 Irish farmers clog the streets of Dublin with their tractors to protest the reforms proposed by the Common Agricultural Policy of the European Union that would reduce their income . The reforms would reduce farmers' income by reducing their incomes .
 This project is made even more difficult by over-bureaucratization, inefficiency, and corruption . This project will be the first of its kind in the U.S.
 People on the left who describe themselves as “European” tend to stress civic reasons for this identity, such as support for democratic political systems and the affirmation of social and human rights .
 Those on the political right are more apt to emphasize a common European cultural heritage . The political right is more likely to emphasize the common cultural heritage of Europe .
 Member states of the European Union are required to keep their budget deficits down to no more than 3 percent of gross domestic product . EU member states must keep their budgets down to 3 percent GDP .
 In 1998, the European Central Bank began operation, charged with managing the European Union currency . It is charged with setting interest rates for the euro zone of eleven nations, and keeping down inflation .
 The euro was launched as an accounting currency in 1999, but without participation of Britain, Sweden, and Denmark, or of Greece . Greece failed to meet financial criteria for monetary union that the EU had set for member states .
 The euro became the official currency in participating member states on January 1, 2002 . The euro was the first currency to become the euro in participating countries in 2002 .
 A relatively smooth transition was made possible by considerable preparations, including publicity campaigns by governments, banks, and shopping centers . The conversion of machines accepting bills and coins, and assistance to the elderly, immigrants, and other groups, was also important .
 The euro soared in value, rapidly surpassing the United States dollar, weakened by the soaring U.S. trade deficit . The euro is now the world's largest dollar .
 It has engendered feelings of ambivalence toward supranational economic and political organizations but also a nationalist response . It's engendered not only feelings . It has also engendered . feelings of . ambivalent feelings toward . suprisational economic . and political . organizations .
 Many ordinary people believe themselves disconnected from the workings of Brussels . Brussels is a city of power, but Brussels is the heart of the EU .
 Even some farmers who receive subsidies from the EU are unaware that they come from Brussels and not their own own ministries of agriculture .
 In 2005, the European Union suffered a blow when votes in France and the Netherlands rejected approval of the proposed constitution, which had been promulgated the previous year . The European Union was hit by the defeat of the constitution in 2005 .
 Its goal was to reform the original treaty that created the European Union by streamlining its administration . The European Council was created to streamline the administration of the EU .
 The rejection of the new treaty in a referendum in Ireland in 2008 cast a new shadow over the functioning of the European Union .
 Ireland's economy has received a major boost from its EU membership, largely through the biotech revolution . Despite continuing operational challenges, new members can indeed look to the example of Ireland's success .
 High unemployment, low agricultural productivity, the necessity of institutional reform, and the great cost of becoming a member of the European Union, pose challenges to new members . The European Union Opposition to Globalization 1231 itself .
 The economic gap between the wealthiest countries and the states of Central and Eastern Europe is still considerable . Central and eastern Europe seeking the advantage of greater access to markets remains considerable . Britain, France, Germany, and Germany are among the countries seeking to access to the markets .
 The possible admission of Turkey has generated great debate, in part because of some doubts that the country still bridges Europe and Asia, is really European . Turkey is still part of the continent, but it still bridges both Asia and Europe .
 Successes of fundamentalist Islamic groups in elections challenged the stridently secular basis of Turkey . The country is overwhelmingly Muslim but not militantly Islamic but not .
 In 2008, the country's highest court turned aside legislation that would have allowed female students in state universities to wear head scarves, conforming to their Muslim religion .
 The number of citizens of countries within the European Union who describe themselves as feeling ‘European’ has increased . Despite continuing loyalty to nation-states based on ethnic identity and long-standing traditions of citizenship .
 European Union has encouraged regionalism in Spain and Britain . However, it has also encouraged the revival of such languages as Catalan and Welsh .
 Such a process in the long run may help reduce ethnic tension and conflicts, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many Europeans hope that the European Union will guarantee the rights of individuals through its Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers of Workers . The European Union has a charter of fundamental rights of workers .
 The EU allocates considerable funds to worldwide humanitarian causes . The European Union allocates much of its funds to humanitarian causes, including humanitarian aid .
 The European Union has worked to protect member states by maintaining standards for the importation of agricultural and food products .
 “mad cow” disease, which struck cattle in Britain in the 1990s and infected a few human beings with a degenerative disease of the brain, led to the slaughter of millions of animals in Britain . European Unions ban on the import of British beef on the continent for
 In 1997, the EU began labeling products made from genetically modified soybeans and corn . The EU started labeling products in 1997 .
 The long-range effect of consumption of insects is still unknown . Insect imports are more resistant to damage by insects, but the long-term effect of their consumption is unknown . Such imports are mainly from the United States .
 Environmental groups, as well as many scientists, strongly oppose their use . Environmental groups and many scientists strongly oppose using them .
 Giant companies and banks, multinational in their structure, have enormous economic power . Giant companies, multinational banks, are multinational in terms of their structure and interests, say experts .
 Global finance has brought volatility to the world economy . The enormous U.S. trade deficit is accentuated by the enormous trade deficit . The United States is the world's largest trading partner in the world .
 The sharp decline in the U.S. stock market that began in 2000 followed wild speculation on dot.com companies . The sharp drop in the United States stock market started in 2000 .
 The dizzying rise in the price of oil ir 2008 jolted world economies, contributing to rapid inflation . Oil prices were a major factor in the 2008 global financial crisis .
 To its critics, globalization could be identified with corporate greed anc indifference to the fate of the poor of the Third World . To some, globalization is identified as corporate greed and indifference .
 Jose Bove became a symbol of protest when he led an attack on a McDonald’s in a southern French town in 1999 . The French farmei attacked the fast-food restaurant as a means of protesting globalization .
 Cases of corporate greed and deceptions cast a shadow over bi£ multinational corporations . Corporations such as Enron and Enron lie and deceive their corporate officers .
 Demonstrations became riots during the meeting of the World Trade Organization in Seattle in 1999, and in Nice in 200C during the European Union summit meetings . Protests became riots in Seattle and Nice during the EU summit in 1999 .
 During the summer of 2001 protesters demonstrated and some battled police at the summit in Gothenburg and then in Genoa . The G7 is an informal association of the world’s leading industrial nations .
 Damage to the environment is itself linked to global interconnectedness . Damage to an environment is also linked to the world's interconnectedness, experts say . The damage to a global environment can be traced to global warming .
 The oceans have become veritable highways for the shipment of oil in huge tankers, many of which are old and badly maintained . Many of the world's biggest oil tankers are too old and poorly maintained .
 The 1999 meeting of the World Trade Organization in Seattle, Washington, was greeted with protests against the negative effects of globalization . Periodic oi Periodic OI was met by protesters against globalization in 1999 .
 The Threat of Terrorism 1233 spills have damaged coasts catastrophically, such as that off the Atlantic coast of Spain in 2003 . The threat of terrorism 1233 is based on the threat of a terrorist attack .
 The diffusion of nuclear power (to say nothing of the threat of nuclear weapons) presents great risks, for all the advantage in generating electricity . Nuclear power is a major source of electricity in the world .
 By the end of the twentieth century, nuclear reactors generated about one-third of Europe’s electricity .
 France led the way in adopting nuclear technology to produce electricity . By the end of the twentieth century nuclear reactors produced 75 percent of the electricity produced .
 Nuclear power generated 60 percent of Belgium’s electricity and 45 percent of Sweden’�s . Nuclear power is generated by nuclear power in Belgium and Sweden .
 The horrendous explosion at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986 further mobilized opposition to nuclear power . Chernobyl was the site of a nuclear disaster in 1986 .
 Nuclear reactors are potentially inviting targets for terrorists intent on taking as many lives and causing as much damage as possible . And as the threat from international terrorism becomes more real, nuclear reactors are inviting targets .
 Greenpeace has actively opposed potential threats to the environment by nuclear power . Greenpeace opposes nuclear power in the U.S. Greenpeace says nuclear power poses a threat to environment .
 Opposition to globalization has centered on profits Westernbased companies earn by selling products produced at low wages in, example, Southeast Asia . Opposition has also centered on the profits Western companies earn from selling products made in low wages .
 Caps or jerseys with logos from NBA teams, brand-name tennis shoes, and T-shirts with the names of U.S. universities became part of popular culture around the globe .
 Some of the products that are sold for high prices in the West are produced by destitute people in Asia for pitiful wages . The products are produced for low wages in the region .
 The disease has ravaged Europe (although not nearly to the same extent) as Africa, where it is now the number one killer . It has also increased the cost of health care in Europe .
 As of 2003, more than 60 million people worldwide have been infected by the HIV virus . At least a third of whom have died from the virus, at least one third have died .
 Although many AIDS victims live longer than before, no cure has yet been found . No cure for the disease has yet to be found .
 During the 1970s and 1980s, small groups on the extreme left and right turned to political terrorism . The Threat of Terrorism in the U.S. is based on the history of terrorism .
 Violence seemed to be the only means of destabilizing political elites in the hope of taking power . Violence was the only way to destabilize political elites, the group says .
 Terrorist groups were militant nationalists seeking independence from what they considered foreign occupying powers . Some terrorist groups were militants who wanted independence from the occupying powers.
 Groups included factions within the Irish Republican Army committed to ending British rule in Northern Ireland, Basque separatists in Spain, and Kurdish rebels in Turkey . Such groups included factions in the IRA, Basques separatists and Kurds in Spain .
 Between 1969 and 1982, political terrorists killed more than 1,100 people in Italy . The bombing by fascists of Bologna in 1980 in which 85 people died was one of the bombings .
 The Red Brigades, founded in 1970, kidnapped and killed former Italian Premier Aldo Moro in 1978 . Former Italian Premier Moro was killed by the group .
 By the early 1980s, Italian terrorism had ebbed, the campaigns at political destabilization had failed . But by the early 80s, it had become a relatively minor threat to Italy .
 In the German Federal Republic, small groups of left-wing terrorists lashed out with bombings, bank robberies, kidnappings, assassinations, and even a plane hijacking . Left-wing terrorist groups attacked the government in the 1990s .
 The Baader-Meinhof gang had links to terrorist groups in France and other Western countries . The most notorious of these groups was the Baader Meinhof group .
 Terrorism has posed an increasing threat in Western Europe, as extremist political groups and Islamic fundamentalist groups launched attacks . Indeed, terrorism has posed a increasing threat to Western Europe .
 Notorious attacks included the massacre of Israelis by Palestinian militants at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich and the seizure of a cruise ship in 1985 .
 Algerian Islamic fundamentalist group claimed responsibility for placing deadly bombs on subways and underground trains in Paris in 1995 . In 1995, the group placed deadly bombs in subways, underground trains .
 On a day of horror, September 11, 2001, hijackers commandeered four U.S. jetliners shortly after they took off from several airports early that morning . The hijackers hijacked four United States .
 Nearly 3,000 people were killed, the vast majority perishing in the World Trade Center . Both towers collapsed in a heap of rubble in September 11, 2001 .
 Osama bin Laden was the leader of the A1 Qaeda movement, which claimed responsibility for the attacks . A massive manhunt began for the Saudi Arabian-born bin Laden . The A1 Al Qaeda movement claimed responsibility .
 Many of its members had trained in Afghanistan, which was ruled by the Taliban . Many of the militia's members trained in the country's Islamic fundamentalist militia called the Taliban.
 Late that fall, the United States launched massive air strikes against Taliban installations in Afghanistan . U.S. troops on the ground searched rugged mountains near the border with Pakistan .
 An interim government took power in Afghanistan, backed by U.S. forces, facing the chronic problems of tribalism and poverty . The interim government is backed by United States forces, but faces tribalism, tribalism .
 The A1 Qaeda organization had spread almost worldwide, with cells in Germany, Italy, France, and Britain, as well as Malaysia and the Philippines .
 European states supported and assisted the U.S. campaign to uproot the structure of the A1 Qaeda network in their countries . European states have been involved in the fight against A1 al Qaeda in Europe .
 International police cooperation led to arrests of A1 Qaeda members in Germany, France, Spain, Britain, and Italy . The search for others continued .
 Islamic fundamentalist groups based in the Middle East have been actively recruiting adherents in European states that have large concentrations of Muslims . Islamic fundamentalists have been recruiting in Europe with large Muslim populations .
 In July 2005, suicide bombers who had grown up in Britain detonated explosives in subway cars and on a bus in London, killing 50 people and wounding many more . The attacks in London killed 50 people, including 50 people .
 One of the consequences of globalization has been the increased vulnerability of Europe, as well as the United States, to political struggles and the threat of terrorism . The Threat of Terrorism 1235 .
 Islamic fundamentalists were also responsible for terrorist attacks in Arab states . Fundamentalists wanted to impose strict religious rule in countries like Egypt and Syria .
 Islam is not the only religion in which aggressive fundamentalism has emerged . Islam not only Islam has emerged as a result of aggressive fundamentalistism . Islam and Islam are not only religions that have emerged in recent years .
 In Israel, Jewish extreme nationalist groups, in coalition with Likud party, have helped shape Israeli hard-line policies toward Palestinian demands for an independent state .
 The Palestinian minority in Israel demands an independent Palestinian state . Palestinians are a Palestinian minority demanding an independent state .
 Groups of Palestinian militants have undertaken murderous attacks on Israelis . Groups of Palestinians have taken part in attacks on Israeli civilians .
 Israeli government often responds by razing villages or by further restricting the rights of Palestinians . In a cycle of violence that has become tragically common, the Israeli government responds to the violence .
 The assassination of Yitzhak Rabin by a right-wing Israeli in 1995 was a blow to peace in the Middle East . Peace in the Mideast hinges on the Palestinian situation, which in some ways hinges on Palestinian situation .
 In 1996, the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat struck from the Palestine Liberation Organization’s charter the call for the destruction of Israel . Arafat's call for Israel to be destroyed came from the PLO's charter .
 The “peace process’s” peace process began in 2000, but broke down in 2000 . U.S. officials refer to it optimistically as the peace process .
 The collapse of the Soviet empire left the United States as the world’s single superpower . U.S. has been the most powerful superpower in the world since the fall of Soviet Union .
 Conservative, or “Neo-Con” exponents of exerting forceful U.S. domination operate under the principle that what seems good for the United States is good for world, they say .
 In the late 1990s, a more aggressive U.S. foreign policy increased fears in Europe about a rush to use force . Europe fears in the late 90s about the United States foreign unilateralism and a rush for force .
 On a continent ravaged by two devastating world wars, this has not gone down well . This is not going down well, especially on the continent .
 The U.S. refused in 2001 to sign the Kyoto Protocol . The Kyoto Protocol requires countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that have caused global warming .
 In 2002, the United States said it would not accept jurisdiction of a proposed new international court . The court was being set up to try those accused of crimes against humanity . The U.S. government announced in 2002 that it wouldn't accept jurisdiction .
 The U.S. government announced its intention of placing a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic . The system was intended, in principle, to defend against any attacks launched by Iran . The United States accused Iran of working to build nuclear weapons .
 Such a plan outraged Russia, which fears the presence of such a system in neighboring states . Russia is outraged by the plan, which would allow the system to be installed in Russia .
 In the wake of the attacks of September 11, 2001, the U.S. turned its attention to Saddam Hussein . President George W Bush argued that he was continuing to produce and hide “weapons of mass destruction” and that he had links to A1 Qaeda .
 Germany, France, and Russia opposed the Bush administration’s position . British Prime Minister Tony Blair (despite popular opposition to the war) supported the U.S. position .
 The Iraqis began to destroy missiles whose range exceeded that permitted by the United Nations following the Gulf War of 1991, when United States troops drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait, which Saddam Hussein had invaded .
 The United States and Britain launched an invasion of Iraq in March 2003, quickly defeating the Iraqi army . The U.S. and Britain invaded Iraq in 2003, defeating Iraq's army .
 The Threat of Terrorism 1237 justifying the invasion justified the invasion of Iraq . The U.S. and British intelligence documents used to reach the conclusion that the regime of Saddam Hussein posed an immediate threat to the region had been exaggerated, misrepresented, or even simply fabricated .
 The Iraq crisis threatened the prestige and effectiveness of the U.N. because of the determination of the United States to go it alone . U.S. government's determination of going it alone led to the crisis .
 Insurgents rose up (aided by arms shipped from Iran) against the occupying forces . Insurgent forces rose up against occupying forces in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The war brought A1 Qaeda into Iraq, and Iraq plunged into civil war . Terrorist attacks became a daily occurrence . Iraq plunged to civil war after the war .
 Probably about half a million Iraqis have perished since the U.S. invasion . More than 2 million Iraqis are refugees .
 The C.I.A. operated secret prisons and undertook illegal kidnappings in Europe, sending several suspects off to probable torture in their countries of origin . Several suspects were sent off to likely torture in the countries of their country of origin.
 Images of prisoners mistreated by U.S. captors in Abu Ghraib prison flashed across the globe . C.I.A. tortured prisoners and Iraqi civilians were gunned down by private United States security contractors . Images of prisoner mistreatment were seen across the world .
 At the United States prison at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, prisoners were held year after year without knowing the charges against them and denied access to any kind of legal representation . At the U.S. prison at Gitmo, prisoners are held without knowledge of charges .
 The president’s acceptance of interrogation techniques considered to be torture further sullied the U.S. reputation . The president accepted the use of torture techniques considered torture .
 President George W Bush no longer seemed to represent the high moral standard long projected by the U.S. Even as the security situation improved in Iraq in late 2007 and in 2008, President Bush seemed to be less moralistic .
 When asked whether British Royal Marine Commandos guarding Iraqi prisoners of war, 2003. 2003. When asked in 2008 whether British . Royal Marine . Commandos were guarding Iraqi . prisoners of . war . 2003 .
 Barack Obama's election in 2008 was overwhelmingly greeted with a sense of optimism by most Europeans . However, the election of Barack Obama in 2008 has been met with a lack of enthusiasm .
 As Europe moves through the first decade of the twenty-first century, its influence over the rest of the world has been reduced . Conclusion: Europe's influence over rest of world is reduced .
 Europeans now for the most part live in peace, a situation that seems likely to remain for the foreseeable future . The situation is likely to continue for the next few years .
 Their quality of life has continued to improve, thanks to ongoing advances in medicine and the production of food . They are still at the top of the world's food production system .
 Europe still confronts the challenges of finding enough safe energy while protecting the environment . Europe still faces the challenges to finding enough energy while preserving the environment, experts say . Europe's biggest energy challenge is to find a way to reduce energy costs .
 In 2007, leaders of the EU agreed to try to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide by 20 percent by 2020 . Renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power are to make up one-fifth of energy consumed .
 As in other regions, European economies must continually adapt to the challenges of globalization . European economies need to adapt to challenges of globalization, European leaders say .
 Even China has embraced some aspects of the market economy, and China and India have become economic giants .
 High unemployment rates in Europe still suggest the vulnerability of many people to the vicissitudes of the market . High unemployment rate in Europe suggests many people are vulnerable to the markets .
 Confrontations between young people and the police in Athens in December 2008 followed the shooting death of an adolescent by a policeman . The confrontation followed an adolescent being shot dead by a police officer .
 Many students and other young men and women are disaffected, fearing they will not find jobs . They fear they will be the first generation in the post-war period to do worse economically than their parents .
 Finding an appropriate balance between the free market and state intervention is essential . Finding a balance between state intervention and free market is essential, says David Cameron . He says the world's free market must be balanced between free markets and government intervention .
 Determined protests against globalization reflect the fact that global interconnectedness has not benefited everyone . Millions of desperately poor people in Asia and Africa, and on other continents as well, have been left behind .
 Human rights around the world remains a European concern more than sixty years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the U.N. Human Rights .
 Amnesty International has been a force for identifying countries in which human rights are not respected . Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have also been critical of human rights in recent years .
 European states were among those that put enormous pressure on South Africa in the 1970s and early 1980s . South Africa defied the world by maintaining its now dismantled system of racial apartheid .
 Genocide in Rwanda in the 1990s, ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, starvation in Ethiopia, massacres in Darfur region of Sudan, Sudan, and the explosive situation in the Middle East have also been the focus of human-rights groups, as well as European states .
 The European Union has made support of human rights one of its priorities . The EU has made supporting human rights a priority in recent years .
 Two old enemies, Germany and France, stand as a stable center for the continent’s future . France and Germany have long been enemies in the world, but have been allies for decades .
 NATO adapted to the fall of communism and expanded toward the east, as has the European Union . Despite divisions over policy toward Iraq, NATO has expanded to the east . NATO has been criticized for its policy on Iraq since 2003 .
 Signs of greater toleration can be found in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, as well . Signs of tolerance are also found in the Balkans .
 Ethnic Hungarians living in Romania could use their own language in dealings with government officials and in education . In 1997, for the first time, ethnic Hungarians in Romania were able to use their language in their dealings with officials .
 In 2000 the Bulgarian government finally allowed the state television network to broadcast a weekly news program in Turkish . And in 2000 the state TV network finally allowed a weekly Turkish news program to be broadcast on state television .
 In most of Europe, nationalist irredentist claims have largely subsided, but ethnic and religious rivalries have by no means been eliminated .
 The Cold War is no more, and in Europe there is seemingly little risk of a hot one, at least of European-wide dimensions . In Europe, the Cold War seems to be over and over, but there is little risk .
 The European Union has brought a single market to much of Europe and will continue to expand, with the help of its single currency, the euro . The single currency is the single currency that has brought together many of the world's largest economies .
 This in itself has made the continent smaller, making it even easier for people to travel and giving them increasingly more in common . The continent has also made it easier to travel, giving it increasingly more common .
 European Union has been to make war between member states unlikely . The EU has made war between members of the EU unlikely to happen .
 All this should carry Europe into an even more prosperous future, one that can be built on lasting peace . Europe's future should be built upon lasting peace, writes David Cameron .
 Protest outside Parliament in London against alleged torture by U.S. forces in Iraq . Protest held outside Parliament against alleged U.N. forces torture .
 John D Roth and James M Stayer, eds., Companion to Anabaptism and Spiritualism, 1521-1700. John Roth and . James Stayer .
 Carla Hesse, Publishing and Cultural Politics in Revolutionary Paris, 1789-1810. Carla . Hesse . Carla. Hesse. Carlas Hesse: Publishing and cultural politics in . 1789—1810 .