 In 1962, Soviet Union decided to convert Cuba into a Russian base as it provided USSR diplomatic and financial aid both . Cuba provided US diplomatic, financial aid to the USSR .
 The United States became aware of it and ordered American warships to intercept to Soviet Union to remove missiles to avoid full scale nuclear war . The U.S. ordered the intercepts to avoid nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 The document was presented by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara on 13 March 1962 . It was presented as a preliminary submission for planning purposes .
 Joint Chiefs recommended that both the covert and overt aspects of any such operation be assigned to them . Joint Chiefs recommend that both aspects of such an operation are assigned to the Joint Chiefs .
 On April 17, 1961, 1,400 Cuban exiles launched what became a botched invasion at the Bay of Pigs . The invasion took place on the south coast of Cuba on April 20, 1961 .
 Fidel Castro came to power in 1959 in an armed revolt that overthrew Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro is the son of Fidel Castro, who was born in 1959 .
 Cuba was an ally of the Soviet Union and received diplomatic and financial aid from it . Cuba was a major ally of Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Components of Brigade 2506 landed at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961 . They were defeated within 2 days by Cuban armed forces under the direct command of Castro . Brigade was defeated by Cuban forces under Castro .
 The failed invasion strengthened the position of Castro’s administration, which proceeded to openly proclaim its intention to adopt socialism and pursue closer ties with the Soviet Union . Castro's administration went on to pursue closer relations with Russia .
 It led to a reassessment of Cuba policy by the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration also reassessed Cuba policy .
 Many Cubans did not agree with Castro's revolution and left for exile . Despite substantial popular support for Castro, many Cubans still opposed his revolution .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 was doomed to fail even before the first shot was fired . The invasion of the U.S. was doomed even before it was fired at the first attempt .
 He did so because he felt the U.S. could not appear to be behind the invasion, he said . He added that he did not want the United States to appear to have been behind the attack .
 The invasion was financed and directed by the U.S. government . The invasion took place in 1991 .
 Some critics thought that the United States had not been aggressive enough in its support of the Bay of Pigs invasion and had left an impression of irresolution . Others questioned United States misjudgment of the Cubans’ fighting prowess .
 The incident was crucial to the development of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The incident occurred in 1962 and 1962 .