 They can learn the facts of this period, but the feelings associated with the experience are beyond the scope of social science . "They can learn facts, but they can also learn the feelings of this time," she says .
 Such feelings should be part of teaching and learning about international studies, says professor . Such feelings are important to students, he says .
 Instructors can present history and politics, but without an emotional sense of empathy, students will never fully understand the subtle complexity of international affairs . Without empathy students will not be able to fully understand complex issues in the world .
 Students must be able to view the world from different perspectives, participating in the values, feelings, and perceptions of others . Students must also participate in their own values and perceptions, says CNN.com .
 Study describes computer simulation that allows students to participate in the emotional affect of the Cold War . Students develop a sense of empathy with decision makers .
 A conclusion introduces a means by which instructors can replicate the simulation experience . The simulation experience is a simulation of a simulation .
 They understand the risk of terrorism and the fear of attack against a building or city that could kill thousands . They understand a different kind of dangerFthe risk of terrorist attacks .
 The concept of millions dying from a thermonuclear war over the course of a few days is a concept they may grasp intellectually, but the emotive feelings associated with such a disaster are illusive .
 October 1962 was 13 days when the world stood on the brink of disaster . This potential catastrophe was unique to the Cold War era, crystallized in the events of October 1962 .
 Those who lived through this event remember the feelings of helplessness and despair . Between a one in three and an even chance of nuclear war was the description used by Robert F Kennedy .
 Today’s students can learn about the history, strategy, and diplomacy of this crisis, but the feelings associated with the danger of the Cold War seem lost to the shadows of time . Today's students can . learn about . the history of the crisis, strategy and diplomacy .
 Such feelings should be an important part of teaching and learning international studies . Such feelings are important to be taught in international studies, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Instructors can present the facts of political science, diplomatic history, law, strategy, and economics, but without a sense of emotional empathy for others, students will never fully understand the subtle complexity of international relations .
 They must be able to view the world from different perspectives, participating in ‘the values, feelings, and perceptions of another’’
 Including affective, emotional elements in our understanding of international relations is important, for it encourages humanistic discernment, supplementing the analytical, quantitative basis .
 These simulations seem to have a useful effect on teaching and learning as reported by instructors who use them . Whether simple or complex, these simulations seem very useful .
 For example, Shellman and Turan agree with Brown and King and Kuzma and Haney about their usefulness . Shellman, Turan and King agree about the usefulness of the system .
 These conclusions and many others like them are based on several different types of evaluations . These conclusions are based upon several different kinds of evaluations.
 Simulation simulations have a positive effect on teaching and learning, says professor . Simulation simulations provide evidence that simulations can be beneficial to teaching and students, he says .
 Evaluative studies suffer from two fundamental problems in their methodology, limiting their usefulness in assessing the pedagogy of simulations . Evaluating simulations is a key part of a pedagogical tool that can be applied to students in schools .
 Few studies use a control group with which the simulation participants can be compared . First, few studies use control groups with which participants are compared .
 Ideally, a class should be divided into two parts; one participating in the simulation, and the other uninvolved . The simulation is a simulation of a simulation .
 The students would have the same instructor and reading assignments with only the simulation as the independent variable . They would have to use simulation as an independent variable in their assignments .
 Two sections of the same course might be used in a study that could choose one section as a control group and the other as an experimental group . Alternately, in larger universities, two sections could be used as control groups or experimental groups .
 This type of research design could present difficulties in an academic setting where the control group might feel left out of the excitement and enjoyment of the simulation . The research design may present difficulties .
 For studies to achieve a higher level of methodological reliability, however, some type of control is essential . The study was published in the prestigious journal Nature Nature .
 One group of students who have participated in a simulation responds to a written or oral debriefing . Another group responds to the debriefings, perhaps fills out pre and postsimulation surveys .
 Educators need to duplicate such studies in different institutions, with different types of students, lending greater confidence to their findings . Educators also need to replicate studies with different students .
 One class was the experimental group who participated in the simulation . The simulation was simulated by a group of people who participated .
 Students spent three class periods discussing the crisis before starting simulation . They were upper division students, juniors, and a few seniors .
 Students read different material about the crisis and spent three class periods discussing it . They were lower division, introductory students, mainly sophomores .
 There were two asymmetries between the control and experimental groups, including a difference in the content of their reading and their level of academic experience .
 Ideally, both groups would be at the same academic level, reading the same material . But this was not possible, due to a limited number of courses and students at the institution where the study took place .
 The study relied on comparing individuals who had already enrolled in the two classes . The study was based on the data from individuals who already enrolled .
 Randomization would have strengthened the study, but this is not always possible in an educational setting . Randomization was not possible in schools where research must accommodate the academic mission and class schedules of institutions .
 While this is notable, it should not negate the usefulness of the control group for two reasons . The control group should not be used as a control group .
 Both groups were exposed to written material and discussions about the crisis . Thus, both groups received written material .
 Second, the difference in age and experience between sophomores in the control group and mostly juniors in the experiential group could be a contaminating factor . Third, the differences in experience and age and age could be contaminating factors, researchers say .
 It should not be so great a difference to abrogate the potential benefit of a control group, strengthening the reliability of the findings . However, it should not make a difference in abrogating the potential benefits of the control group .
 Even in clinical trials involving medical research, the control and experimental groups are never identical . Even in trials involving patients, the groups are not identical, the study says .
 On the American team, the roles included President Kennedy, the vice president, attorney general, secretary of state, the secretary of defense, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, director of the central intelligence agency, national security advisor, ambassador at large, and a presidential assistant .
 Cuban team was smaller but had enough roles to permit small group deliberation . Cuban team is smaller but has enough roles that allow small group deliberations .
 As part of their simulation experience, they wrote a brief paper described as a ‘subjective rather than objective effort’’ at research .
 They were instructed that the paper should not be a neutral, balanced report . They were told that the report should be neutral .
 Students should present the paper from their simulated countries’ perspective . Students should use sources from the state they are simulating as well as historical news reports and academic, scholarly work .
 Students were instructed to present the paper in an innovative manner . Students were also instructed to achieve a degree of empathy with the simulated state .
 Writing a state of the world address by a head of government, a briefing by a foreign minister, or a secret report on military preparedness by a security advisor can help students better adopt the role they are simulating .
 Heads of states wrote about the historical context of the crisis, their countries’ goals, and the dangers the crisis posed . Heads of state wrote about their countries' goals and their country’s goals .
 Advisors wrote about their role in the government, their values, and the ideal outcome of the crisis from their institutional perspectives . Advisors say they want the government to be more transparent about the crisis .
 Students received a scenario presenting a listing of historical events immediately before the crisis . After this preparation, students were presented with a scenario .
 The events were written in language reflecting the ideology and values of each involved country .
 The plan is one of several assassination plots devised by the U.S. government between 1960 and 1962 . The plan was part of several planned assassination plots against Cuban leader .
 A multiservice United States military exercise designed to test contingency planning for Cuba begins . U.S. military exercise is a test for contingency planning in Cuba .
 Another military exercise in the Caribbean is planned for sometime in the spring or summer .
 Soviet and Cuban sources conclude that the series of military exercises is additional evidence of U.S. intentions to invade Cuba . The exercises are believed to be part of a series of exercises by the United States .
 They are trying to present the case as though rocket bases of the Soviet Union are being set up or are already established in Cuba . The Cuban government has been accused of trying to set up rocket bases in Cuba.
 A Soviet special envoy arrives in Cuba with a delegation to meet with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul . The Cuban Minister of Defense is Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro .
 Soviet officials state that the Soviet Union is prepared to assist Cuba in fortifying its defenses, even to the extent of deploying nuclear missiles on Cuban soil .
 General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on U.S. limited war programs following the Bay of Pigs invasion . The report was published June 13, 1961 .
 Taylor calls for the creation of a new program of action against Cuba . Taylor says the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics could be used .
 Intelligence Board: Some intelligence indicates possible ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba . U.S. Intelligence Board states that some intelligence indicates the possible deployment of missiles .
 The U.S. U-2 ‘reconnaissance’’ or ‘‘re-convoy’s’ plane that discovered the missiles followed the launch of the U.K. missiles .
 Instead of photographing missiles, the aircraft crashed in Cuba, and the pilot became a prisoner of Cuban authorities . The pilot was captured by Cuban authorities after the crash .
 This meant that the American team could not be certain that the missiles had been deployed in Cuba . The U.S. team had not been able to confirm that missiles were deployed in the country .
 It also raised the possibility for recovering the pilot and aircraft, thus eclipsing the more pressing need for preventing missile deployment . It also provided a possible diversion for the U.S.
 The pilot-prisoner also gave the Cubans (and potentially the Soviets) an issue about which they could negotiate with the U.S. The pilot's release gave the Cuban government an immediate issue to discuss with the United States .
 The simulation is set in the fall of 1962, and all actual world events occurring immediately before October 11, 1962, are taken into account at the onset of play . All actual events occurring in the year before the start of play are considered .
 Activities that occurred after October 11, 1962, are no longer relevant . However, once the simulation begins, activities that occur after that date are not relevant . The simulation begins after the simulation ends .
 The teams are expected to enact successfully the foreign policy goals presented by the heads of state in their papers .
 Advisors deliberate the issues, making recommendations, but heads of state have final authority for policy decisions . Heads of state can make final decisions on foreign policy . Advisors are responsible for the decisions, but not for foreign policy, they deliberate .
 A simulation director serves as a referee . He is responsible for interpreting game rules, determining whether nonroutine moves may be permitted, judging outcomes .
 Heads of state then meet with advisors at a prearranged location during class time to discuss their strategy . The heads of state meet with their advisors at an undisclosed location .
 Heads of state may issue instructions for negotiation, give assignments to team members, obtain reports from advisors after negotiations, and ultimately prepare move forms .
 Copies of the move forms are posted on the web site (or bulletin board if there are technical problems) at a specific time on the day following the advisory group’s meeting . The move forms will be posted online at a time following the meeting .
 This simulation involved four moves, with the last set of move forms presented in class as part of a debriefing process . The simulation involved a total of four moves . This simulation took place in a simulation of four different moves .
 Students in a lower-division class constituted a control group for this simulation . Students in the control group were students from a lower division class .
 The students devoted three sessions to decision making during the crisis . They read the book Essence of Decision and devoted three class sessions to making decisions . The students also read a book about decision making in crisis .
 Both the control and experimental groups were given quantitative pretest questionnaires at the beginning of the course and posttest questionnaires .
 The experimental group was given qualitative preand postsimulation questionnaires . As you consider your perceptions about the Cold War, write some adjectives that describe your feelings . In addition to the questionnaires, the experimental group of participants was given a questionnaire .
 The experimental group’s data suggest a trend indicating changed feelings toward the Cold War after students’ participation in the simulation . The data suggests a trend of changing feelings toward Cold War .
 In three categories of paired adjectives, there is a trend in which subjects viewed the Cold War differently after their experience with the simulation . Subjects viewed the war differently after the simulation, according to the study .
 It is also possible that the changes are an artifact of the small sample size . The changes are also possible because of the size of the sample sample .
 It is likely, however, that the simulation itself, a lively, engaging, and dramatic experience, is the explanatory factor . The simulation itself is likely to be the reason for its success .
 Qualitative explanations and descriptions of attitudes in questionnaires support the quantitative data . Qualitative . explanations and . descriptions of these attitudes in the questionnaires supported the quantitative . data .
 Students described their feelings about the Cold War using adjectives such as distrust, deception, deceit, disbelief, competition, hostility, intrigue, confusion, uncertainty, and resentment .
 After the simulation, they used words like fearful, scary, life threatening, unpredictable, dangerous, dangerous and paranoid, anxious, worrisome, worrisome and stressful, tense, and risky . The simulation was simulated by a group of people .
 I would have been ‘suspicious’ of those around me and of those in charge. ‘I would’ve been suspicious,’ he said . ‘‘Suspicious' he said of his former colleagues .
 Students have a better appreciation about the risk, danger, and fear associated with the Cold War as a result of participating in this simulation .
 The introduction of a control group provides a somewhat greater level of confidence in the quantitative findings, and the qualitative responses support the statistical data . Despite the methodological issues described above, the introduction of the control group gives a greater confidence .
 Replication of this study and others would help lend greater reliability to findings about the effect of simulations on teaching and learning, authors say . Replication would help lending greater reliability of findings, they say .
 The site presents a contemporary Middle East simulation that involves universities, faculty, and students in Egypt, Lebanon, Israel, Morocco, and the U.S. Additionally, the site presents an interactive simulation of the region .
 Instructors can join this simulation during the scheduled times or create their own version using the template on the site . Instructors will be able to use the template to join the simulation .
 A third deals with international legal adjudication that has been useful in the teaching of international law . A third deal with international adjudication .
 The Integration of Research Studies on the Use of Simulation as an Instructional Strategy . The integration of research studies on the use of simulation as an instructional strategy. The Simulation of Simulation is a result of a study of simulation .
 A review of Scholarship on Assessing Experimental Learning Effectiveness. A Review of Scholarship . Assessing experimental learning . Effectiveness . Assessibility of Experimental Learning. Effectiveness of Experimentation .
 Teaching Students about the Fuzziness of World Politics and International Law . Teaching students about the fuzziness of world politics and international law . Teaching Students .
 Simulations and Experiential Learning in the International Relations Classroom . International Relations in the international relations classroom .
 The Active Learning in International Affairs Section of the International Studies Association 4 : 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 4 . 5. 5 . 6. 7. 7 .
 The Uses and Limits of the Model United Nations in an International Relations Classroom are discussed in this article .
 In Simulation and Gaming across Disciplines and Cultures, edited by D Crookall and K Arai. The study was published in the journal Simulation and Games, published in September .
 An Examination of Exercises on Peacekeeping Operations and Foreign Policy Decision Making. Peacekeeping operations and foreign policy decision-making. An Exercise on peacekeeping Operations. An examination of Peacekeeping . Operations and Decision-making .
 Reflections on Middle East Conflict from Jewish, Muslim, and Christian Perspectives . Jewish and Muslim perspectives on the Middle East conflict .
 Teaching Collective Action in International Relations and Organization . Teaching collective action in international relations and Organization.