 CIA reference photo of Soviet medium-range ballistic missile in Red Square, Moscow . CIA reference photograph of Soviet missile . Reproductive Rights .
 The world stood still 50 years ago during the last week of October, when it learned that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . The crisis was officially ended — though unknown to the public, only officially .
 Millions of readers have placed their trust in Truthout to keep them informed through extraordinary times . Over the last twenty years, Truthout has been a major source of information for Truthout .
 After two decades of publishing donor-funded, independent journalism, we’re facing an existential threat to our survival . Now, after two decades, we're facing a threat to the survival of our independent journalism .
 Big tech companies are actively censoring non-corporate news stories . As a result, our work is being seen by fewer and fewer people each month when trustworthy journalism is needed most .
 To get through this time, we’re relying on support from you, our core readership . We're relying on you, the activists, organizers, and community leaders that got us to where we are today .
 Through Sunday, a generous Truthout supporter has pledged $5,000 to match the first year of all new monthly donations to Truthout .
 Whether you're able to make a $5 monthly donation, or give more, you’ll be making a real impact today . You’re able to give a monthly donation of $5 or more .
 All new monthly donations from Truthout will be matched for the first year . Truthout has been matched by a generous Truthout donor .
 Your support will go twelve times as far when you start a recurring donation today . That means your support will be twelve times more than what it would normally cost .
 Donate your money to support Truthout's weekly weekly news stories . Donate to support the weekly Newsmax program .
 Follow us on Twitter @Truthout . Donate to Truthout. Donate .
 Through Sunday, all new monthly donations will be matched for the first year . The first year of donations is $1,000 .