 The first missile crisis t a p w r actually extracts from it, together with an 87-page ""sanitized"" transcript- was released last year by the Kennedy Library .
 Internatioml Security, Summer 1985 0162-2889/85/0164-40$02.50/1 0 1985 .
 The passage Schlesinger alludes to was introduced by Robert Kennedy raising the issue of an invasion, and in fact practically every time he spoke in the course of these October 16 meetings, his comments seemed to point in that direance .
 McNamara’s view was the basis for his belief that the missiles posed not a “military problem’’ but simply a ‘domestic, political problem'’ This assumption lay at the heart of his thinking about what should be done .
 Some of the hyperbole lavished on this episode is almost embarrassing to read in the light of the evidence . Myths are easy enough to deflate, and some of the . hyperbole . The hyperbole on this . episode-“this combination of toughness and restraint, of
 The Rio Pact has been violated what acts should in, under the terms of the Rio Pact . Uhm, uh, that we stimulate the GAS’ procedure immediately for prompt action to make it quite clear .
 "I think it would be important to use the, uh, consider calling in General Ei~enhower,~ giving him a full briefing before a public announcement is made"
 There are a number of unknowns in this situation I want to comment upon, and, in relation to them, I would like to outline vely briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them .
 Khrushchev's Tuss statement of September 12 is all mixed up with this point, says CNN's John Sutter . Experts attribute the statement strongly to the former Soviet leader, Sutter says .
 A5 number two, which would be a general air strike, would be possible, he says . "The questions will be whether, which, I would describe a5 number number two," he says. "I would describe it as a general strike"
 The third course of action is any one of these variants of military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles, McNamara says . McNamara: Any one of the options is air strikes against missiles .
 This is the very, very rough plan that the Chiefs have outlined, and it is their judgment that that is the type of air attack that should be carried out . Documenfution 283I: The Chiefs' plan is very rough .
 The political advantages are, are v e y strong, it seems to me, of the small strike . The political advantage is strong, says the author of the book .
 Secretary Rusk summarized political actions now under way . October 26, 1962, 1O:OO AM Secretary Rusks summarized political action now under Way .
 Ambassador Stevenson said the aim of the longer term talks would be the withdrawal from this hemisphere of the strategic missiles and the dismantlement of existing sites . Ambassador Stevenson says the aim is the withdrawal of strategic missiles .
 The President instructed the Defense Department to place the night reconnaissance planes on the alert and to prepare a public announcement of the mission .
 There ensued a discussion of how to handle the discrepancy between the Khrushchev private letter and the Russian offer made public in the Soviet statement . The President left the meeting at this point with Mr Sorensen .
 Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission . The mission took place on October 27, 1962, at 4:OO .
 The President left the room to talk to General NorstadI6on the KY-9 secure telephone to Paris . The President then left the . room to discuss the . President's phone with Norstad on the secure telephone .