 This series focuses on new interpretations of the Cold War era made possible by the opening of Soviet, East European, Chinese, and other archives . The University of North Carolina Press has published a series of Cold War-era books .
 A complete list of books published in The New Cold War History is available at www.uncpress.org .
 Natalia Telepneva: The Soviet Union and the collapse of the Portuguese empire in Africa, 1961-1975 . She says the Soviet Union was responsible for the fall of the Soviet empire .
 LCsH: Revolutionaries—Angola . LCCN 2021052598 | ISBN 9781469665856 | ISBN ISBN 1 to 1 to 2 .
 This book is published as part of the Sustainable History Monograph Pilot . To the loving memory of my grandfather, Moisei Slutskii .
 I am grateful to Arne Westad, who has been a consistent champion of this project, giving the much-needed encouragement and important feedback over the years .
 'He has pushed me to see the bigger picture and his own work has provided a source of inspiration,' he says .
 This book started as a project, which focused primarily on the Cold War and high politics, but it has evolved in other directions . This book is partly under the influence of the very talented people I have collaborated with over the past years, he says .
 In particular, I would like to thank David Anderson for encouraging me to think about African politics and Kristin Roth-Ey for inspiring me to conduct oral history interviews .
 Vladimir Shubin has been extremely helpful, providing important contacts, advice and support over the years . Vladimir has provided important contacts and support for Vladimir .
 He has been an insightful critic, urging me to question assumptions as well as filling the gaps on some of the key protagonists in this story .
 British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship grant provided the crucial basis for conducting research for this book .
 I have learnt a great deal about East-Central Europe whilst working on the edited volume “Warsaw Intervention in the Third World” with Philip Muehlenbeck, as well as through discussions with colleagues on the “Socialism Goes Global” project .
 In Portugal, I have greatly benefited from participating in the ‘Amilcar Cabral project’ and from discussions and support from Juliao Soares Sousa, José Neves, Aurora Almada e Santos and Catarina Laranjeiro .
 Rui Lopes has been a wonderful critic and a great friend, whose enthusiasm for this work was uplifting in what was a long journey .
 I am deeply indebted to Vladislav Zubok, Artemy Kalinovsky, Jeremy Friedman, Alexander Hill, Eric Burton, Mustafah Dhada, Nathaniel Powell, and Allen Isaacman, who read and gave useful feedback .
 My cousin Andrei Frolov gave extremely useful advice on certain military aspects of this story . Andrei spent long hours looking at old photos and explaining to me the technical specifications of Soviet weaponry .
 I also want to thank George Roberts, James Brennan, Radoslav Yordanovy, Alessandro Iandolo, William Minter, Yusuf Adam, Nick Rutter, Irina Filatova, Elizabeth Banks, Corina Mavrodin . Hans-Georg and Iona
 Iam grateful to archivists, especially at the Russian State Archive for Contemporary History and the Archive of Foreign Policy of the Russian Federation in Moscow, and the Security Services Archive in Prague .
 I want to thank Clinarete Munguambe and Carlos Jorge Siliya at Centro de Pesquisa da Histéria da Luta de Libertagao Nacional for helping me getting around .
 In Cape Verde, Tatiana Neves at the Fundacao Amilcar Cabral provided contact details . Saidu Banguru and Dominika Swolkien gave crucial logistical assistance and made me feel welcome .
 Guinea-Bissau has been a source of inspiration for this week's travel project . Sana Baldé gave the author the opportunity to travel to Guinea and Guinea . She also received information on ex-guerrillas .
 Joana Sousa and Liam Carney translated oral histories from Kriol to English . Kim Friedlander helped improve the readability of the manuscript . The oral oral histories were translated by Liam Carney .
 A very special thanks goes to the men and women who agreed to be interviewed for this book . The interview was conducted with the help of CNN iReporters .
 Due to the nature of this project, I could not spend any significant length of time in the countries I visited . I was not allowed to spend significant time in any of these countries .
 "They had to take a chance on me, a person who waltzed in without much introduction, and trust me enough to share their stories," she says . They thus had to trust me, she writes .
 Vasilii Solodovnikov, at the age of ninety-seven, agreed to an interview, and offered to work with his personal Acknowledgments xv . xv papers, sharing his meals in the process . He was particularly impressed with the generosity of the generous nature of
 "I was sad to learn about his death in 2018, and that he would not see the book," she says . "I'm sad that he will not see it," she writes .
 The final year of writing this book coincided with the Covid-19 pandemic . The book was published in 2007 and 2008 .
 Meanwhile, my friends have provided me with warm companionship, and a much-needed space not to talk about the book during rare moments of relaxation . Meanwhile, she has provided her friends with warm  companionship and a much needed space .
 I am particular grateful to Natalia Lapotko, Adela Gjorgjioska, Bosiljka Kozomara, Daria Aitmatova, Vladimir Dobrenko, Elizaveta Tikheeva, Irina Maslenkova and Oleg
 "None of this would have been possible without the love and support of my family," she said . "I'm not going to be able to do this again, but I'm looking forward to it," she added .
 Hussain Mehdi has been a true comrade-in-arms, taking over daily chores, offering psychological counselling and last-minute proofreading . Mehdi also offered psychological counselling, offering last minute proofreading and psychological advice .
 "I want to thank my father Evgenii who translated documents from Czech and Polish and my mother Irina whose unconditional love sustains me," she said .
 Moisei Slutskii is the grandson of the late Soviet-Bulgarian politician and author of the book . He dedicated the book to his grandfather, Moiseyi, who died in 2011 .
 A devoted husband, father, grandfather and a talented scientist, he weathered the ups and downs of Russia’s turbulent 20th century with his integrity and passion for life intact . He is survived by his wife, father and grandfather .
 His deep-seated belief in the equality of all men and women irrespective of their gender, race, and ethnicity was what inspired me to write this book .
 I have omitted soft signs, apostrophes, and diacritical marks throughout the text . Thus, I have odeed soft signs . I also omitted apostropheses, diacritritical marks .
 Nobody is at the airport in Luanda, Angola, when the plane arrives . Xxi COLD WAR LIBERATION is an attempt to capture the story of the war .
 "In front of me, I see an Angolan soldier standing ten to fifteen feet away," he says . In front of him, he says, "I see a soldier standing 10 to 15 feet away from me"
 "I can’t reach him because he will open fire and riddle me with bullets," she says . She says she can't reach him 'because he would open fire' and shoot her .
 He stares at me menacingly, and I assume that he doesn’t know Portuguese . I assume he doesn't know Portuguese. ‘He stares at him menacingly’,’ says the man .
 I was rescued by the chief of airport security, an Angolan who knew me well . I was saved by chief of security, a well-known Angolan, he says .
 Boris Putilin recalls arriving at Angola’s capital, Luanda, on November 11, 1975 . ‘We were accompanied to our hotel. Then we were accompanied by our hotel’
 The MPLA had been fighting for control over Luanda in the run-up to Angola’s independence on November 11 . Angola's independence from the MPLA was announced on November 12 .
 The previous day, celebrations had begun with a symbolic torchlight procession to commemorate the beginning of a popular uprising against Portuguese colonial rule in Luanda on February 4, 1961 .
 Putilin flew to Luanda to attend the inauguration of the MPLA’s leader, Agostinho Neto, as the first president of independent Angola . The MPLA leader was elected as president of an independent Angola in 2003 .
 After landing in Luanda, the group was escorted to a hotel and then to city hall for the ceremony .
 Putilin 2 Introduction recalled that Afanasenko was the first foreign dignitary to address the crowds from the balcony of city hall . Putilina 2 Introduction: Afanasiev was first to address crowds from city hall balcony in Russia .
 Neto read out a short greeting from the Soviet government to the cheering crowds . Standing next to Neto, he read out the short message from the government .
 The Portuguese Empire in Africa began to crumble after a group of military officers overthrew the Portuguese dictatorship in a military coup in Lisbon on April 25, 1974 . The Portuguese empire in Africa was one of the largest empires in the world .
 The new government has also moved swiftly to negotiate independence for the Portuguese colonies in Africa .
 The PAIGC and FRELIMO had dominated the military struggle against Portuguese colonial rule in Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique, respectively, and thus transitions to independence were relatively smooth . The PIGC had dominated military struggle for independence .
 The MPLA was in power struggle with rival nationalist movements that had gained support from Zaire (today the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and the Republic of South Africa, and the United States .
 As independence approached, the MPLA’s rivals launched an assault on Luanda . The MPLA had been fighting for independence from Angola .
 Armed with Soviet weapons and backed by a contingent of the Cuban Special Forces, the MPLA managed to retain control of the capital . Armed in the capital, it was backed by Soviet weapons, backed by Cuban forces .
 This book argues that Soviet policy toward anticolonial movements in the Portuguese colonies was shaped by the interactions between the Soviet middle-level bureaucratic elite and African revolutionaries . The book is based on interactions between Boris Putilin and the African revolutionaries in the Soviet colonies .
 Their contacts began in the 1950s when the Soviet Union first attempted to win over the ‘hearts and minds” of Third World elites . The Soviet Union is now trying to win the hearts and minds of the Third World elite .
 This assistance was managed by a small group of Soviet bureaucrats and military officials . The Soviet government managed to provide assistance to the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Introduction 3 explores the relationship between the Soviet elite and African revolutionaries to explain the Soviet role in the collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Africa . This book explores the evolution of Introduction 3 . Introduction 3 is a look at the history of the Russian elite in African revolutionaries .
 The book makes three major contributions to the new histories of the Cold War . As such, the book is a major contribution to a new Cold War history .
 The book establishes the importance of African agency in the process that led to the collapse of the Portuguese Empire . First, the book establishes that African agency was key to the Portuguese empire's collapse .
 It highlights the role of ideology and the contribution of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite in the conduct of foreign policy . Second, it highlights the importance of ideology in foreign policy, it says .
 It provides a fresh interpretation of Soviet involvement in Angola in 1974-75 . It substantially revises existing scholarly accounts . Finally, it provides a new interpretation of the events .
 The most popular conception of the Cold War, the conflict that pitted the Soviet Union against the United States after 1945, invites a binary understanding of power in international society .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union were the only “superpowers” during the Cold War . Power, by implication, must have resided solely with the two giants .
 The end of the Cold War led to a substantial rethinking of the definition and geographic context of the conflict . The Cold War ended with the death of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Scholars have shifted their attention to examining the agency of what Tony Smith has called “junior members in the international system” Smith: Their role in “expanding, intensifying, and prolonging” the titanic struggle .
 The final dissolution of European empires coincided with the onset of the Cold War . European empires were the last remnants of their empires .
 By the mid-1960s, most European powers had given up de jure control of their colonies in Africa . Most European powers gave up de facto control of the continent in 1960s .
 Portuguese rule in Africa was widely considered a relic of the past, yet Portugal managed to hold onto its colonies until the 1970s amidst armed opposition from the liberation movements .
 Portugal was a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and controlled the Azores archipelago . The Azores was a crucial military base in the middle of the Atlantic .
 Portugal's prime minister used access to the Azores as a bargaining chip to resist Western pressure for decolonization . Portugal’s prime minister, Anténio de Oliveira Salazar, skillfully used access . Salazar used it to resist pressure for Western pressure on decolon
 By the mid-1960s, Portugal came into violent conflict with anticolonial movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau, all of which demanded independence . Portugal was involved in violent conflicts with anti-colonial movements in those countries .
 Military support for armed struggle was available mainly from socialist countries . In each case, military support was provided mainly from the socialist countries.
 Portugal's delayed decolonization embedded struggles against colonial rule within the international context of the Cold War . Portugal’s delayed decolonialization thus embedded struggles with colonial rule in the global Cold War context .
 The first generation of African studies scholars had little to say about the liberation movements’ international alliances .
 Their primary task was to revive the history of resistance to colonialism . But accounts often confirmed metanarratives drawn up by African elites to legitimize their nationalist projects .
 The extent to which the Soviet Union was able to influence the African National Congress in its struggle against the apartheid regime in South Africa has attracted significant controversy . The extent of the influence the Soviets were able to exert in particular has attracted controversy .
 Studying nationalist movements in Portuguese-speaking Africa is no less important than examining English-speaking movements for numerous reasons . Studying national movements in Portugal-speaking African is no longer important .
 First, they were engaged in guerrilla campaigns against the Portuguese through the 1960s and 1970s, in contrast to the ANC, which had limited opportunities to engage in active combat .
 Second, they were led by influential African leaders who were inspired by Marxist thought . Third and fourth African leaders were influenced by Marxist thinking .
 By looking at the international connections of the liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies, we can better understand why certain elites would come to dominate political life in Lusophone Africa after independence .
 This book highlights the agency of African anticolonial nationalists in the Cold War . The book is published by Simon Simon, an award-winning historian .
 Nationalist activism in the Portuguese colonies took off in the aftermath of World War IL, and the first organizations campaigning against Portuguese rule were set up in the 1950s .
 Initially, there were many groups with competing agendas Introduction 5 and strategies for liberation . Introduction 5: There were competing agendas for liberation.
 As the Portuguese stepped up their repression of nationalist activism in the late 1950s, it became clear that whichever group could successfully mobilize resources for armed struggle would be able to capture the “national liberation” movement title .
 This book looks at a set of African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies . Many of them grew active in anticolonial nationalist movements while studying in Portugal in the 1950s . They would come to dominate the liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau .
 It explains how African intellectuals managed to obtain assistance in the aftermath of the Angolan uprising in 1961 . It details the varied diplomatic strategies they employed to obtain military support .
 The narrative follows the cast of characters into 1975, as it reexamines how the MPLA leadership drew the Soviets into deeper commitments in Angola in 1974-75 .
 For better or worse, the Africans in this story were agents of their own liberation, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The role of ideology on both sides of the Cold War divide has attracted substantial attention among historians and observers alike . Ideology, foreign policy, and the Soviet Bureaucratic and Military Elite were key to the Soviet Union's success .
 This book follows in the path of scholars who have highlighted ideology as the key motivating factor in Soviet foreign policy . The book is based on the work of Soviet scholars .
 I prefer to define ideology as a particular lens through which individuals processed and understood events around them . Instead of 6 Introduction judging my cast of characters on the basis of a strict set of dogmatic beliefs, I prefer instead to define ideologies as a lens .
 To the Soviets, the lens was the ideology of Marxism-Leninism, which entailed a particular reading of human history and progress . To the Soviet Union, this was the lens of its ideology, which was Marxist-Leninist .
 Some of them were international journalists and members of the Soviet academe . Others were members of Soviet academes .
 These were officers of intelligence services, the KGB and the GRU, who were often responsible for the practical implementation of policy . These were also officers of the KGB, who often had to be responsible for implementation of policies .
 The importance of this bureaucratic elite is not new to students of Soviet foreign policy . It's important to learn about the importance of the bureaucratic elite in Russia .
 Studying the bureaucratic and military elite has broad implications for our understanding of Soviet policy in Africa . Studying bureaucracy and military elites has implications for understanding of Russia's policy in African affairs .
 This book argues that the Soviet ‘interventionism’ in Africa during the 1970s was deeply rooted in the prior decade . It argues that Soviet interventionism in Africa in the 1960s was rooted in prior decade of Soviet involvement .
 The roots of Soviet involvement in Africa stretched back to the bureaucratic changes that took place under Nikita Khrushchey, the first secretary of the CC CPSU .
 Khrushchev began to pursue a much more active policy in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . Stalin prioritized relations with the West after World War II, but Khruschev pursued a more active foreign policy .
 The primary party organ empowered to forge policy toward the liberation movements in the 1950s was the CC CPSU International Department . The party was the party's primary organ for the liberation movement .
 International Department staff forged personal relationships with 7 African revolutionaries . Controversy often proved instrumental in determining policy choices .
 They often served as liaisons with African revolutionaries, aiding allies in their struggles with local rivals, gathering information and producing analyses for Moscow .
 The book reveals that the Soviet military believed that limited hit-and-run guerrilla tactics were no substitute for large-scale military operations against the Portuguese . The book also reveals that Soviet military thought that limited guerrilla tactics would not be enough to defeat the Portuguese.
 African revolutionaries supplied with increasingly “advanced” Soviet weapons . Therefore, they often advocated the expansion of military operations .
 The rise of African militaries as political actors in their own right contributed to what I call the “militarization” of Soviet interactions with A frican allies . Such interactions were in itself a product of frustrated hopes for rapid revolutionary transformation throughout the continent .
 The Soviet Union often lacked hard power in sub-Saharan Africa, especially compared to Western powers with a history of presence on the continent . Prior to the second half of the 1970s, the Soviet Union was often lacking hard power .
 This book uncovers the clandestine relationships that the Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence officers forged with African revolutionaries as a way to level the playing field . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, an award-winning British journalist .
 By reconstructing these secret contacts, I show that Africans often used them for personal advantage . I show how Africa's secret contacts were often used by Africans to gain advantage .
 The study of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite also helps explain how ideology functioned in practice . The study also explains how the Soviet bureaucracy functioned .
 Ideological affinity was essential to develop trust on a personal level between African anticolonial nationalists and Soviet bureaucrats, spies, journalists, and diplomats who supported them .
 African nationalists from the Portuguese colonies were well-known in leftist European circles . Angolan Mario de Andrade, Cape Verdean Amilcar Cabral, and Mozambican Marcelino dos Santos were well known in leftist circles .
 Their ideological “credentials” helped forge their initial contacts with the Soviets, helped forge contacts with them and allowed them to receive the first aid packages for their organizations .
 The Soviets were skeptical of FRELIMO’s first president, Eduardo Mondlane, because of his U.S. education and high-profile contacts in Washington . Meanwhile, the Soviets were highly skeptical of his United States education and contacts in D.C.
 Ideological affinity meant that the Soviets continued to support the MPLA, even though relations with its president, Agostinho Neto, were often conflictual .
 In each of these cases, ideology was the prism through which Soviet officials looked at their allies as the 1960s transitioned into the 1970s . Ideology was a key part of the Soviet strategy .
 Relations with African countries never topped the agenda of the Soviet leadership . Relations with the African countries were primarily preoccupied with relations with the U.S., Western Europe, Eastern European allies and China .
 Soviet middle level bureaucrats often played particularly important roles in shaping relations with African allies . The Soviet middle-level bureaucrats often shaped relations with Africa .
 The Soviet Union and the Internationalization of the Angolan Civil War, 1974-1975 . Soviet involvement on the side of the MPLA in the Angolian Civil War has captivated scholars since the 1970s .
 The end of the Cold War led scholars to re-emphasize ideology . In line with the general trend, the end of this trend, scholars to emphasize ideology .
 These studies have offered broad interpretations but do not focus on Angola in much detail . Angola has been known to be a source of oil wealth in the region .
 Westad has depicted the Soviets’ relatively limited and reluctant delivery of arms to the MPLA before switching gears to support the Cuban operation once South Africa intervened in autumn 1975 .
 This book offers a revised assessment of Soviet policy in Angola within the broader context of developments in Portugal after the coup that overthrew the dictatorship on April 25, 1974 .
 It reinforces the role of ideology in how the Soviets perceived events in Portugal as closely interlinked with events in the colonies . The Soviets believed events were closely linked to their success in Portugal .
 Agostinho Neto and the MPLA leveraged his close relationship with military officers in Portugal to seek support from the Soviet Union in 1974 . It reveals how Neto sought Soviet support amid increasingly violent competition with his rivals in Portugal .
 The book provides details of the Soviet logistical operation to supply the MPLA with weapons . The book resolves the debate about the timing of Cuban involvement in Angola .
 The new narrative reconstructs the role of Soviet liaisons, “men on the ground” who were fundamental in shaping perceptions of the changing situation in Angola . The new . narrative also reconstructs . role of ‘men on . ground’ who shaped perceptions of . changing
 It shows how pressure from these actors and a broader ideological framework shaped Soviet decision-making on Angola . The decision was made by the Soviet government .
 The book is divided into seven chapters . Organization, Sources, and Limitations is organized into organization, sources, and limitations .
 African nationalists from the Portuguese colonies and Soviet bureaucratic and military elites. African nationalists . Soviet bureaucracy and Soviet bureaucracy . African nationalists and Soviet bureaucrats .
 Nikita Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World in the 1950s gave rise to a new stratum of Soviet military and bureaucratic elite with vested interests in developing relations with newly independent African nations . Chapter 1 shows how Nikita .
 Chapter 2 outlines the key tenets of Portuguese colonialism and recounts the rise of African nationalism . Chapter 2 focuses on the life stories of key protagonists—Amilcar Cabral, Mario de Andrade, Agostinho Neto, and Viriato da Cruz .
 Chapter 3 centers on the 1961 Angolan uprising as the key moment when the two groups forged their first alliances . Chapter 3 of the book is based around the 1961 uprising in the Angolan .
 The Soviets and Czechoslovaks provided their first assistance packages to the nationalists from Lusophone Africa in 1961 .
 Chapters 4, 5, and 6 discuss how the MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC tried to dominate their respective nationalist movements and the limits of their endeavors . Chapters 4 and 5 discuss how they tried to control their respective national movements .
 Chapter 4 examines the politics of liberation movements in exile in the context of the Sino-Soviet split . Chapter 4 explores the politics in exile of the Chinese people in exile .
 It illustrates how African revolutionaries used diplomacy to obtain support from their African host states and international patrons . The 10 Introduction to Africa's 10 Revolutionaries is presented by CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Chapter 5 concentrates on guerrilla strategy and the role of Soviet military assistance in the context of the ‘militarization’ of the Cold War in Africa . Chapter 5: The role of the Soviet assistance in Africa is discussed in Chapter 5 .
 It traces discussions over guerrilla warfare strategies and how these conversations shaped relations between African revolutionaries and their international patrons .
 Chapter 6 follows the evolution of anticolonial campaigns in the 1970s, placing them in the context of superpower détente . Chapter 6: The rise of the anti-imperialist movements in the 70s and 1980s .
 It argues détente had a minimal impact on Soviet policy in Africa . Détente was a 'minimal impact' on African policy in the 1960s .
 Chapter 7 reveals Soviet views of revolution in Portugal and decolonization process, especially in Angola . Chapter 7 also reveals Soviet view of decolonialization process .
 The conclusion discusses the broader implications of Soviet involvement in Portuguese colonies within the Cold War context . Finally, the conclusion concludes that the Soviet involvement of Portuguese colonies in the 1950s and '60s was not a coincidence .
 This book is based on extensive research in Russian and Eastern European archives . The author's research was conducted in Russia, Eastern Europe and Russia .
 When I first began studying this topic almost ten years ago, access to Russian sources was minimal . Access to the topic was minimal. When I began studying it almost 10 years ago I had access to minimal access .
 I had to consult archives in the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Poland, Poland and Germany to construct a partial picture of what had transpired .
 Russian State Archive of Contemporary History has declassified thousands of documents pertaining to Soviet foreign relations . Thousands of documents have been declassified in a significant development, the Archive says .
 The declassification of files has not been completed, as many files remain unavailable .
 There is still no access to the records of the Soviet intelligence services . Further, there is still not access to any of the former Soviet intelligence agencies .
 "I have tried to fill the gaps with information acquired through memoirs and interviews with key protagonists in the story," says author .
 Readers will notice that the amount of detail is particularly rich when it comes to the PAIGC and the context of anticolonial campaigns in Guinea-Bissau .
 This is because I was able to conduct interviews with dozens of former participants in Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde . This is not the first time I have interviewed dozens of people who participated in Guinea Bissau . I was interviewed by dozens of ex-Guinea-B
 A similar opportunity did not present itself in Angola, mainly for practical reasons . Angola is the only country in the world to offer a similar opportunity .
 The book is fundamentally a study of the USSR’s foreign policy in Africa . It is written mainly from the perspectives of the 11 Soviets and their African interlocutors .
 It does not generally address the perspectives of the rank-and-file members of the liberation movements . With the exception of military training in the Soviet Union, it does not .
 "The material was too rich to fit into one book. When I started to conduct interviews with some rank-and-file members, I realized that the material would be too rich . The material was so rich that it could not fit into a book .
 The main focus of the book is relations between the Soviets and African elites who came to dominate liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau .
 I have made an explicit choice to focus on the perspectives of those who occupied positions of leadership in the liberation movements because they were the ones who communicated with international patrons . I have also made a choice of focusing on those who were in leadership positions in liberation movements .
 Their strategies shaped relationships with the Soviets and Moscow’s view of the anticolonial movements as a whole . Thus, their strategies shaped relations with the Soviet Union .
 For reasons of space, I have decided to limit discussions of East German, Bulgarian, Czechoslovak, and Polish support for the liberation movements in Lusophone Africa except when relevant to the main story .
 Cold War Liberation is, therefore, a starting point in the journey toward understanding the true extent of the Soviet impact on liberation struggles in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau .
 Telling the story of Soviet relations with liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies brings to the fore some understudied aspects of the Cold War . Offers a new perspective on events such as the 1974-75 Angolan Crisis .
 The anticolonial wars in the Portuguese colonies shaped the Soviet Cold War in Africa in ways that have not yet been appreciated . The Portuguese colonies were the focus of the Cold War between the Soviet and African nations .
 The story told here offers insights into the Soviet decision-making process and the people involved in it .
 African liberation movements are often-dominant political forces in modern-day Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau . It also provides a comprehensive overview of the diplomacy of the African liberation .
 African nationalists dominated the campaigns against Portuguese rule, their supporters and rivals, and the international environment in which they operated . What follows is the story of 14 years of colonial wars, the African nationalists and their supporters .
 Before going further, we need to look at the inception of Soviet policy in Africa and the mezhdunarodniki who came to occupy important roles as “mediators of liberation” in this story .
 According to the German philosophers Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, humankind developed in stages . According to Marx and Engels, humans developed in a series of stages .
 A series of revolutions in the modes of production, starting from tribal society and eventually reaching capitalism in the nineteenth century . These took the form of a series of revolutionary revolutions .
 The principle of proletarian internationalism became a fundamental means of achieving the goal of international revolution . Thus, the principle of proletic internationalism became a fundamental means of international revolution .
 Marx and Engels did not provide a blueprint for waging revolutionary struggles . Many debates emerged about how to carry out this out in practical terms . Marx, Engels, however, did not give a blueprint .
 One dispute centered on how to square the goal of socialist revolution with demands for national self-determination in the largely agrarian and multiethnic empires of the nineteenth century . The dispute was over how to reconcile socialism with national sovereignty .
 Lenin postulated that imperialism led to a division of the world into “oppressor” and ‘oppressed” nations, competition, and, inevitably, war . In Lenin’s eyes, the movement for national liberation was the weakest link of imperialism . In the
 Selfdetermination was a necessary stage in the inevitable merging of nations . Even though nationalist movements in ‘oppressed nations’ were bourgeois, the majority of colonial subjects were peasants . Selfdetermination is a necessary part of the inevitable merge of nations.
 Lenin and the Bolsheviks believed that a worldwide socialist revolution was both imminent and essential for the survival of the first workers’ state . After coming to power in Russia in October 1917, Lenin believed a worldwide revolution was inevitable . The Bolsheviks were convinced that the revolution was necessary for the
 The Bolsheviks institutionalized their revolutionary agenda by establishing the Third International . The Third International was a socialist organization dedicated to spreading socialist revolution .
 Comintern embraced anti-colonial and anti-imperialist agenda . The Comintern established policy on the “Negro Question,” as issues related to the liberation of men and women in Africa and the Diaspora were referred to at that time .
 By 1934, Comintern had scaled back its commitment to anti-colonial agenda in the face of the threat from Nazi Germany . However, by 1934, the Comintern's commitment to the anti-colonial agenda was scaled back .
 Comintern’s support for the anti-colonial cause, including only lukewarm defense of Ethiopia in the face of Italian aggression in 1935, and finally Soviet non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany in 1939 . The zigzags in Comintern's support left many anti
 The Stalinist purges during the Great Terror decimated the organization, which was formally dissolved in 1943 . The organization was officially dissolved in 1945 .
 This chapter charts the revival of Soviet interest in Africa under Stalin’s successor, Nikita Khrushchev . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Russian-born British journalist .
 Khrushchev’s time in office between 1953 and 1964 coincided with the quickening pace of decolonization in Africa . The former Soviet Union leader was in office at the time .
 By the mid-1960s, the European colonial powers had given up control of empire . Britain, France, Belgium, and Belgium gave up control via “negotiated exits” after pressure from colonized subjects .
 The first summit meeting of leaders from Asia and A frica in Bandung, Indonesia, in April 1955, heralded the advent of the ‘Third World” a political project . The project was to unite countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, bound by common experience of
 Khrushchev saw these developments as opportunities for the Soviet Union to gain new allies in Asia, Africa and Latin America, but also to revive Soviet socialism in line with revolutionary ideals, which coincided with his agenda on de-Stalinization . Khrushchchev wanted to gain allies in
 The men and women who carried out Khrushchev’s new policy in the Third World were primarily members of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite .
 They would become what I call “mediators of liberation” between African anticolonial nationalists and the top Soviet decision-makers . They would be ‘mediators’ of liberation between African nationalists and Soviet decision makers, he says .
 This chapter examines Khrushchev’s view of Soviet aims in Africa in the context of his broader foreign policy goals . This chapter includes the view of the Soviet Union in Africa .
 It paints profiles of several key figures who became involved in supporting anticolonial movements in the Portuguese colonies in the 1960s and 1970s . It also provides an overview of the key Soviet institutions .
 Nikita Khrushchev seemed to be unlikely candidate to succeed Joseph Stalin in 1953 . The former Soviet Union leader became the leader of the Soviet Union in 1956 . He was the first Soviet leader to be elected to power in Africa .
 From a party boss in the Donbas region in Ukraine, by the early 1930s, he was transferred to Moscow . He was responsible for overseeing the construction of the Moscow-Volga Canal and the Moscow metro system .
 Khrushchev had no foreign policy experience and little formal education, especially in contrast to more experienced colleagues . Although a talented organizer and a shrewd politician, he was not a foreign policy expert .
 Stalin’s successors all agreed there should be a relaxation of tensions with the West . But debates raged as to how rapprochement could be squared with maintaining the stability of the Eastern Bloc .
 In 1953, the Politburo proclaimed a “New Course” for Eastern Europe to reverse some of the Mediators of Liberation 15 Stalin era’s most heavy-handed policies, such as collectivization . In response to an economic crisis in East Germany, in
 They even contemplated the prospect of a unified Germany in exchange for a pan-European security arrangement . That would, in essence, end the Cold War in Europe .
 Khrushchev was unwilling to jeopardize socialism in East Germany . However, he was willing to put the country on the path of socialism .
 Khrushchev backed the formation of the Warsaw Pact in May 1955 . In response to West Germany joining NATO, he backed the NATO alliance in response .
 Khrushchev also wanted to pursue a more active policy in the Third World . The former Soviet leader wanted to take on more active role in the world .
 In October 1955, he went on a highly publicized tour of India, Burma (today Myanmar), and Afghanistan . He toured Burma, Burma, and Afghanistan in October 1955 .
 Khrushchev argued that with the advent of nuclear technology, a military confrontation was inconceivable, and thus the USSR should adapt to peaceful forms of competition with the West, which were possible in the Third World .
 Soviet Union began forging new diplomatic, commercial, and cultural links with countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . The Soviet Union also provided loans and developmental assistance .
 Soviet academics also resuscitated the concept of ‘noncapitalist development’ which premised Third World countries could skip the “capitalist stage of development” and move directly to socialism with the support of the state and the Soviet Union .
 Soviet allies were supposed to pursue more active policies in the Third World . The Soviet Union was supposed to take more active policy in the world .
 On September 27, 1955, Nasser announced the purchase of weapons worth $45. million from Czechoslovakia . Nasser said he bought the weapons in exchange for $45 million .
 Khrushchev's boldest move came shortly afterward when he took on Stalin’s legacy at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU in 1956 .
 Khrushchev opened the Congress by asserting that a new world war was not inevitable and that different countries could take their own peaceful roads to socialism . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a world war in the early 1950s .
 The new policy of ‘peaceful coexistence’ dovetailed with his attack on Stalin, which he made at the closed session of the Congress on February 25 . In fact, the new policy dovetails with his attacks on Stalin .
 The transcript was quickly leaked to the West, and an abridged version of the speech soon became available to Soviet citizens . It was quickly released to the Soviet citizens, and a shortened version of it was available to them .
 The speech accelerated the so-called cultural Thaw that had begun shortly after Stalin’s death . Although the speech was received with highly mixed reactions, it accelerated the Thaw .
 Soviet artists, theater directors, and writers were now permitted a never-before-seen degree of discussion and openness . Soviet artists and theater directors were now allowed to discuss their work .
 Khrushchev wanted to establish more equitable relations with Warsaw Pact partners . The secret speech unleashed a major crisis for the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Popular protests over living standards strengthened reformists in Poland . Reformists sought to redefine the relationship with Moscow .
 In October 1956, Polish leader, Wladyslaw Gomulka, managed to negotiate a new relationship with the Soviets and avoided intervention . The Polish leader managed to avoid intervention from the Soviet Union .
 Imre Nagy was appointed as Hungary's new leader but was unable to calm street protests . The situation turned out very differently in Hungary, where he was forced to resign . The new leader has been accused of inciting violence against him .
 On November 4, Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest, crushing the Hungarian revolution . The Hungarian revolution was crushed by Soviet tanks in Budapest .
 The Soviets were dealing with the consequences of the secret speech . A major international crisis was developing over access to the Suez Canal .
 In July 1956, President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt proclaimed the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company . The canal company had been controlled by a conglomerate of Western companies .
 After failed talks, Israel, Britain, and France intervened militarily to retake control of the Suez in October . Israeli, British, French, Israeli and British forces intervened in the battle for control .
 The Soviets were initially slow to respond, but in November, Moscow issued a stark warning to end intervention, threatening a world war if there was no withdrawal . Mediators of Liberation 17 responded, but the Soviets were slow .
 Under pressure from the United States, the British government announced a ceasefire . The British government has been under pressure from U.S.
 The Suez Crisis showed that the Cold War had moved to the periphery . Both the Soviet Union and the U.S. would be central players in the Suez crisis .
 Zaire became independent on June 30, 1960, after hasty negotiations between the Belgians, the former colonial power, and the main nationalist parties . A resource-rich country two-thirds the size of Western Europe, Zaire is a resource rich country .
 Zaire’s army mutinied over low pay and the presence of Belgian officers in high-level positions . Only five days after the proclamation of independence, the army mutined .
 A workers’ and a general strike followed, unleashing widespread chaos and sporadic violence . Workers’s and general strike unleashed widespread chaos, violence and chaos .
 Brussels sent in paratroopers, ostensibly to restore law and order . The following day, Moise Tshombe, the leader of Katanga province, announced the secession of the resource-rich province .
 Zaire’s first democratically elected prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, believed the Belgian intervention was a neocolonial coup and appealed to the United States, the United Nations, and the Soviet Union for military support against the secessionists .
 By August, Washington believed that Lumumba was dangerously close to the Soviets and started scheming for his removal . Washington believed he was close to Soviet Russia .
 Lumumba was ousted from power in a U.S.-backed plot concocted by Joseph-Désiré Mobutu . The plot reached its crescendence on September 5 .
 In 1961, Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence services would cooperate to support Lumumba’s loyalist Antoine Gizenga, who fled to Stanleyville, Eastern Zaire, after the coup .
 The use of clandestine means in the African context was a way to fight the Cold War ‘on the cheap” since it did not require substantial material investments nor headstrong collision with the superpowers . It did not need substantial material or headstrong .
 Khrushchey’s motivations for launching a new ‘offensive’ in the Third World have become the subject of substantial debate . The motivations behind the launch of the new “offensive” in the Middle East are still under debate .
 The interplay of pragmatic and ideational motivations was deeply bound up with Khrushchev’s background and formative years . ‘Krushchev was deeply involved in the creation of the state of the Soviet Union,’ he says .
 His peasant upbringing gave him a strong sense of social justice . He believed that the Soviet Union had a duty to help newly independent nations and revolutionary movements .
 His support for national liberation movements was necessarily interwoven with his domestic agenda . His support of national liberation movement was therefore interwove with his own agenda . He was assassinated in 1968 in the Philippines .
 Discussion below examines two generations of Soviet party cadres who played influential roles in Soviet Africa policy . The discussion below examines the two generations .
 The sections below highlight how their formative experiences informed their worldview . They came to shape their attitudes toward policy in Africa .
 In the 1950s, the Cominternians were a small yet influential group of people in the party apparatus . They were influential members of the Communist Party .
 These were mostly men of modest backgrounds in their sixties and seventies who had joined the Bolsheviks before or shortly after October 1917 . The Bolsheviks joined the Bolshevik Party in 1917 .
 Many of them had participated in the Russian Civil War, building up their careers and networks when the Comintern was carrying out large-scale antiracist campaigns . The Comintern had carried out large scale ant-racist campaigns .
 Ivan Potekhin was the one man among the Cominternian generation who possessed the most expertise on Africa . He was one of the most experienced Cominternarians in the world . Potekin was a member of his generation of Cominternians .
 He was born in 1903 in the village of Krivosheino, central Siberia, into a family of Old Believers . Born in 1903, he was born into an Old Believer .
 After finishing school, he joined the Bolsheviks, working as a party organiser . He later joined the Communist Party and became a party member .
 In 1929, he served as a political commissar during an armed conflict with China over control of the Eastern Railroad in China’s northeast . He was then mobilized into the Red Army and served in China's Red Army in the 1930s . He served in a war with China
 In the 1930s, Potekhin and several fellow A fricanists at Comintern-affiliated Communist Institute of the Toilers of the East launched their first academic program . The program was intended to analyze the prospects for “noncapitalist development” in Africa .
 In 1936, he was accused of “Trotskyism” and expelled from KUTV with party sanctions . However, in 1936, it was a relatively light punishment compared to the terror unleashed a year later .
 After Stalin’s death, Potekhin became actively involved in reviving Soviet engagement with Africa . After Stalin's death, he was actively involved with reviving relations with Africa.
 He used connections from the interwar period to develop informal links with African leaders . He pushed for the establishment of the Institute of African Studies as an independent research body .
 Only twelve years old in 1917, Ponomarev claimed to have started his party career at 14 . He first served as a party activist at a local textile factory in his native Zaraisk, near Moscow .
 In 1936, Ponomarev became a personal assistant to Georgii Dimitrov, the new head of the Comintern . In 1936 he became an assistant to the new Comintern head Georgii Ditrov .
 At the height of the Stalinist purges in 1937, Ponomarev was accused of harboring “Trotskyist” sympathies . He was questioned about his connections to high-ranking colleagues who had been purged .
 A successor to the Comintern, the International Department was fairly insignificant in the postwar period . It was a successor to Comintern and was a relatively insignificant department .
 The International Department was entrusted with several crucial functions . Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World in the mid-1950s, the International Department .
 Its cadre collected and processed information from papers drafted by Soviet academic research institutes and reports from diplomatic, press, and intelligence sources .
 The department was responsible for allocating cash allowances for communist parties and liberation movements from the International Trade Union Fund .
 Ponomarev was a protéé of the party ideologue Mikhail Susloy . He had a notoriously contentious personal relationship with Andrei Gromyko, the longtime minister of foreign affairs .
 The priorities of the Foreign Ministry and the International Department did not always coincide . Many conflicts ensued, and many conflicts ensued. In fact, the priorities were not always aligned .
 International Department still retained the final say on policy vis-a-vis African anticolonial movements .
 Ponomarev possessed a “Cominternian mindset” and tended to “preach” to foreign dignitaries who came to Moscow Mediators of Liberation 21 seeking assistance, a senior official says .
 At the same time, he was also a “true anti-Stalinist” who supported people who had been persecuted during the 1930s, he said . He was also an ‘anti-Russian’ who supported those who were persecuted .
 Born in 1905 in Vitebsk, Belarus, he joined the Red Army in 1920 . He moved to Tashkent, in Soviet Uzbekistan, in the 1920s .
 In 1922, he was dispatched to Moscow and enrolled at the Institute of the Far East . He was sent to Russia in 1922, where he studied in Russia .
 After graduation, he joined the Comintern-af filiated International Agrarian Institute . Eventually became the head of the Far East and the Colonies section .
 His life took a sharp turn on January 1, 1935, when he was arrested, charged with belonging to a Trotskyist organization . He was dispatched to the Gulag .
 Ulianovskii spent almost twenty years in labor camps and was only rehabilitated in 1955, during the Thaw . He spent almost 20 years in a labor camp and was rehabilitated .
 The Soviet Solidarity Committee was established in 1956 as the Soviet branch of the Afro-Asian People’s Solidarity Organization . It was established on the heels of the Bandung conference .
 Its goals were to represent Soviet agenda at AAPSO’s Permanent Secretariat based in Cairo . It was to develop links with so-called “progressive, democratic” forces in the colonies and newly independent countries .
 In Moscow, the presidium of the Soviet Solidarity Committee consisted of prominent academics, cadres at relevant government ministries, and public figures who debated Third World policies .
 The cadre of the Soviet Solidarity Committee also served as the first point of contact and the official hosts for non-state actors from Asia, Africa, and Latin America during trips to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet intelligence services worked to implement policy priorities by clandestine means . Meanwhile, the Soviet government was working to implement its policy priorities .
 Many cadres were forced to resign, while new, younger officers were promoted in their wake . Many of the cadres resigned, while many were promoted by younger officers .
 Khrushchev wanted to direct the KGB’s activities abroad . He entrusted his protééé Aleksandr Shelepin with the task to do so .
 The KGB and the International Department did not always see eye to eye . Intelligence officers had to implement decisions made in Moscow . The decision was made by the KGB and International Department .
 The chief of the GRU was directly responsible to the minister of defense . The GRU's aims were shaped by the priorities of the Soviet military .
 Its efforts entailed gathering intelligence on Western weapons systems via a network of clandestine human contacts, as well as from signals intelligence .
 GRU analyses also fed into reports for the CC CPSU and the International Department . GRU analysis was also used in reports for CC CPS U and the ICU .
 GRU was often more closely involved in African liberation movements than the KGB . Its officers often advised on military strategy, reviewed the requirements for weapons, and were involved in military training .
 Born in 1909 as the son of a railway worker in Brest, Ivashutin trained as a military pilot . Born in 1908 as the . son of railway worker .
 During World War I, he worked for the Red Army’s military counterintelligence branch . He rose to the rank of lieutenant general in Russia during World War II .
 After the war, he was recruited by the KGB, becoming deputy chairman in 1954 . He was deputy chairman of the KGB in 1954, becoming a member of the party .
 In this capacity, he was involved in the violent crackdown on protests in the Soviet city of Novocherkassk in June 1962 . In June 1962, he took part in a violent crackdown against protesters .
 He made his most significant mark at the GRU, expanding its capacity to collect signals intelligence . He would dominate the organization until his retirement in 1986 .
 The KGB and GRU often produced drastically different assessments of developments on the ground . Much has been said about long-standing institutional rivalry between the KGB and the GRU .
 Ivashutin did little to foster cooperation with the KGB and apparently favored the ‘less politicized” nature of his job . He did not appear to be interested in cooperation with Russia .
 The GRU was arguably more professional and more selective in its recruitment practices than the KGB . The two intelligence services operated on the same turf, often using similar contacts and methods .
 As the head of the International Department, Ponomarev was much more powerful than Potekhin, who was largely dependent on the party for resources and permission to do academic work abroad .
 Recommendations and policy papers drafted by Institute of African Studies could easily be rejected by middle-ranking desk officers of the International Department .
 Potekhin played a crucial role in reviving Soviet African studies and reengaging with African elites . However, he still played a key role in the Soviet Union's reengagement with Africa .
 They were also sources of inspiration, patronage, and ideas for the younger generation that would come to dominate Soviet Africa policy .
 The younger generation was quite different from the Cominternians . The Soviet Bureaucratic Elite and Their environment were quite different .
 Born in the interwar period, they did not participate in or witness the Russian Revolution or the Civil War . Born in interwar Russia, they didn't participate in the Revolution or Civil War.
 A lack of direct experience of 1917 did not mean that these young people were devoid of revolutionary ideals . However, they were not without revolutionary ideals, they say .
 Growing up during the height of the Soviet antiracist campaigns in the 1930s, many sympathized with the plight of African Americans and colonial subjects .
 Their core formative experience was World War II, in which they participated as combatants in the Red Army or as civilians working for the war effort .
 Some experienced the war and its harsh deprivations as children or teenagers, and many lost family members and friends . Some of the war's survivors were children or teens .
 This generation shared an overwhelming sense of pride in their country . As a result, this generation shared a sense of . pride in the country .
 This younger generation reacted to Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin in varying, often conflicting ways . The younger generation react to the denunciation in varying ways .
 Some abhorred the Great Terror and welcomed Khrushchev’s secret speech, but their break with Stalin didn’t imply disillusionment with socialism, they said . Some of those who broke with Stalin did not necessarily disillusionment .
 Many believed Stalin had perverted the so-called “Leninist principles,” a mythologized concept that, in their imagination, contrasted the early Bolsheviks’ democracy and idealism with the privilege and terror unleashed by Stalin . Stalin's "Leninism" was a
 Georgii Mirskii was part of the team at the Institute of World Economy and International Relations in Moscow, working on theorizing such concepts as ‘noncapitalist development’ in the 1950s .
 Not all men and women of the younger generation supported Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin, however . Not all young people supported the denunciation .
 To some, Stalinism was synonymous with the massive surge of upward social mobility that allowed many men and women from modest peasant backgrounds to obtain an education and achieve social standing that would never have been possible before 1917 .
 Whatever their attitudes to Stalin, Khrushchev’s opening to the Third World offered new opportunities for the younger generation . Whatever their views to Stalin they were open to the world's Third World .
 For all these reasons, studying to become a foreign policy expert was highly competitive .
 Entry required high academic achievement, enrollment limited on the basis of one’s gender and ethnicity . Enrollment was also limited to one's gender, ethnicity .
 The main outlets for women area studies experts were either to enter academia to work as university professors or to be interpreters, translators, and foreign language instructors .
 At MGIMO in the 1950s, the student body was divided between children of the party elite, the Red Army veterans and a large group of young people from outside Moscow whose parents did not have much influence .
 The latter group was at the bottom of the ladder and eager to accept less prestigious jobs upon graduation .
 European languages are considered the most prestigious, followed by Arabic, Hindi, and African languages . European languages were considered most prestigious .
 African languages remained at the “bottom of the pile” in terms of prestige for the majority of graduates . African languages remain at the bottom of the . pile’s prestige for most graduates .
 The continent also offered career opportunities, particularly for graduates from modest backgrounds who had niche skills . However, the continent also had opportunities, especially for those with niche skills.
 The biographies of select cadres who came to occupy important roles in Soviet relations with the anticolonial movements in Portuguese Africa illustrate these points . They include those who came into contact with the anti-colonial movements .
 Petr Manchkha is the head of the Africa section at the International Department . He was speaking at the start of the conference in Moscow .
 Manchkha was born in modern-day Ukraine, where he spent his childhood working in the countryside . Of Greek origin, he was of Greek origin .
 He had some naval experience before moving to Moscow . He eventually became the chief of the Albania section at the International Department .
 One of his tasks was maintaining relations with left-wing groups in Albania and Greece . For which he had to cross the Albanian—Greek border to meet Greek partisans, often on horseback .
 Manchkha was the first head of the newly established Africa section in 1961 . When Soviet-Albanian relations faltered, he moved on to become the head of Russia's Africa section .
 Manchkha was a “cheerful and life-loving man, a Mediators of Liberation 25 52 . He was not a trained Africanist, big patriot of the African continent .
 Petr Evsiukov became the key referent on Portuguese Africa in Portugal . He became a key figure in the country's development of Portuguese Africa .
 Evsiukov was born on January 3, 1921, in Harbin, China, and moved to Moscow at an early age . He was born in 1921, and later moved to Russia .
 After the war, he studied and then taught at the Military Institute of Foreign Languages . He died in 1945 .
 Evsiukov went to work at the Foreign Languages Publishing House in 1956 . After its dissolution in 1956 he went back to work for the Foreign Language Publishing House .
 He was brought in to work under Petr Manchkha as the desk officer for the Portuguese colonies in 1961 . He was fluent in Portuguese, a rare skill in the USSR at that time .
 He was not an expert on Lusophone Africa, but he quickly became well-informed . His job was to filter and analyze information coming from Soviet press agencies, embassies, and the intelligence services .
 He became one of the regulars who would “meet and greet” the leaders of the African liberation movements in Moscow and process requests for assistance . He also became a regular who would meet and greet the leaders .
 Eysiukov believed that decolonization was an inevitable process and that socialist countries had an internationalist duty to support national liberation movements . Like many men and women of his generation, he believed decolonialization was inevitable .
 These younger intelligence officers often had very similar backgrounds to their peers in the party bureaucracy and academia . They often had similar backgrounds in party bureaucracy .
 Born in 1922 in Kursk, he volunteered for the Red Army during World War II . Served in a paratrooper battalion in the Soviet Union .
 Kirpichenko graduated from Moscow Institute of Eastern Studies in 1952 . He specialized in Arabic, graduating in 1952 in Moscow . He is one of the most prominent figures in Russia's history .
 At university, he was spotted by recruiters from the KGB . After a year’s training at the Higher Intelligence School, he joined the KGB in 1953 . He was a member of the KGB's First (intelligence) Directorate .
 In memoirs written shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kirpichenko criticized the lawlessness of the security organs under Stalin . He also wrote about the lawless security forces under Stalin's rule .
 He was ambivalent about de-Stalinization since it was undertaken by the same people, like Khrushchev, who had participated in the Great Terror, he said . However, he added that de-stalinization was undertaken in the same way as the great Terror .
 Kirpichenko recalled great optimism among the officers who joined the Africa section in the early 1960s . Kirpichenkovsky: "Great optimism" among officers in Africa section .
 Africa specialists believed that newly independent African nations would soon choose the socialist path . But they also realized the continent was “riddled with problems,” including poverty and instability .
 Kirpichenko was optimistic about the prospects of socialism in the Third World . Like others in his generation, he was optimistic of socialism .
 There was no other single event that better encapsulated the optimism of the 1950s than the Sixth World Festival of Youth and Students . The festival was held at the end of the 1960s in New York .
 The festival was designed to celebrate the new era of de-Stalinized socialism . Held a year after Khrushchev’s secret speech, the festival was created to celebrate new era .
 Soviet citizens encouraged to learn foreign languages and engage in conversations with foreigners . In preparation for the celebration, tourist infrastructure was upgraded . Soviet citizens were encouraged to become part of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet youth organization, the Komsomol, put together an impressive program of sports, cultural, and artistic events to project the image of a modern Soviet Union . Meanwhile, the youth organization put together a program of sport, cultural events .
 The African delegates enjoyed great popularity among Soviet citizens . Their hotel quickly became a vibrant social spot in the city .
 In sum, younger-generation cadres who worked for the foreign intelligence service, the International Department, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs all shared some core experiences and characteristics .
 Educated at the most prestigious universities, they belonged to the Soviet elite . They belonged to Soviet elite. They were educated at the highest universities .
 They knew foreign languages, regularly met foreigners, traveled, and often lived abroad as government employees . They often met foreign people, often met foreigners .
 They were all profoundly shaped by World War I, both the traumas and the victory, which instilled in them a sense of pride and optimism about the socialist system, they say .
 Many had direct experience of combat, which would prove significant in their future dealings with African guerrillas . Many of the soldiers were involved in combat with African rebels .
 Few Africanists were trained Africanists, and most knew little about the continent or its people . However, few were trained Africans, and few knew about Africa .
 In the late 1950s, African leaders developed personal relationships with Africans . What they lacked in regional expertise they came to compensate for in personal relationships .
 Mediators of Liberation 27 did not mean they were free from prejudice or personal biases, but the majority did believe in the ideals of socialist internationalism . This development does not mean that they were not free of prejudice .
 Kirpichenko, Manchkha, and Evsiukov became “mediators of liberation” precisely because Africa would remain a relatively low priority for the Soviet leadership over the long term . As the following chapters show, men like Kirpichenkha and Manch
 Late 1950s saw a profound transformation of Soviet policy toward the Third World . Conclusion: The late 1950s was a profound change in Soviet policy .
 Khrushchev used foreign policy pragmatically as a tool to raise his domestic and international profile . Highly ambitious yet at the same time personally insecure, he was personally insecure . His foreign policy was pragmatically used as a means of raising his profile .
 Khrushchev became the prime trendsetter in foreign policy after members of Stalin’s ‘old guard’ made a failed attempt to remove him in June 1957 . He became the leader of the Soviet Union .
 His hopes for socialist revolution in the Third World cannot be dismissed as simple pragmatism in the battle for supremacy after Stalin’s death . However, his hopes for a socialist revolution can be seen as pragmatic .
 Khrushchev was convinced that socialism was superior to capitalism . Like many men and women in his generation, he was convinced . He was convinced of socialism being superior to capitalist capitalism .
 If only socialism could be purged of Stalinism and revived around “Leninist principles,” then its power and strength could also be restored on the international stage, says Julian Zelizer .
 The revival of socialist internationalism was thus irrevocably connected to Khrushchev’s domestic program of de-Stalinization . The revival was also linked to the revival of Soviet-style internationalism in Russia .
 Soviet internationalism in the Third World could not be reversed by his successors . Because he promised to revive socialism around an idealized notion of ‘Leninist principles” (however ephemeral the actual meaning of that phrase may be) may be, it is not possible to
 Khrushchev’s belief in ‘peaceful competition’ in the Third World was undermined by events in Zaire . Zaire was the first African African nation to join the Soviet Union in Africa .
 Crisis in Zaire would also prove sobering experience for younger party cadres entering the service in the early 1960s . In fact, the crisis in the Zaire crisis would also proved sobering for younger Zaire cadres .
 Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World was the expansion of the bureaucratic apparatus . Another long-term legacy of Khrushchev's turn was the expanding of the bureaucracy .
 By the early 1960s, hundreds of young men and women would take up new jobs in Soviet academia, the bureaucracy, and the intelligence services . By the mid-1960s, the Third World had a large stake in Soviet intelligence .
 The profiles and personal experiences of the Soviet bureaucratic elite who would come to specialize in African affairs differed . The profiles of Soviet bureaucrats differed .
 Potekhin, Ponomarev, and Ulianovskii had a long-standing belief in proletarian internationalism . The Cominternians had some experience supporting an international revolution .
 Cominternians were at the forefront of the Soviet outreach to the Third World in the 1950s . They were often due to long-standing contacts with foreigners and international experiences .
 These were young, ambitious men and women who were keen to seize the opportunities opening up in the 1950s . They were keen, ambitious and ambitious to seize opportunities .
 They held a genuine belief in the superiority of the socialist system . However, they were not immune to idealism and held a belief in socialism .
 Africa was not the most desirable destination for most young and ambitious cadres who joined the bureaucratic elite in the 1950s and 1960s . Africa is now the most important place in the world to join the bureaucracy elite .
 Those who did become involved would quickly establish contacts with African revolutionaries . They would travel around the continent, and often become keen lobbyists on behalf of their clients .
 Cominternians and the younger generation became important “mediators of liberation,” playing a pivotal role in fostering contacts with African revolutionaries, including those from Portuguese Africa . Both Cominternarians and the . younger generation were important ‘mediators . of liberation .
 The next chapter investigates the development of these initial contacts in the context of the 1950s .
 Map showed the Portuguese colonies superimposed on the political map of Europe . Map showed Angola, Mozambique, GuineaBissau, Cape Verde, Sao Tomé and Principe, and Macau .
 The map was supposed to represent the revival of Portugal’s status as a great European power . It was designed by Henrique Galvao, the curator of the exhibition .
 Portuguese presence in Africa began in the fifteenth century . It was transformed into formal colonial rule by the early 1900s . The discussion begins with an overview of the Portuguese history of the continent .
 It analyzes the role of African labor in the Portuguese colonies . It examines the key components of Salazar’s vision, enshrined in the ideology of Estado Novo .
 The chapter then turns to the rise of nationalism in Portuguese Africa during the interwar period . The chapter is titled "Portuguese nationalism"
 The core of the discussion is the analysis of the formative experiences of a select number of African intellectuals from Portuguese colonies . Amilcar Cabral, Agostinho Neto, Mario Pinto de Andrade, Viriato da Cruz and Marcelino dos Santos would come
 This chapter situates future African leaders in a sociocultural milieu of urban centers across the Portuguese Empire . This chapter sitsuates these future leaders in an urban milieu across Portugal .
 It traces their personal stories and ideological influences, following them on their first trips to socialist countries in the 1950s . It also traces them on trips to the socialist countries .
 This chapter highlights the origins of the Cold War alliance that would define the international dimension of anticolonial movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau as rooted in the Soviet cultural diplomacy .
 The small kingdom of Portugal was at the forefront of European maritime exploration during the ‘Age of Discovery’ in the fifteenth century . The kingdom of Portuguese Africa is one of the most important countries in Africa .
 Prince Henrique (13941460) supported the development of the caravel, a highly maneuverable, light, and powerful vessel that could make long-distance voyages . He was driven by the search for the legendary ruler Prester John .
 Diogo Cao established the first European contact with the Kingdom of Kongo in 1482 . In 1482, he reached the mouth of the Zaire River and established contact with Zaire . The kingdom stretched across Angola and southwestern Zaire at the height of its influence .
 In Africa, the Portuguese used a combination of infiltration, persuasion, and coercion to extend their influence . The Portuguese are known for their use of infiltration and coercion in Africa .
 They co-opted the rulers of Kongo, who adopted Christianity and welcomed Catholic missionaries . Kongo's rulers were Christianized and welcomed missionaries .
 The Ndongo were more suspicious of the Portuguese than the Portuguese . However, further to the south, the Ndonga were more likely to be suspicious of them .
 Mozambique Island became the central point for exporting ivory, gold, and slaves to Portuguese India . The Portuguese gradually replaced Arab, Persian, and Swahili traders .
 By the nineteenth century, the Portuguese dominated a network of trading posts from Lisbon to Nagasaki in Japan . The Portuguese dominated the trading posts between Lisbon and Tokyo .
 The abolition of slavery and the onset of the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century led to the beginning of more formalized colonial rule .
 Competition between European powers for a sphere of influence in Africa led to a partition of the continent at the Berlin Conference in 1885 . The Revolutionaries were the first African Revolutionaries to take over Africa .
 Lisbon harbored plans to connect its possessions in East and West Africa into a central African empire . Lisbon had plans for connecting its possessions with an empire in Africa .
 Plan clashed with British ambitions to establish a protectorate, stretching from Cape Town to Cairo . However, the plan clashed with plans to establish an African protectorate .
 Lisbon had little choice but to accede, but national humiliation contributed to the downfall of the monarchy in 1910 . Lisbon was humiliated by the humiliation of the Portuguese monarchy .
 The extension of formal control beyond the coastal areas was also closely connected to the need to acquire cheap African labor . The extension was closely connected with the need for African labor, according to the historian .
 Laborers were required to work in coastal fisheries, on agricultural plantations, and build roads and railways . Laborers needed to work on coastal fisheries and agricultural plantations .
 The Portuguese also started constructing railways, connecting oceanic ports to mining centers in neighboring countries .
 In Angola, the Benguela railway carried copper from Zaire to the ports of Beira and Lobito on the Atlantic coast . In Angola it was used to transport copper from Beira to the port of Lobito .
 Lisbon also struck a deal with London, allowing the British to recruit Mozambican laborers for the gold mines of Transvaal, South Africa, in exchange for paying taxes for the use of port facilities at Lourenco Marques . Lisbon also agreed to pay taxes for using port facilities
 Although slavery was officially abolished, the practice persisted . The practice persisted throughout the centuries .
 The treatment of plantation workers in Sao Tomé was so dire that Cadbury suspended cocoa imports in 1909 . Cadbury was forced to suspend cocoa imports following the scandal .
 After the Portuguese monarchy collapsed in 1910, the rulers of the First Republic wanted to rationalize the exploitation of the empire . The Portuguese monarchy was abolished in 1910 after the collapse .
 colonial high commissioners had freedom to engage in developmental schemes . They stamped out slavery, imposed taxation, reduced protectionist tariffs .
 All "natives" who had no income from cash crops were subject to at least three months of compulsory labor, known as chibalo . All ‘natives’ who had . no . income from . cash crops had to work three months a year in compulsory labor .
 The abusive practices did little to revive Portugal’s economic fortunes . Portugal has been hit hard by a wave of anti-gay laws in recent years .
 On May 28, 1926, a group of military officers launched a coup that brought down the First Republic . The coup was a coup against the President of the Philippines .
 In 1928, the military appointed Anténio de Oliveira Salazar finance minister . He was assigned a brief to solve Portugal’s economic crisis . Salazar was the prime minister of the late 1930s .
 Salazar was born on April 29, 1889, into a religious peasant family in Vimieiro, in northern Portugal . Salazar is the first president of Portugal .
 Salazar rose rapidly, becoming prime minister in 1932 . An ultraconservative Catholic known for his ascetic lifestyle .
 One year later, he enshrined his vision for Portugal in the new constitution of the Estado Novo . Portugal's new constitution was enshrined in a new constitution in 2012 .
 Portugal became a ‘unitary and corporatist republic,” and Salazar’s Uniao Nacional became the country’�s only political party . Salazar became the president of Portugal in 1964 . Portugal was a “unitary, corporat
 Police were given new powers to stamp out criticism of the regime . Unions were suppressed, and the police were given extra powers to stop criticism .
 The patriarchal nuclear family became institutionalized, and women faced restrictions on suffrage and discrimination in the labor market . Women were able to vote and work in the workplace .
 Salazar dominated Portugal's political life until a debilitating stroke in 1968 . Salazar would come to dominate Portugal’s political life in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Salazar sponsored the Colonial Act, which ended colonial autonomy, centralized control over finances, and took steps to diminish the role of foreign capital in the colonies . Salazar also led the government to end colonial autonomy .
 Prices and quotas are set to drive the production of raw materials, including cotton, coffee, tea, rice, sugar, and maize .
 Salazar introduced the compulsory cultivation of certain crops, such as cotton, to fuel Portugal’s textile industry . In the effort to rapidly expand trade with the empire, Salazar tried to expand trade .
 Portugal’s regular trading partners, Europe and Brazil, imposed protectionist tariffs and capital controls, depriving Lisbon of its traditional sources of income . The Great Depression in the 1930s led to the onset of the Great Depression .
 Japan’s entry into World War II created shortages and stimulated demand for colonial goods, increasing the demand for African labor . The demand for labor increased during the war and increased the need for colonial labor .
 In 1942, colonial authorities announced that Africans were obliged not only to pay Revolutionaries 33 taxes but also to cultivate an area of land or work for an employer . The colonial authorities said that Africans must also work for employers .
 Lisbon has instructed local administrators to assist with the allocation of labor . Lisbon also instructed local officials to help with the allocated labor .
 The availability of cheap African labor was key to Salazar's dream of economic autarky . Salazar’s dream was to use African labor to create an economic boom .
 The so-called assimilados were either mesti¢o Afro-Portuguese or Black Africans who fulfilled certain conditions . The assimilados included white Europeans and those who were Black Africans . White Europeans and the assimilados also included those who lived in the assimilado category .
 There were many roadblocks to obtaining assimilado status, including the requirements to speak Portuguese, have a certain level of income, and show loyalty to the regime .
 One of the critical roadblocks to achieving assimilado status was the highly restrictive educational system . One of those roadblocks was the high school's highly restrictive education system .
 There were very few government schools, and these were reserved for Europeans, mesticos, and assimilados . There were also very few schools for Europeans and mesticados .
 There were also Protestant mission schools run by Baptists, Methodists, and Swiss Presbyterians . Mission schools were also run by Methodists and Baptists .
 The crown granted special trading rights and tax exemptions to propertied settlers on Santiago Island . Santiago Island was granted a special tax exemption by the crown .
 They acquired slaves to sell to the Americas or to cultivate cotton on local farms . The slave trade is a form of slavery in the Americas .
 All Cape Verdeans were designated as 24o indigenas, and as a result, enjoyed better access to educational opportunities . Many took up lower-level administrative posts across the empire . Many of the empire's most important posts were administrative posts .
 Cape Verdeans are not the only ones to suffer from special status . The island nation's special status has led to hardship for many Cape Verdescoans . The special status did not spare them from hardship .
 The arid archipelago had been affected by droughts for centuries, and islanders often resorted to immigration as a way to escape starvation .
 Lisbon proposed public works and encouraging people to migrate to Sao Toméé . But both measures were inadequate and came too late . The only solution Lisbon proposed involved public works, encouraging migration .
 As a result, almost 24,643 people lost their lives in the famine that struck between 1941 and 1943 . Almost 24,000 people died during the famine, which lasted between 1941 to 1943 .
 Very little was done in the immediate aftermath to develop access to water or prevent soil erosion . Very little has been done since the disaster .
 The transition to formal colonialism in the nineteenth century required the kind of investment and capital that Lisbon did not have . Lisbon's history of Portuguese colonialism has been called the Portuguese capital of Lisbon . The Portuguese capital is now the capital of Portugal .
 Successive Portuguese administrations used human exploitation to extract profits from Empire, but these strategies failed to produce the desired results . Successive administrations tried human exploitation, but failed to achieve the desired result .
 Only the exceptional circumstances during World War II brought Salazar’s dream of economic autarky closer to fruition . Salazar's dream came to fruition at Africans’ expense .
 The war accelerated a general crisis of colonialism, as subjects of Empire demanded equal rights for their sacrifice . However, the war also accelerated a . general crisis in colonialism .
 Abusive colonial practices encountered criticism, even from ardent supporters of colonial rule . Abusive practices faced criticism from even ardent supporters .
 In a closed session of the Portuguese National Assembly in 1947, Henrique Galvao, the curator of the 1934 Colonial Exhibition, argued that the brutality of forced labor in Angola led to migration to neighboring countries .
 Opposition to Portuguese rule crystallized among young men and women growing up under Salazar’s rule . This was the context in which, by the late 1950s, opposition to Portugal, was crystallized . Salazar's rule in the 1950s crystallized in the context of opposition
 Portuguese colonialism had developed some distinctive characteristics by the early twentieth century . Portuguese colonialism was similar to its European counterparts, but developed some distinct characteristics .
 The Portuguese were the first to explore all of Africa’s coasts, leading to the emergence of so-called “creoles” or “Luso-Africans,” who often spearheaded colonization with little direction from Lisbon .
 Luso-Africans were a heterogeneous group of Black Africans and mesticos, who were born in the colonies . They were born around the world in colonies .
 Their ancestors included conquistadores, soldiers, merchants, and criminals who had been banished from Portugal . Their ancestors include conquistsadores and soldiers, soldiers and merchants .
 The changes in colonial rule in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries often marginalized creoles . The changes were often marginalized .
 Another issue was the bureaucratization of the hierarchical racial order, which privileged white Europeans . White Europeans were privileged in the hierarchy of white Europeans, says historian .
 “nativist movement’s grievances found expression in the so-called ‘nativist’ movement . It saw notable creole intellectuals form associations and spearhead campaigns protesting racist laws and abuses committed .
 The new generation of urban Africans who grew up during the interwar period shared many similarities with their parents . They grew up in the same way as their parents did .
 "In some ways, they occupied positions of privilege in colonial society," says historian . "They occupied positions in some ways of privilege"
 As already discussed, those designated as assimilados constituted a tiny proportion of the overall population, had citizenship rights, and were spared the harsh realities of forced labor . Those designated as assimilationados constituted only a tiny portion of the population .
 Their parents were educated government employees or small business-owners . They were often critical of the colonial administration .
 Many differences remained because of their varying ethnic, socioeconomic, and educational backgrounds . Nevertheless, they were not a homogenous group, and differences remained .
 The biographies of Amilcar Cabral, Marcelino dos Santos, Mario Pinto de Andrade and Agostinho Neto provide insight into the early formative experiences of some of the key protagonists in this story .
 Amilcar Cabral’s early years were fairly typical of many Cape Verdeans growing up during the interwar period . Cabral's early childhood was typical of a typical Cape Veradian growing up .
 Born on September 12, 1924 in Bafata, Central Guinea-Bissau, Cabral was the son of Juvenal Anténio da Costa Cabral and Iva Pinhel Evora . He was born in 1924 and died in 2002 .
 Cabral's parents met in Guinea-Bissau, where Juvenal was a schoolteacher, and Iva owned a small hotel . Like thousands of Cape Verdeans who found employment in neighboring Portuguese colonies, Cabral’s parents found employment .
 His parents separated, and his mother was compelled to take up a succession of low-paying jobs to feed her children . His mother was forced to take on a series of jobs to support her children in order to feed them .
 Cabral's student days in Mindelo coincided with a literary renaissance movement known as the Caboverdenidade . Cabral’s student days coincided with the literary renaissance .
 Developed around a new journal, Claridade, the movement sought to break with the sterile traditions of Portuguese literature . It sought to focus on Cape Verdean problems in the “nativist” tradition .
 Cabral in his early writings expressed outrage at the isolation and living conditions on the islands . He spoke of hope and optimism for the future in his writings .
 Santos was born on May 20, 1924 in Lumbo in northern Mozambique, the son of Firmindo dos Santos and Teresa Sabina dos Santos . He was born in 1924 .
 In 1947, Marcelino dos Santos left to study in Lisbon, where he shared an apartment with Cabral . In 1947 he moved to Lisbon to study and lived in an apartment .
 He was born on August 21, 1928 in Golungo Alto in northern Angola, to Ana Rodrigues Coelho and José Cristino Pinto de Andrade . He was also known for his work in Angola .
 There were “old assimilados,” mainly Black Catholics with roots going back to the seventeenth century and few links to the countryside . “Old assimilados’s” were mainly Black Catholic Catholics . There were also “assimilationados” with roots
 Revolutionaries 37 ‘New assimilados’ retained links to the countryside and spoke both Kimbundu and Portuguese at home . Revolutionaries remained loyal to the country and spoke of the countryside . They also spoke of their country's culture and culture .
 Methodist missionaries dominated Luanda and its surroundings . Many of them were educated by the missionaries who dominated the country .
 Mario de Andrade’s lifestyle during his early years resembled that of “old assimilados” in many ways . The former Barcelona star's lifestyle was similar to that of an assimilado in his early life .
 Mario attended the Catholic Seminario de Luanda and the Colégio das Beiras, two prestigious secondary schools that were accessible to both white inhabitants and assimilado Africans . Mario attended both prestigious schools in Luanda .
 During the interwar period, the family lived in Ingombotas, a historically African neighborhood that was also home to many assimilado families . The family lived there during the 1930s .
 Luanda's house was leveled after World War II to accommodate Portuguese immigrants . The family had to move to a neighborhood close to the musseques, Luanda’s shantytowns .
 Neto was the son of Pedro Neto, a Methodist pastor, and a schoolteacher . Born in 1922 in Catete, Icolo e Bengo, near Luanda, he was born in 1922 . Neto died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 In Luanda, Neto managed to enroll at the Liceu Salvador Correia, one of the few government-sponsored high schools in the country . Neto is currently studying in a government-funded high school .
 He also supplemented his income by working as a secretary for a colleague of his father’s, the Methodist bishop Ralph Dodge . He also worked for Ralph Dodge's father, a Methodist bishop .
 Neto was a “very serious lad, very studious and very intelligent,” says Dodge . Dodge later recalled Neto as one of the ‘very few blacks’ who completed the lyceum .
 There, he came into regular contact with contract laborers, he says . The experience opened his eyes to the violence inherent in Portuguese colonialism, he writes .
 Neto's early poetry illustrated his indignation at the violence and poverty of everyday life in Luanda’s musseques . Neto was born in 1961 and died in 1992 .
 All the key protagonists in this story shared similar backgrounds, coming from assimilado or mestico families .
 Each belonged to a relatively privileged stratum of society, but they were by no means the colonial elite . Each of the men in the army was a member of the British elite .
 Recent research has also emphasized the role of Protestant missionaries and other religious networks in fostering a sense of national identity .
 These were young men who all either bore witness to or directly experienced discrimination and injustice in their youth . Above all, these were . young men . They all bore witness or directly . experienced discrimination or injustice in youth .
 The memory of Portuguese abuses remains a key starting point for the generation who would later rebel against colonial rule . It was a key start point for many of the generation that would later revolt .
 In 2017, I visited Praia, Cape Verde, to talk to men and women who had participated in the liberation struggle . In 2018, I went to Praia to talk about the liberation struggles there .
 Amélia was born in Luanda in 1933 . She was the daughter of Felisbela Rodrigues de SA, an Angolan, and Joao Baptista Andrade Sanches from Cape Verde . She is one of the world's most famous women .
 Her family was not wealthy but was still better off than the majority of Black Angolans . Her family is not wealthy, but still had a good life expectancy .
 Amélia was keen to emphasize the injustices she had witnessed in her childhood . As an adult, she became involved in the nationalist struggle as an adult . She became involved with the struggle as a child .
 She was distressed to see that Black people walking barefoot were not allowed to walk on the pavement . She said she was distressed that people were being forced to walk barefoot .
 Her aunt took her to enroll in a state-run primary school in Luanda . She had to confront her aunt when she tried to enroll her in the school .
 The room, she recalls, was full of “scruffy, dirty, and barefoot children” waiting to be enrolled . The room was filled with “dirty, dirty” and “barefoot” children .
 Agostinho Neto, Amilcar Cabral, José Araujo, Mario Pinto de Andrade and Marcelino dos Santos attended the OAU summit in Accra, Ghana, in October 1965 .
 Another incident involved witnessing elderly agricultural workers being beaten as punishment for failing to pay taxes to the colonial authorities . The elderly workers were beaten for not paying taxes to colonial authorities, according to reports .
 Amélia detested such discrimination, but she was not involved in political affairs . She was not in politics, but not in any form of government .
 Her life would change dramatically in 1956 after she joined her fiancé and future husband, José Aratijo, in Portugal . She was unaware that he was involved in nationalist activism .
 Many entertained reformist agendas and sought equal rights with Europeans within the imperial context . Like elsewhere in Africa after World War II, many entertained reformists agendas . In Africa after the war, many entertainers sought equality with Europeans .
 World War II and its aftermath was a moment of crisis for Salazar’s regime . From Cultural Self-Discovery to Independent Statehood, Salazar's regime was at a crisis .
 Portugal remained neutral during the war and thus escaped the physical destruction of other European countries . Portugal was not involved in the war but was neutral during it .
 Costs of living and problems with rationing resulted in food shortages and hunger in the countryside . The spiraling costs of living led to food shortages in the country .
 The Red Army’s role in defeating fascism increased the appeal of Soviet socialism and fueled the rise of communist parties . Across Europe, wartime devastation and the Red Army helped fuel the Soviet socialism . The Soviet Union was defeated by fascism in 1945 .
 Salazar allowed opposition parties to contest parliamentary elections in 1945 . Salazar implemented several measures to speed up economic development in the metropole and the colonies .
 Only three years later, however, MUD was banned as the extent of opposition to Salazar’s rule became apparent . Salazar's rule was the result of a growing opposition to his regime .
 In the colonies too, the majority remained without citizenship rights, and government-sponsored investment programs were curtailed . The majority of the colonies remained without citizens rights .
 The Portuguese-controlled Azores archipelago is strategically situated in the middle of the Atlantic . The key reason was the strategic value of the Azores .
 During World War II, the British and the Americans used the Azores as a refueling and resupplying station . The Azores were also used by the U.S. and British during WWII .
 As the Cold War gained traction in the late 1940s, continuity of access to the Azores was one of the main reasons why Portugal was invited to join NATO in 1949 . Portugal joined NATO in the following year .
 The U.S.-Portugal Lajes Base Agreement of 1951 stipulated that NATO could use the Azores as a military base and, in return, the United States would provide the country with military aid . The agreement was made in 1951 .
 Lisbon made use of U.S. aid in Africa . Secret clause allowed Lisbon to make use of United States aid . Lisbon was forced to sign a deal with the United States in 1994 .
 He maintained that harmonious racial relations prevailed across Portuguese Africa . He also maintained that . harmonious . relations prevailed .
 Beneath the veneer of stability, the 1950s would serve as a crucial decade for the formation of various clusters of nationalist activity in Portugal and across the empire .
 African students were supposed to become the new colonial elite . One cluster formed among African students in Portugal . The group was supposed to be the new Colonial elite .
 CEI was a self-help organization with a canteen, a medical center, and a social club . Students from the Portuguese colonies came to socialize with the organization . CEI became a self help organization with canteen and medical center .
 African students explored their cultural roots and what it meant to be an ‘assimilado’ in the context of the Portuguese empire . Inspired by the Francophone African writers of the Négritude movement such as Aimé Césaire and Léopold Sengh
 By studying and reconnecting to specifically African culture, students rejected the concept of “Lusotropicalism’s” It was a convenient extension of a fundamentally exploitative and racist colonial order, they say .
 In Angola, Luanda’s musseques were the focal point for the formation of a specific national culture . The muses were a focal point in the formation .
 Music was particularly significant in the development of Angolan consciousness, often to a greater extent than political nationalism . As Marissa Moorman has argued, music was significant in development of the Angolan .
 In the late 1940s, several civil servants formed a band called Ngola Ritmos . It performed in Kimbundu and other Angolan languages, using local instruments .
 The music was supposed to awaken people to colonial oppression, and many of its members were politically active . Many of the members of the band were political active .
 In Luanda, a group of politicized youths called Novos Intelectuais de Angola published Mensagem, a journal dedicated to the rediscovery of Angola’s politics, culture and history .
 The editor of Mensagem, Viriato da Cruz, was a childhood friend of Mario de Andrade .
 The authorities considered Mensagem subversive and banned the publication after only two issues . The publication was banned by the authorities after just two months .
 In the postwar period, many African leaders preferred socialism to capitalism for several reasons . In the 1950s and 1960s, African leaders chose socialism over capitalism for economic reasons .
 To them, capitalism in the African context was associated with colonial exploitation . To them they believed capitalism in Africa was a form of exploitation .
 The majority of African economies relied on the export of agricultural goods, leaving them vulnerable to fluctuations of the global economy . African economies rely heavily on agricultural exports, leaving the economy vulnerable .
 Socialism was attractive for many African leaders who wanted to overcome the colonial legacy and achieve rapid economic development upon independence . Socialism was an attractive option for many leaders .
 African leaders of the first post-independence generation did not believe their economies or societies were suited to a socialist transformation along the lines of the Soviet Union . Many African leaders believed their economies were not suited to socialism .
 Many Africans have embraced ‘A frican socialism’ to combine state-led development initiatives with the coexistence of private capital . Many have embraced the idea of a 'socialist state'
 Andrade, Santos, Neto, and Cabral forged contacts with the PCP upon their arrival in Portugal . As a result, many African students in Portugal forged contacts . The PCP was founded by African students .
 Mario de Andrade recalled distributing Marxist literature . All of them participated in the PCP-sponsored Soviet Peace Campaign launched by the USSR .
 African students resented that the Portuguese Communists prioritized struggle against the dictatorship over the liberation of the colonies . African students were angered by that the struggle was prioritized by the Portuguese Communist Party .
 The PCP formally approved support for the independence of the colonies at its fifth congress in 1957 .
 PCP provided a vehicle for African students to gain experience of underground activism, with some forming long-term contacts that would prove vital in the long run .
 Marxist ideas also gained some traction in urban centers across the Portuguese colonies . Marxist ideas were also gaining some traction across the colonies .
 It is unclear whether the PCP had any input in forming the PCA or drafting the manifesto . The PCP is the party's largest party in the UK .
 The 1950s were a period of profound ideational transformation for African intellectuals . They started to analyze the concepts of race and racism in the context of the Portuguese Empire .
 They would soon abandon cultural nationalism in favor of a fundamentally Marxist analysis of Portuguese colonialism . However, they would soon abandoned cultural nationalism .
 Young people abandoned Négritude because they concluded that the narrow assimilado culture of urban areas could not be connected with the experiences of the vast majority of people living under Portuguese rule . As Branwen Gruffydd Jones has argued, these young people .
 In short, contacts with Portuguese communists helped politicize African students, but these did not determine their politics . Contacts with communists helped politicalize students in Africa .
 As Neto and Cabral argued, ‘African socialists’ underplayed the importance of class struggle in Africa and the Marxist laws of historical development . “African socialism’s” underplayed class struggle, they said .
 Criticisms of ‘A frican socialism’ emerged gradually throughout the 1960s, but some of the fundamental differences were visible from the outset .
 By the mid-1950s, it became clear that it would be challenging to engage in anticolonial activism in Portugal . By the 1950s, the anti-colonialist movement in Portugal was a major focus .
 Cabral continued to work as an agricultural expert, first in Guinea-Bissau and then Angola . Cabral was also known for his role in Angola .
 Most nationalist activists in Angola were either in prison or in exile . By 1957, most nationalist activists had left the country in exile or in prison .
 In 1957, Viriato da Cruz fled Luanda to join the others in Paris, fearing arrest . In 1957 he fled to join them in Paris fearing arrest, but was arrested .
 The center of political activism had to move outside of Portugal into exile . The move signified that the center of the political activism must move outside Portugal .
 From the outset of the interwar period, Paris served as a hub for nationalist activity for African intellectuals . Tashkent, Beijing, and exile Activism in the 1950s .
 Mario de Andrade started working for Présence Africaine, an influential journal founded by Alioune Diop, a key figure in the Négritude movement .
 Andrade’s association with the journal led to the development of contacts with other Francophone nationalists based in Paris . Andrade raised awareness of Portuguese colonialism .
 Francophone and Lusophone activists disagree about the direction of political nationalism . Francophone activists also disagree on direction of national unity in France .
 Marcelino dos Santos, Viriato da Cruz, and Mario de Andrade were invited to attend the “First Conference of African and Asian Writers,” held in Tashkent, Soviet Uzbekistan, from October 7-13, 1958 .
 Nikita Khrushchev underlined the importance of writers in developing the nationalist consciousness of people struggling against imperialism . The Soviet Union was founded in 1961 .
 Behind the scenes, the conference was marred by the delegates’ many competing agendas . Behind scenes, though, the delegates' competing agendas were seen as a distraction .
 According to the Soviet version of events, the conflict began during preparatory meetings, where Diop insisted that the Soviets not Revolutionaries 45 participate in the proceedings . Diop: "Revolutionaries 45 refused to participate in proceedings. The Soviets insisted that they not participate"
 The incident caused some controversy during discussions at the Presidium of the newly established Soviet Solidarity Committee . Some A fricanists like Alexander Zusmanovich argued there should have been more ‘patient” engagement with Diop .
 Other members of the Presidium noted that many people in Diop’s circle did not share his views . Although not everyone agreed with such a proposal, others disagreed with Diop's proposal .
 As Rossen Djagalov has argued, the Tashkent conference was divided among those writers who favored strong connections between literature and politics . Those who wanted literature to maintain its independence were divided .
 He also met many prominent writers, among them the Turkish Nazim Hikmet . He met many of the writers, including Nazim Akkmet .
 Andrade made a very positive impression on the Soviet conference organizers . Andrade was invited to attend the conference in Moscow .
 Viriato da Cruz and Marcelino dos Santos were not listed in the reported, even though they both attended the Tashkent conference . Both attended the conference, but were not named .
 Andrade established correspondence with Ivan Potekhin, the first director of the Institute of African Studies . Andrade also established correspondence between him and Potekin .
 Du Bois was at the “First Conference of African and Asian Writers,” held in Tashkent, October 7-13, 1958 . DuBois was a member of the ‘First Conference’ of African, Asian Writers .
 Cultural exchanges remained an important part of the engagement between the Soviets and their new African allies . Cultural exchanges continued to be important in the Soviet-Africa relationship .
 In 1959, a collection of poems by Marcelino dos Santos was published in the USSR in Russian translation . In 1959 the poems were published in Russia in a translation .
 Pavel Shmelkov was given responsibility for sub-Saharan Africa at the Association for Friendship and Cultural Ties with Foreign Countries . In the early 1960s, he was appointed as head of the association for friendship and cultural ties with foreign countries .
 There gathered the library staff, readers, and simply young people who had found out there would be a meeting with the Africans gathered there . The library staff and readers gathered at the meeting .
 The guests did not expect such a lively interest in their art, and they read poetry in Portuguese and French . The guests were surprised by their interest in poetry .
 Poetry reading was a way to connect African intellectuals with the Soviet public . They showed the domestic audience that the revolution was still alive, with poetry reading serving as a way .
 They raised the prestige and increased the international exposure of African writers . They also raised the . prestige of the . writers .
 The Soviet cultural diplomacy of the 1950s was important for fostering personal contacts and connections between African revolutionaries and local intermediaries . Thus, it was important to foster personal contacts with African revolutionaries .
 The Soviet Union was not the only actor interested in capturing the ‘hearts and minds” of Third World elites due to the rise of China as a formidable regional power with global ambitions in the 1950s .
 Initially, the Chinese leadership forged a close alliance with the Soviet Union . Initially, it was a close ally with the USSR .
 Chairman Mao Zedong was not happy with the pace of modernization and decided to pursue a ‘national road to socialism’ after Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin . However, the CCP’�s leader, Chairman Mao Zingong, was not satisfied with
 In 1958, he launched the ‘Great Leap Forward’ scheme that aimed to increase industrial production and agricultural output at breakneck speed . The scheme was aimed at increasing industrial production, agricultural output and boosting productivity .
 Three of our protagonists, Mario de Andrade, Marcelino dos Santos, and Viriato da Cruz, grew infatuated with the Chinese Revolution during the 1950s .
 He had already gone to Bucharest, Romania, for the Fourth World Festival of Youth and Students with Agostinho Neto . He was impressed with the warm reception, which contrasted sharply with the reality of daily racism .
 He traversed the country, visiting factories, speaking to leaders of trade unions, women’s groups, and youth organizations . He also visited factories, visited leaders of unions, youth organizations, and women's groups .
 He remembered being impressed with the massive scale of industrial construction, with all the work done through sheer physical labor . He said he was impressed by the sheer physical work of the construction .
 The first experience of state socialism would be significant for African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies .
 The lack of racial and ethnic hierarchies demonstrated what socialism could achieve, even in multiethnic societies . Although such expressions of socialist solidarity were often ritualized, such expressions were ritualized .
 The experience of the Chinese Revolution in the 1950s was particularly influential for African intellectuals . It offered a model of state-led mass mobilization for a non-white, non-Western country with history of suffering from imperialism .
 The Great Leap Forward would end in disaster and mass starvation in China . The perceived mobility and grandeur of the experiment that Africans witnessed left a profound and long-lasting impression .
 In the USSR, the majority of these encounters were part of Soviet cultural diplomacy, an attempt to capture the ‘hearts and minds” of Third World elites . In the Soviet Union, the most of the encounters were cultural diplomacy .
 The contacts forged through these early encounters, such as with Mario de Andrade, were significant . They placed the Paris-based African intellectuals in contact with central Soviet figures and organizations .
 These travels contributed to a radical vision of a just society that many African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies would come to share by the late 1950s . These international travels contributed .
 A number of local rivals would emerge in the 1950s and 1960s in urban centers across the Portuguese Empire and neighboring countries . However, they were not the only ones, with a number of rivals emerging from the same period .
 In Angola, the Luanda-based intellectuals would be challenged by a group of people based in Zaire who sought inspiration and support from the United States . The Luanda intellectuals would have been challenged by the Zaire group, which sought inspiration .
 Various regions of the Portuguese Empire had long-standing links to neighboring countries, as people moved in search of better job opportunities or to escape compulsory labor requirements under Salazar .
 Masses of migrants traveled from Mozambique to work in the mines and on the railways of Southern Rhodesia and South Africa .
 Thousands migrated from Cape Verde to Sao Tomé, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, and Angola to escape famine . Thousands migrated to Senegal, Senegal and Guinea Bissau .
 Angola had historical links with the Belgian Congo to the north and Northern Rhodesia to the east . Angola had history links with Belgian Congo, the Congo and the Belgian Rhodesia .
 By the late 1950s, migrants had started to set up selfhelp organizations to support members of their communities . Self-help organizations were set up by migrants in the 1950s .
 One such organization was based in Léopoldville (later renamed Kinshasa), the capital of Zaire . Zaire was the birthplace of the Zaire kingdom .
 Angolans living in Léopoldville were rooted in the Revolutionaries 49 5,000-strong Bakongo community, which had traditionally inhabited northern Angola and southwestern Zaire . The Bakongo people are a large Bakongo population of Angola .
 Those who settled in Zaire spoke fluent French rather than Portuguese and were well integrated into the local politics and culture .
 Angolans were initially dedicated to the restoration of the Kongo kingdom . These were key features of the so-called ‘Léopoldville group’ of Angolians .
 Unlike the Luanda-based intellectuals, the Léopoldville group was opposed to communism . The group derived their inspiration from the United States .
 Holden Roberto was the man who would come to dominate the Léopoldville group . Roberto was one of the most influential players in the world . Roberto would go on to be a success in the sport .
 Roberto’s family moved to Zaire when he was only two years old . Born in 1923 in Sao Salvador in northern Angola, Roberto's family moved into Zaire at two .
 He studied at a Baptist missionary school and then worked as an accountant for the Belgian colonial administration in Léopoldville, Belgium .
 Roberto represented the UPNA at the First All-African People’s Conference in Accra in 1958 . Roberto met influential African leaders who advised him to broaden the organization's appeal . Roberto was born in 1961 .
 Roberto wanted to show the UPA aspired to represent all Angolans . By dropping the narrow regional focus from the title, Roberto wanted it to reflect all Angolan citizens .
 Roberto began to entertain ideas about the violent overthrow of colonial rule . He fashioned himself as a staunch anticommunist . He established relations with United States officials .
 Roberto first met with the United States Consulate in Léopoldville, France, in late 1955 . In late 1955, Roberto first visited the U.S. Consulate .
 Washington was in the process of revising its policy on Africa in the late 1950s . The timing was opportune, since Washington was revising policy on African affairs .
 Although the United States had a long-standing anticolonial tradition, many U.S. politicians saw Africans through a racial lens . The bitter history of segregation in the southern United States.
 Richard Nixon made an extended tour of Africa in 1957 and came back convinced that the continent would become the next battlefield between the West and the Eastern Bloc . However, this policy started to change, especially after Vice President Richard Nixon's extended tour .
 Eisenhower and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles agreed to a policy review . On August 23, the National Security Council approved their final report, NSC 5719/1 .
 Eisenhower administration also faced criticism of its Africa policy . Eisenhower administration faced substantial criticism for its policy in Africa .
 One of the critics was John Fitzgerald Kennedy, a young Democratic senator at that time . Kennedy was criticized for his actions .
 Kennedy believed that one had to engage with African nationalist leaders—or risk having them fall under the spell of communism . Kennedy: "One must engage" with African nationalists or risk falling under communism .
 On July 2, 1957, Kennedy shocked the Senate when he denounced U.S. support for the French colonial war in Algeria . Kennedy shocked Senate in 1957 when he spoke out against support for Algeria .
 Holden Roberto established himself as a reliable “noncommunist nationalist,” which put him on a path of long-term collaboration with Washington . Roberto thus established himself .
 Major differences between the Luanda and Léopoldville-based Angolan nationalists have attracted significant attention from historians . The major differences between Angolan and Luanda-based nationalists have drawn significant attention .
 Both groups represented educated elites, but they were distinct in terms of ethnic background, culture, and education . Both groups were distinct from each other .
 Luanda-based intellectuals embraced Marxism as a form of identification that stood above race . Holden Roberto and the UPA identified predominantly with the Bakongo .
 The difference in the way the two groups understood race was compounded by variations in religion and occupation .
 The UPA embraced a “capitalist ethos” because it was rooted in Bakongo-dominated Northwest Angola, a major coffee production center . As David Birmingham has argued, the UPA embraces a "capitalist ethos"
 White farmers often occupied the best land, but there was also substantial coffee planting among Africans . The best land was often occupied by white farmers .
 These divisions were reflective of how “Angola’s” was put together, cutting across ethnocultural divides . More generally, these divisions were reflected in how "Angola" was created .
 By 1960, the Revolutionaries 51 UPA emerged as a powerful rival to the Luanda-based intellectuals . Holden Roberto managed to mobilize the Bakongo of northern Angola and developed a network of international patrons .
 As the 1950s drew to a close, it became increasingly evident that Salazar was not willing to relinquish Portugal’s empire in Africa . Salazar became increasingly determined to retain the Portuguese empire .
 The colonial administration arrested and jailed fifty Angolans suspected of involvement in nationalist agitation . Fearing that the same would happen in Angola, the colonial administration jailed fifty people . Feared that the government would arrest and jail people in the country .
 Police shot at peaceful protesters at the Pidjiguiti docks in Bissau, killing fifty people and injuring many more, on August 3, 1959 . In Guinea-Bissau the police killed fifty people .
 The man who would connect this act of police brutality to the nationalist narrative was Amilcar Cabral . Cabral was the first person to connect the act to a nationalist narrative . The incident occurred in Brazil's capital, Sao Paulo .
 He conducted the country’s first agricultural census and developed a critique of colonial land exploitation . The census was conducted in the 1930s and 1940s .
 He acquired connections among Cape Verdean community in Bissau . He also acquired connections with Cape Verdesan community .
 The Portuguese secret police, the PIDE, treated such activities with suspicion . The PIDE treated such activity with suspicion. The secret police were responsible for many of the activities .
 Cabral was forced to leave Guinea-Bissau, coming back only occasionally to see his family . Cabral is forced to return to his country after the coup .
 Cabral set up the PAIGC after the events at the Pidjiguiti docks in August 1959 . However, as Juliao Soares Sousa has discovered, Cabral actually set it up . Cabral was the prime minister of Portugal in 1959 .
 The building pressure for violent action became apparent at the Second AILA frican People’s Conference, held on January 25, 1960, in Tunis, Tunisia . The conference was held in Tunis .
 The Tunis conference was very different from the first such meeting in Accra in 1958 in 1958 . The first such conference was held in Ghana in 1958.
 By 1960, the Algerian War had become a rallying point for the Non-Aligned Movement and inspired other Third World revolutionaries . Algeria was the focus of the non-aligned movement in 1960s .
 Frantz Fanon personified the militant mood in Tunis, calling upon delegates from the Portuguese colonies to launch an armed struggle against the Salazar regime . Fanon was in solidarity with the Algerian National Liberation Front .
 Cabral then went to Luanda but failed to find any recruits because of the repression . Cabral went to Angola to recruit but did not find recruits due to the repression of the country .
 Fanon: Cabral’s trip showed that the conditions for armed rebellion were not right . Fanon disagreed, but Cabral's trip showed the conditions were not the right, he says .
 Paris-based activists had to move to Africa to mobilize support on the ground or lose out to regional rivals embedded in local politics . Activists had to leave Paris for Africa or risk losing out to rivals in regional politics .
 Guinea provided an ideal “launching pad” for armed action in Guinea-Bissau . Guinea provided the ideal ‘launching point’ for military action in the country . Guinea was a ‘launch pad’ in Guinea, Guinea, for armed conflict .
 The two countries share a long and porous border, which is difficult to control because of the long-standing movement of goods and people . The border is a long, porous border which is hard to control .
 In the early 1960s, Conakry became a critical hub for African revolutionaries due to the patronage of Ahmed Sékou Touré, Guinea’s first president .
 Touré's name hit the international headlines in 1958 when Guineans voted to reject French president Charles de Gaulle’s proposal of continued membership of the French community . Touré was the leader of the Guinean community .
 Touré used the referendum result to construct an image of himself as an uncompromising, radical nationalist leader . Touré pledged support for African liberation, and pledged to fight for the country .
 China's interest in Africa picked up in 1960 because of competition with the Soviets . China’s interest in African affairs picked up because of the Soviets competition .
 Sino-Soviet disagreements had been brewing for some time for many reasons . China and the Soviet Union had been at odds for years .
 The CCP’s chairman, Mao Zedong, wanted Moscow to treat Beijing as an equal partner . The CCP's chairman wanted to treat Moscow as a partner in Beijing .
 He was unhappy when the Soviets criticized the Great Leap Forward and failed to support China in its border conflict with India . The former Chinese president was unhappy with the Soviets' criticism of China's Great Leap forward .
 China started to challenge the USSR openly for leadership in the Third World . As Sino-Soviet competition intensified, China started challenging the USSR .
 Beijing stepped up its support for anticolonial movements in Africa and began offering cash and military training to these movements . Beijing also offered cash, military training and other support for the anti-colonial movements .
 Cabral and Cruz took some practical lessons in “guerrilla warfare” in China . Cabral, Cruz and Cruz received the cash in exchange for the cash .
 Some of their notes from the course were allegedly preserved on microfiche and transported secretly to MPLA supporters in Angola . Some of the notes were allegedly sent to supporters of the MPLA .
 Guinea-Bissau will send recruits to Nanjing Military Academy for short training course . Cabral also negotiated with the Chinese to send recruits for short military training courses . Guinea Bissau is one of the most impoverished countries in the world .
 Anrade later recalled that the trip showed that the Chinese were much more willing to support armed struggle than the Soviets . As Anrade recalled, the trip .
 The argument goes that the SACP influenced members of the ANC to engage in violence against the apartheid regime . Then, the argument goes, the ANC was influenced by SACP . The SACP has been accused of encouraging violence against apartheid regime members .
 This led to the formation of its armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, in 1961 . Umkonto we sizwe formed an armed wing in 1961, which led to its formation of an armed force .
 The central role of the USSR as “backing’s” the violent option has been disputed by several authors . However, the central role in the Soviet Union as ‘backed’ by the violence option has also been disputed .
 There is no direct evidence that the Soviets encouraged a violent anticolonial uprising in the Portuguese colonies . Similarly, there is no evidence that there was a violent anti-colonial uprising .
 Andrade, Cruz, Cabral, and Cabral visited the Soviet Union in the summer of 1960 . Details of conversations they had there are unknown .
 Andrade does not mention the trip in an otherwise detailed interview with Michel Laban . In fact, Andrade doesn't mention it in the interview .
 Portuguese colonialism was nowhere near the top of the Politburo agenda in 1960s . Soviet inaction could also be explained by the fact that it was not on the agenda at the time .
 Even if such requests were filed, the Soviets lacked the organizational capacity to process them . In fact, even if such a request was made, the Soviet Union lacked the capacity to handle it .
 During their early trips to Moscow, African anticolonial activists were usually hosted by members of the Soviet Solidarity Committee . During their visits to Moscow they were often hosted by the committee .
 While the Chinese took a highly personalized approach, the Soviet bureaucracy was cumbersome and often slow, with minimal access to high-level decision-makers . The Chinese took an approach similar to the Chinese, but the bureaucracy was often slow .
 It would take some time—and some exceptional circumstances—for the Soviets to truly notice developments in the Portuguese colonies . The Soviets would take time to notice the Portuguese colony's progress .
 African revolutionaries had to harness support for armed struggle quickly, or lose out to local rivals . By 1960, it had become clear to African revolutionaries that they must harness support quickly .
 African intellectuals realized that they had to demonstrate the ability to challenge the Portuguese by the force of arms . Although violence was never their preferred option, African intellectuals had to show they could resist the Portuguese .
 The rivalry between the Luanda-based intellectuals and the Léopoldville group emerged early on, with both vying for leadership in the anticolonial movement .
 Mario de Andrade declared that the liberation movements would resort to “direct action” if faced with continued Portuguese intransigence . Speaking at the London Conference for Nationalist Leaders from the Portuguese Colonies on December 6, 1960, he declared that .
 The 1950s were a crucial period in which the men and women who would later preach revolution in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau came of age .
 Initially, these were young people who expressed their frustration with the colonial regime in ways that had been common in interwar Paris, London, and Brussels . Through cultural production and self-discovery, they expressed their frustrations with colonial regime .
 They eventually abandoned Négritude in favor of a more radical approach . However, they eventually abandoned the idea of Nébritude .
 Portuguese colonial system in terms of class rather than race . They would come to understand the Portuguese colonial colonial system .
 Their vision of the future came to rest on socialism as a way to ensure total liberation from colonialism . Their vision was that socialism was a way of ensuring total liberation .
 Andrade, Cabral, Neto and Neto envisioned a radical transformation of society . Neto: "I want to see a radical change in society" Neto says he wants to see Brazil's future as a model for democracy .
 By the late 1950s, they had adopted a Marxist framework to analyze colonialism . They had forged close connections with European left-wing circles and officials across the Eastern Bloc .
 Their trips to the socialist countries were impactful, as they reinforced the belief in the mobilizing potential of socialism . Revolutionaries fostered personal links with key people and institutions that would be significant once anticolonial wars began in the early 1960s .
 By 1960, it became clear that Salazar was unwilling to negotiate . Lusophone Africa preferred peaceful transition to independence . Salazar refused to negotiate.
 Leadership of the liberation struggle hinged upon the ability to prepare and ultimately lead armed uprisings in the colonies . Asa result, leadership hinged on the ability of the . ability to . prepare and . ultimately . lead armed forces in the . colonies .
 Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau also claimed ownership of the nationalist project . In the years it would have to compete with many local rivals .
 Luanda-based intellectuals challenged by a group with a very different nationalist vision . Such divisions were evident early on in Angola . Luanda's intellectuals were challenged by group with very different vision .
 The mobilization of resources from African and international patrons became particularly pertinent. Thus, the mobilization of funds from African, international patrons is particularly pertinent .
 A few years earlier, world prices for coffee, Angola’s most significant export commodity, had dropped, leading to wage cuts in the coffee-producing areas of the north .
 1960 was not a good year for cotton farmers of the Kassange region . In addition, 1960 was also a bad year for the region .
 In January 1961, wage cuts in Kassange spurred a wave of protests, which were soon answered by arrests . The protests were soon followed by arrests, which led to the deaths of many .
 This crisis led to a full-blown rebellion against the system of forced cotton growing in the area . This led to the revolt against forced cotton in the region .
 This revolt and reprisals, known as “Maria’s War,” passed relatively unnoticed by the world press, mainly due to strict censorship . The revolt and the reprisal of Maria's War was known as "Maria's War"
 In 1960, developments in the colonies still did not feature in international headlines . The Santa Maria, a Portuguese luxury liner, was hijacked by a group of political activists led by Henrique Galvao .
 Henrique Galvao, the curator of the 1934 Colonial Exhibition in Porto, is the leader of the anti-colonialist movement .
 Galvao had been a staunch supporter of the regime, but turned against Salazar after his criticism of abusive labor practices in the colonies fell on deaf ears, eventually leading to his arrest .
 The hijacking was the most dramatic event in Galvao's career . However, it was the hijacking that would become the biggest event in his career . The hijacker is the most famous hijacking of all time .
 The hijacking attracted widespread attention, and rumors spread that his ship was sailing toward Luanda, the capital of Angola, to launch a coup . Rumors spread that the hijacking was a coup attempt .
 After ten days navigating the Atlantic, the Santa Maria docked in Recife, Brazil . The Santa Maria is the first ship to sail over the Atlantic since it was launched in December .
 Journalists who remained in Luanda bore witness to events that would shatter Salazar's myth of harmonious racial relations in Portuguese Africa . Salazar’s myth would shatter his myth that harmonious race relations in Portugal Africa .
 The events known as the ‘Angolan uprising’ started with a series of violent incidents in Luanda on February 4, 1961 . The uprising was the first of its kind in the country .
 In the north, local Bakongo joined the UPA, attacking farms, destroying property, and killing European farmers . The UPA has attacked farms and destroyed property in the north .
 The Angolan uprising was a violent rebellion against the forced labor system . The scale of the violence was unexpected, even among the nationalist leaders .
 In April, Minister of Defense Julio Botelho Moniz demanded urgent reforms in Angola and called for Salazar’s resignation .
 Salazar resolved to crush the uprising in the north with overwhelming terror . However, the coup failed, and Salazar decided to crush it in the name of the rebels .
 On orders 56 Cataclysm 57 from Salazar, the Portuguese army bombed and raided entire villages looking for suspects, killing thousands on the spot and arresting many more . Thousands were killed in the raids .
 By the end of the year, about 50,000 Africans had been killed in the conflict . 300,000 Angolan refugees had crossed the border into Zaire .
 Angola uprising raised questions regarding the salience of Portuguese colonialism . The Angola uprising was the first of its kind in Angola .
 In Washington, the newly elected John F Kennedy broke the pattern by siding with the Soviet Union to condemn Portugal at the UN .
 He also used diplomatic channels and the promise of economic aid in an attempt to convince Salazar to proceed toward self-determination, he says .
 Portugal controlled access to the Azores archipelago, which hosted a NATO military base at Lajes . Washington’s response was constrained by the fact that Portugal controlled control of the region, which is home to a NATO base .
 Lisbon made it clear that it would not hesitate to terminate the lease if Washington continued to exert pressure over its colonial policy . Lisbon said it would be willing to terminate its lease if it continued to be pressured by Washington .
 The first secretary astounded Kennedy with the announcement that the Soviet Union would sign a peace treaty with the GDR and terminate Western access to West Berlin . Then, during the first meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchev in Vienna on June 4, 1961, the president astounded him with the
 Kennedy refused to relinquish Western access and ordered a military build-up to defend the city . The city was overrun by Soviet troops in 1968 .
 Thousands of East Germans streamed to the West over the summer, leading to the construction of the Berlin Wall in August . The Berlin Wall was built after thousands of people streamed to West .
 The Lajes military base in the Azores was used heavily during the Berlin airlift in the summer of 1961, thus strengthening the arguments of State Department and Pentagon officials who warned against alienating Salazar .
 Kennedy continued to press Salazar for reforms but refrained from any measures that would deny continued U.S. access to the base . Kennedy pressed Salazar to reform but stopped short of any measures to deny continued access .
 The Soviets were initially slow to respond to events in Angola . They supported resolutions condemning Portugal’s actions at the UN .
 Czechoslovakia also emerged as an important patron of the MPLA and PAIGC . Czechs also forged a special relationship with Viriato da Cruz and Amilcar Cabral .
 This chapter charts the largely unknown story of how the Angolan and Berlin crises led Moscow and Prague to approve the first aid packages for the MPLA and the PAIGC . It details the important role key officials played in such responses to such responses .
 By evening, six white policemen, one African army corporal, and 14 so-called rebels had been killed . Six white policemen and one African police corporal were killed .
 Interracial violence erupted again at the large public funeral of those who had been killed on the previous day . The next day, interracial violence again erupted at the funeral of the people killed that day .
 The prison was attacked again on February 10, leaving seven dead and seventeen wounded . Seven people were killed in the attack, including seven people wounded .
 As Dalia and Alvaro Mateus have discovered, neither the MPLA nor the UPA orchestrated these events in Luanda, Angola . The MPLA and UPA did not orchestrate these events, says Mateus .
 The violence in the Angolan capital took the MPLA by surprise . In fact, the violence in Angola's capital, capital, was a surprise . The MPLA has been in power for more than a decade .
 Holden Roberto was preparing to launch an armed struggle in northern Angola . Meanwhile in Zaire, Holden Roberto planned to launch a military struggle in Angola .
 He was frustrated with the failure of peaceful protest and was preparing for armed action . Although he advocated nonviolence in public, he was preparing to armed action.
 In March, he went to the U.S. and spoke about Angola at the United Nations . Angola is Angola's only country in Africa .
 The timing of the UPA’s invasion of northern Angola coincided with a vote on Angola at the UN Security Council . In a carefully crafted international strategy inspired by the FLN in Algeria, the timing coincided with the vote .
 Robert Kennedy allegedly met with Attorney General Robert Kennedy to secure support for the president . The Kennedy administration is said to have met with Kennedy .
 In April, the CIA put Roberto on an annual retainer of $6,000, which was subsequently raised to $10,000 . Roberto was put on the retainer at the CIA in April .
 The Angolan uprising and Salazar’s brutal response drove home the importance of a coordinated response . Salazar's brutal response to the uprising was the result of the uprising and the brutal response .
 Organizers envisioned that the new organization would raise the international profiles of the MPLA and the PAIGC . Organizers hoped to capture the leadership of the nationalist movement .
 Czechoslovakia was the first country to provide an assistance package to the MPLA . The MPLA was fighting for independence from France in the 1960s .
 Starting in the 1950s, Czechoslovakia had been pursuing an active policy in the Third World . The country has been pursuing a policy to help develop the world's economies .
 Czechoslovakia boasted an advanced arms manufacturing industry that had been famous since the interwar period . Czechsoslovakia was one of the most industrialized states in Eastern Europe . The country's arms industry was famous for its arms manufacturing .
 It also maintained a network of commercial and diplomatic contacts with many countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America .
 Czechoslovak-Egyptian arms deal once again put Prague on the map as the ‘go-to-the-top’ capital for Third World leaders looking for arms . The communist takeover in 1948 saw a temporary decline in commercial and diplomatic engagement with Africa, Asia, and
 These considerations often matched the personal ambitions of the top leadership . These considerations were often matched by personal ambitions .
 More than half of the Portuguese colonial army consisted of African troops . African troops were under direction of European officers .
 His immediate rival was Rudolf Barak, the minister of the interior, who oversaw state security and its foreign intelligence branch, the First Directorate .
 In conversations with Czechoslovak officials, Viriato da Cruz emphasized the MPLA aspired to establish a common front of all the Angolan movements . The MPLA is currently fighting in Angola .
 The Angolan uprising probably accelerated the timetable on Prague's decision to approve the MPLA’s requests . The MPLA's request was likely to be approved by Prague .
 Prague agreed to discuss the possible delivery of arms with their Soviet colleagues . Prague also agreed to talk about the possible weapons delivery to their Soviet counterparts . Prague and Moscow agreed to meet to discuss arms deliveries .
 Ideology clearly mattered for the CPC leadership who emphasized ideational affinity with the MPLA . They internalized Cruz’s Cold War identification of the UPA as essentially a foreign, U.S.-sponsored organization .
 In comparison to Czechoslovakia, the Soviets were initially slow to respond to events in Angola . The Soviet Union was slow to react to the situation in Angola.
 The Soviet Union supported all the UN resolutions condemning Portugal’s action in the colonies, but did not actively engage with nationalist activists until May . The Soviet Solidarity Committee offered to commandeer one of their staff for a three-week reconnaissance trip .
 The Soviet ambassador to China sought contact with Pascoal Luvualu, the Angolan trade union leader affiliated with the MPLA, and invited him for talks in the Soviet Union . Around the same time, the Soviet Ambassador to China wanted to meet Pascoal .
 The Soviet Solidarity Committee informed Luvualu that they could offer “money, medicines, and food” to the MPLA in Conakry . In Moscow on June 8, the committee said it could offer money, medicines and food .
 They also considered supplying weapons but asked him to explore ways to transfer arms to Angola . Perhaps using African troops stationed in Léopoldville who were there under the auspices of UN peacekeeping mission in Zaire .
 Moscow is stepping up its support for the Angolan nationalists, according to reports . These developments indicated that Moscow was stepping up support for Angola's nationalists . Moscow is expected to step up support of the Angolian nationalists in Angola .
 Evsiukov was one of only few cadres in the party apparatus who could speak fluent Portuguese . He would become a regular participant in meetings with lusophone anticolonial activists from Portuguese colonies .
 Once the Berlin Crisis erupted over the summer, the KGB and Czechoslovak StB worked out the first set of measures that would guide their policy on Angola . The KGB and the Czechoslovakia StB agreed to the deal in the summer .
 The KGB and the StB agreed to recruit “progressive agents” among the leaders of the liberation movements . Among the myriad proposals against the “main enemy—the U.S. and its allies,” the KGB and StB . The StB also agreed
 They also drafted joint action plans on Zaire, India, Indonesia, and Egypt . The group also drafted action plans for Zaire and India .
 The StB’s First Directorate pretty quickly proceeded to implement the plan . The plan was implemented by the StB's First Directorate .
 He arrived in Conakry in 1960 and forged contacts with leaders of the African liberation movements based there . He met with Amilcar Cabral and Viriato da Cruz, among others .
 On July 14, 1961, Adamek met Viriato da Cruz at his house in Conakry and proceeded to talk about Czechoslovak assistance for the MPLA . Both sides would benefit from closer cooperation, he said .
 As Adamek reported to Prague, Cruz agreed that they shared the same goal—“fighting imperialism in A frica’—and promised to use his position as the MPLA’ secretary general .
 The Soviet-Czechoslovak plan for Angola was thus in the making by the time Viriato da Cruz and Mario de Andrade arrived in Moscow for talks in late July 1961 .
 They also asked for financial assistance, humanitarian aid for Angolan refugees, training for party cadres in the USSR, and arms . The Angolan party asked for money, arms and financial assistance .
 The Soviets at least partially fulfilled these requests, as they allocated yearly financial assistance to the MPLA, starting with $25,000 in 1961 and 1962 . The MPLA was awarded $1,000 each year in support .
 The MPLA was still based in Conakry, unable to move to Léopoldville because of the crisis in Zaire, so questions of logistics must have taken center stage . Zaire was still in the chaos when the crisis broke out .
 There is both indirect and direct evidence to suggest that the Berlin Crisis hastened the intensification of support for African nationalist movements . There is also direct evidence that the crisis hastened support for the African nationalist movement .
 The Soviets stepped up their efforts to support the Angolan nationalist movement only toward the end of May and in particular after Khrushchev’s June meeting with Kennedy in Vienna in Vienna .
 On July 29, the KGB chief Shelepin sent Khrushchev a “mind-boggling set of proposals” for intelligence action in various parts of the world aimed at distracting the U.S. during the settlement of the Berlin Crisis .
 These proposals included measures to “help organize mass anticolonial uprisings” in Kenya, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, and Guinea-Bissau by arming rebels and training military cadres .
 Shelepin’s proposals seem as ambitious as the joint KGB-StB coordination plan from July and likely were part of the same strategy . The proposals were likely to be part of a larger strategy .
 The Cold War context also played an important role in accelerating attempts to develop a plan for Angola . The Angolan uprising was a crucial factor motivating the Soviets to act, but also played a key role .
 There had always been considerable cross-border movement in Guinea-Bissau . Men and women left for neighboring Senegal and Guinea to seek job opportunities, escape forced labor .
 By the time Cabral arrived in Conakry in 1960, several nationalist organizations had already started recruiting members among the immigrant community . Cabral's arrival in 1960 was the first time he had arrived in the country .
 Conakry-based organization was led by Luiz da Silva and Belarmino Gomes . One such Conaky-based group was led to Luiz's death in 2011 .
 There were also a number of nationalist organizations based in Dakar, the capital of Senegal .
 Movement for the Liberation of Guinea found support among the Manjako ethnic group in northern Guinea-Bissau . It gained backing from Senegalese authorities .
 Most of the organizations opposed Cabral’s binationalist vision and advocated independence for Guinea-Bissau alone . Most of these organizations were opposed to Cabral's vision .
 He organized a leadership election, mobilizing Balante émigrés from Guinea-Bissau in support . Settled in Conakry, he organized an election for his party .
 The Soviet Solidarity Committee wrote back confirming that they had formed a similar view of Belarmino Gomes during his ‘one-day stay” in Moscow .
 Cabral also met Miroslav Adamek who supported his request to visit Prague . In Conakry, Cabral met Adameks who also supported his visit .
 One year earlier, Cabral traveled to Moscow on his way to China with a group of recruits from Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde . It was not Cabral's first trip to the Soviet Union .
 Cabral criticized the concept of “African socialism” on the grounds that there was only “scientific socialism,” and marveled at Soviet achievements . Cabral was “highly critical” of U.S. policies on Africa, said his hosts .
 Most likely, Guinea-Bissau was not a priority for the Soviet leadership . Most likely it was not to be a priority to the Soviets .
 Cabral’s trip to Czechoslovakia with his righthand man Aristides Pereira was much more fruitful . Cataclysm 65 Cabral visited the Czech Republic in 1964 and 1965 .
 In July, the KGB and the StB worked out a plan for Angola . The StB proceeded with “recruitment” of MPLA’s Viriato da Cruz . The KGB and StB have been working on a plan to recruit the MPLA'
 The Ministry of the Interior also pledged to organize a six-month course for a dozen recruits . The Interior has pledged to organise a six month course for the recruits .
 Adamek’s “recruitment” meeting with Cabral on August 13, 1961 was similar to the one with Viriato da Cruz a month earlier . The meeting took place in 1961 .
 He also asked Cabral to share information about people and the political situation throughout Africa . Cabral also asked him to share his thoughts on the continent's political situation in Africa .
 Cabral promised to help, but also warned that his options were limited since he was often critical of the Guinean authorities . Adamek’s report to the StB: Cabral said he would help but also said he had limited options .
 Cabral’s “recruitment” was a bit more ambiguous than the case of Viriato da Cruz . It is not clear whether Adamek broke his diplomatic cover or if any papers were signed . The meeting was a professional success, but it is not
 Political activity was on the rise among Mozambican migrants in East Africa . The Foundation of FRELIMO was founded by Julius Nyerere and Eduardo Mondlane .
 Makonde of northern Mozambique were particularly important in the history of the nationalist movement . The Makonde were important members of the nationalist movement . They were important figures in the Mozambican independence movement .
 In the 1950s, many Mozambican Makonde emigrated to neighboring countries in British East Africa, Tanganyika, Zanzibar, and Kenya . They escaped the forced labor still in place in Portuguese Africa .
 In the 1950s, a number of Makonde associations appeared in Tanganyika, including in Dar es Salaam, the capital, and Tanga . The Makonde association was formed in 1950s .
 The Dar es Salaam association consisted of a small group of politicized Makonde who spoke English and knew very little Portuguese . The association was formed by a group of politicalised Makonde .
 In the 1950s, many joined Tanganyika’s African National Union . It was a nationalist front campaigning for the independence of the territory held under British trusteeship . Many of the population joined the African National Party .
 In March 1960, TANU supported the transformation of the Dar es Salaam group into the Mozambique Africa National Union . The 25-year-old Tanganyika-born Makonde Matthew Mmole was the first president of the union .
 In 1960, the Tanga association petitioned the Portuguese administration at Mueda, northern Mozambique, for permission to return to their home country . The Tanga Association petitioned for permission in 1960 to return home .
 Crowds gathered at the office of the local authorities in Mueda in 1960 . That was the subject of a meeting on June 16, 1960, as crowds gathered in the city .
 Meeting quickly degenerated into violence when police opened fire . Police opened fire after people reacted angrily to the governor's speech . The governor announced that their leaders had been arrested .
 Police brutality politicized the Makonde and reaffirmed their belief in the need for armed struggle in Mozambique . While the interpretation of the event has since been substantially revised in recent years .
 The organization quickly managed to attract members from several regions, including Portuguese-speaking Makonde . The organization is based in Makonde, Angola .
 One of its founders was 22-year-old Adelino Gwambe, a former employee of the south Rhodesian railways from Inhambane in southern Mozambique .
 Gwambe and MANU ’s president Matthew Mmole represented the Mozambican liberation movement at the CONCP meetings in Casablanca in 1961 . In April 1961, Gwampe represented the movement at CONCP .
 In July 1961, Gwambe publicly announced to the press in Dar es Salaam that he stood for immediate armed struggle . He publicly announced in July 1961 that he had declared himself for an armed struggle in Tanzania .
 As the claim was too radical for the local authorities, he was expelled from Tanganyika and moved to Ghana with support from President Kwame Nkrumah .
 The role played by Marcelino dos Santos, who joined UDENAMO and moved to Dar es Salaam after Gwambe was expelled in 1961, might be the reason for the allocation of funds .
 UDENAMO’s main rival, the Dar-es-Salaam-based MANU, also appealed to the Soviets for assistance . UdenamO's main rival MANU also appealed .
 Mmole and Millinga also claimed that Gwambe’s UDENAMO was a movement of ‘assimilated’ Mozambicans who had, in fact, made a secret deal .
 In June 1962, representatives from a number of Mozambican nationalist organizations gathered in Dar es Salaam to discuss unification in a common front under the auspices of TANU’s leader and the first president of Tanganyika, Julius Nyerere .
 Nyerere believed that liberation would not be complete until all of Africa was free . Alongside many African leaders of his generation, he believed liberation was not complete .
 Since the 1950s, Nyerere had expressed staunch opposition to South Africa’s apartheid . He was among the founders of the Britain-based Anti-Apartheid Movement . Since the 1960s, he had expressed his opposition to apartheid .
 Nyerere allowed exiled liberation movements from the Portuguese colonies, South West Africa and South A frica to establish their offices and training camps in the country . Tanganyika gained independence on December 9, 1961 .
 Nyerere did not approve of Gwambe’s militant rhetoric, which was one reason why he was expelled from Dar es Salaam in July 1961 . He was expelled in 1961 after he was found guilty of using his militant rhetoric .
 The candidate whom Nyerere favored for the leadership of the Mozambican nationalist movement was the U.S.-educated Eduardo Chivambe Mondlane . Mondlane was the candidate for leadership .
 Born on June 20, 1920, he was the son of a Tsonga chief from Gaza province in southern Mozambique . He was born in 1920 and died in 1994 .
 In South Africa, he became involved in political campaigning, for which he was expelled from the country . He was also expelled from South Africa after becoming involved in a political campaign .
 Lourenco Marques cofounded the association for Black students in Mozambique (NESAM) He spoke out against Portugal’s racist policies .
 He then continued his education, first, briefly, in Lisbon, before moving to the United States . He studied sociology and anthropology at Oberlin, Northwestern, and Harvard . He then moved to the U.S. to study sociology, anthropology .
 While living there, he married Janet Rae Johnson, a white woman from Indiana . He married her in 1946 .
 In 1957, Mondlane started work as a research officer at the Trusteeship Department of the United Nations . He met Nyerere at the UN, where he met him in 1957 . Mondlane was born in New York City .
 Back in the U.S. he established contacts with the Kennedy administration, urging them to put pressure on Salazar . The Kennedy administration urged them to do so .
 UDENAMO’s Uria Simango was appointed as vice president . Marcelino dos Santos became the secretary for foreign affairs . Matthew Mmole became treasurer and David Mabunda became general secretary .
 FRELIMO represented a genuine union of ethno-nationalist organizations rooted in distinct communities of Mozambican émigrés . According to a nationalist narrative, Frelimo represented a real union . FrelIMO was founded by Mozambicans who emigrated to
 FRELIMO base was made up of Makonde-based UDENAMO, which had already become a ‘pluriethnic organization with a modernist program” by 1962 .
 In July 1962, David Mabunda, Fanuel Mahluza, and Matthew Mmole came to Moscow to participate in the International Congress for Peace and Disarmament . The three men participated in the Moscow conference .
 Only one month after the formation of FRELIMO, they expressed concern about Mondlane’s election . Mondlane's election was only month after they formed the party .
 Mabunda questioned Mondlane’s ‘political affiliation’ and declared that UDENAMO could withdraw from the union at any time . Mabundunda: “UdenAMO can withdraw from union at anytime .
 In August, Adelino Gwambe accused Mondlane of being a United States agent and officially withdrew UDENAM6O from the front of the U.S. State Department .
 Evsiukov recalls Mondlane impressed him during his first visit to the USSR in early 1962 . Evsukov said Mondlane was someone who was well educated and knew the situation in his country well .
 He was also not in a hurry to begin an armed struggle, a decision that the Soviets understood . The Soviets understood that the decision was made, as was not made by the Soviets .
 Angolan uprising brought home the urgency of establishing a political and military organization in Africa . Student Activists Flee Portugal to escape Portugal .
 Most of the most high-profile anticolonial nationalists had already left Portugal by 1961 . Many remained in the country and engaged in underground activism .
 The authorities increased their surveillance of A frican students and ramped up their recruitment drive for the colonial army .
 In the aftermath of the Angolan uprising, a frican student activists feared they could be arrested or drafted into the Portuguese army .
 Many believed they could best serve the anticolonial cause by joining the nationalist movements rather than continuing with underground activism in Portugal . Many also believed that they could serve the anti-colonial cause better .
 CIMADE developed a daring escape plan involving driving groups of students to Porto, northern Portugal, before using boats to smuggle them to the border and across the Minho River to Spanish territory .
 After they reached Spain, a group of young Americans drove them across the country to France . They were taken to France by young Americans who drove them to the country .
 One of the escapees was Amélia Araujo from Luanda, who had moved to Portugal in the late 1950s to join future husband José, who was involved in nationalist activism .
 In 1961, Amélia fled Portugal with her three-month-old daughter Teresa . She fled with her daughter Teresa in 1961 with her mother .
 She heard that her husband was among the group of escapees who had been arrested and imprisoned in Spain . However, when reaching France, she heard that he had been imprisoned .
 Then, they were suddenly released, allegedly on orders from Madrid, for reasons that are still not entirely clear . They were suddenly suddenly released by Madrid for reasons still unclear . Then, the Spanish government suddenly ordered them to be released .
 After staying in France for several months, the group left for Accra, Ghana . After several months in France, they moved to Accra .
 Those students who escaped Portugal became the core of the Western-educated, cosmopolitan elite . They would take over critical functions in the administration of the anticolonial movements . The students became part of the elite of the anti-colonial movements .
 The Araujos joined the PAIGC at their headquarters in Conakry, where José worked closely with Cabral . José and Cabral worked closely together in the 1970s and '80s .
 Cape Verdeans Maria da Luz “Lilica’s Boal and Pedro Pires were dispatched to Senegal to recruit among the Cape Verdesan community . The pair were sent to Senegal where they were recruited to recruit .
 Lilica Boal would become the director of the PAIGC’s Escola-Piloto, an experimental school established in Conakry to educate the future national elite . Lilica would be the first woman to head the school .
 Joaquim Chissano continued his studies in France before joining FRELIMO’s leadership in Dar es Salaam . The Mozambican joined the Frelimo leadership in 1996 .
 Henrique "Iko" Carreira became a member of the MPLA’s first executive committee, responsible for security, after undergoing training in Czechoslovakia . The Angolan Henrique “Iko’ako” was trained in Czechsoslovakia
 Many of the cadres trained in Portugal continued their education in the Soviet Union and other socialist countries . Many of these cadres continued their studies in Soviet Union .
 The majority of the recipients trained at professional technical colleges while the elite cadres studied at universities . The recipients are mostly from technical colleges .
 Amélia Araujo went to study radio broadcasting in the USSR . She returned to lead Radio Libertagao in Conakry .
 Cabral's daughter Iva and Aratijo's daughter Teresa were sent to ‘Interdom’ The boarding school for the children of elite foreign communists in Ivanovo near Moscow . Cabral’s daughter was sent to the boarding school .
 The Angolan uprising was a significant catalyst for the Portuguese colonies’ entry into the Cold War . The uprising in Angola was a catalyst for Portugal's entry into Cold War relations with the West .
 The events in Angola offered significant opportunities for both Moscow and Washington . However, the international environment shaped their actions in very different ways . Russia and the U.S. acted very differently in Angola .
 The Berlin Crisis limited the effectiveness of Kennedy’s anticolonial policy . Rising Cold War tensions encouraged the Soviets to formulate a strategy on Portuguese Africa .
 The story shows that the Soviet response to events in Angola was initially slow . The initiative came from middle-ranking cadres in the Soviet bureaucracy, the mezhdunarodniki .
 In due course, Petr Evsiukov would emerge as an increasingly important liaisons for day-to-day relations with African revolutionaries . The Russian revolutionary leader would emerge in due course as an important liaison between Russia and Africa .
 The involvement of the intelligence services with the liberation movements is not surprising, says the author of the book . The book is published by Simon Simon Simon, a former member of the British Army .
 KGB and StB played an important role in devising a plan for Angola in 1961 . The KGB and the StB also played a key role in planning for Angola .
 Czechoslovakia had a good opportunity to influence the Cold War in Africa to Prague’s advantage . From the perspective of the country with limited resources, these secret contacts offered a good chance to influence Cold War . Prague's limited resources were used to influence Africa's Cold War to Prague
 Intelligence officers would play key roles as liaisons with the African anticolonial intellectuals, trying to establish the dominance of their allies over the nationalist movement . As the following chapters show, the intelligence officers would be key liaisons .
 While Cold War considerations certainly mattered, the choice of partners was closely tied to ideological considerations . The decision was made in the 1950s and '60s, and '80s .
 By 1961, Viriato da Cruz, Mario de Andrade, and Marcelino dos Santos were already known to the Soviets as A frican intellectuals influenced by Marxism . By 1961 they had already been known as A.F.C. intellectuals .
 A sense of ideological affinity mattered to the Soviets and Czechoslovaks, who saw the world in terms of class struggle . The Czechs and Soviets saw the the world as a class struggle, the Czechs saw it as an ideological struggle .
 These ideological interpretations were not rigid, and they could be reconsidered based on shifting realities . However, these ideological interpretations are not rigid and could not be rigid .
 Support from socialist countries in 1961 was fairly limited . Overall, support from the socialist countries was fairly low .
 By the end of the year, the brutal suppression of the Angolan uprising showed that Salazar would not give up the empire without a fight .
 The nationalist movements would have to organize in exile, mobilize and train recruits, and supply them with weapons if they wanted to launch an armed struggle . The nationalist movement would need to organize and mobilize, train recruits and supply weapons if it wanted to take action .
 International donors would need to find additional assistance from international donors . African states must also overcome internal rivalries and overcome internal divisions . They would need international help, while maintaining support from host states .
 The next chapter addresses how key protagonists used diplomacy to establish dominance over the nationalist movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau .
 Lisbon granted colonial subjects equal rights, abolished labor requirements, attempted to improve essential services, and opened up the colonies to foreign direct investment . Lisbon granted colonies equal rights to equal rights .
 colonial elites welcomed reforms but the measures were piecemeal at best . There was no discussion of self-determination, and there was no talk of selfdetermination .
 India seized the momentum occasioned by events in Angola and invaded the Portuguese-controlled Goa in December 1961 . In December 1961, India seized momentum occasioning events in Anglia .
 Salazar ordered the vastly outnumbered contingent of Portuguese troops in Goa to resist at all costs . The officers who surrendered surrendered without much resistance were court-martialed . Salazar's forces were outnumbered by the majority of the population .
 Lisbon acquired modern military equipment from France and West Germany to fight its colonial wars . Lisbon also acquired modern equipment from West Germany and France .
 By 1962, the ability to wage armed struggle became fundamental to establishing a claim to leadership of the nationalist movement . As explored in chapters 2 and 3, by 1962, armed struggle was fundamental to establishment of a claim .
 On May 25, 1963, thirty-two A frican leaders founded the Organization of African Unity as a forum for collective action on the continent . The Organization was founded by African leaders in 1963 .
 In 1961-64, the MPLA, the PAIGC, and FRELIMO all confronted internal critics and local rivals that, for the most part, formulated alternative visions of anti-imperialism based on race and ethnicity . The MPLA faced internal critics, local rivals
 After Agostinho Neto joined the MPLA in Léopoldville in 1962, he clashed with Viriato da Cruz and others . He argued against the preponderance of mesticos in leadership positions in leadership .
 Mondlane had to answer to charges that Mozambican "southerners" like himself occupied key posts in FRELIMO . Mondlane was the newly elected president of Frelimo . He was accused of being a key figure in the country's political movement .
 The internal dynamics of liberation movements in exile was closely connected to the politics of their African host states . Hosts frequently maintained relationships with competing nationalist organizations .
 China’s growing competition with the Soviet Union further complicated the internal dynamics of the liberation movements . The liberation movements were formed in response to China's growing competition against Soviet Union .
 Beijing started to aggressively promote its model of a peasant-based, popular revolution that emphasized race and nation over class . Beijing was in direct opposition to the Soviet model in the 1960s .
 China’s ideas on race deepened factionalist struggles within liberation movements . Mao Zedong's ideas were often used to bolster their claims and often found an ally in Beijing .
 The conflicts over race and privilege coincided with discussions of political strategy, thus complicating relationships with international patrons and African hosts . It has also been a problem for African leaders in the past .
 Agostinho Neto was evicted from Zaire in 1964 . Cabral and Mondlane managed to secure positions in Guinea and Tanzania by 1964 .
 This chapter shows how the dynamics of local and international patronage were closely interlinked . Key protagonists used international support to solidify their position in host states and vice versa .
 The politics of African host states often shaped Soviet policy toward Lusophone liberation movements in the context of the Cold War and Sino-Soviet competition . It also demonstrates that the politics of Africa's host state often shaped .
 Soviets sought to establish a “common front” of all Angolan organizations, which would ensure continuous MPLA access to Zaire, a key “launching pad” for guerrilla action in the neighboring Angola .
 Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence services infiltrated Holden Roberto’s UPA in Zaire, documents reveal . A substantive part of the plan included infiltrating Holden Roberto's UPA, documents show .
 In 1962, Moscow established a close relationship with Amilcar Cabral, but the provision of arms was delayed by the dynamics of its relationship with Guinea . Guinea's relationship with Moscow was also delayed due to its relations with Guinea.
 Soviet interest in FRELIMO picked up in 1964 after what the Soviets perceived to be revolutionary changes in East Africa, following a left-wing revolution in Zanzibar . The Soviets perceived the changes to East Africa as revolutionary changes .
 The Soviets were still suspicious of Eduardo Mondlane, but they began to provide limited support due to advocacy from key individuals such as Marcelino dos Santos and increased importance of Tanzania in the Cold War .
 Jeremy Friedman has argued that Sino-Soviet competition in the Third World pushed Moscow to embrace militant, anti-imperialist struggles .
 African revolutionaries played a fundamental role in sustaining the Soviet commitment to their struggles in the aftermath of the Angolan uprising . As we will see, African revolutionaries were key to sustaining Soviet commitment in Angola .
 The political fortunes of Angolan nationalists centered on the shifting political landscape in Zaire . Race, Ideology, and the Struggle for Zaire, the Angolan Nationalist Party .
 There, they established a center to support Angolan refugees, set up a newspaper, and organized a recruitment drive .
 The move was highly significant for the MPLA since it opened up easy access to northern Angola . The MPLA has been heavily involved in the fight for the country's independence .
 The MPLA was keenly aware of the UPA’s advantage and hoped to pursue a ‘common front’ strategy . MPLA is keen on pursuing a common front strategy to solidify their position in the country .
 The MPLA continued to use Cold War logic to “Americanize” Roberto, thus ensuring continued support from the socialist countries . Roberto was the subject of a Cold War plot to win support from communist countries .
 The task of securing a ‘common front’ in Angola fell to Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence officers stationed in Zaire . The task was to secure a common front in Angola .
 The Soviet embassy staff and the KGB regidentura had been expelled from Zaire after the coup d’état that brought down Patrice Lumumba in September 1960 . The KGB and embassy staff were expelled from the country in 1960 .
 The Soviets tried to transfer funds and weapons to Antoine Gizenga, who had fled to Stanleyville following the coup in an attempt to challenge the new government in Léopoldville . Then, the Soviets tried . to transfer . funds and . weapons to . Antoine
 By the summer, it became clear that Gizenga’s plan to restore power by military means had failed . By that time, it had become clear that the military had failed to take control of the country .
 Members of the Binza group retained the most powerful positions . Cyrille Adoula, a U.S.-favored candidate, became the new prime minister .
 One member of the KGB team who returned to Léopoldville in 1961 was Oleg Nazhestkin . One of the team members who returned in 1961 returned to the city was Nazhestin .
 Nazhestkin first went to Léopoldville in August 1960 . He was a young Soviet intelligence officer in 1961 . He first went there in 1961 as a young Russian intelligence officer .
 From the start, he was assigned to establish contacts with Angolan nationalists based in Zaire . He was tasked with establishing contacts with the Angolan nationalist based in the country .
 His mission was cut short because of the coup in Léopoldville, only to be revived a year later . He was killed by the coup, but his mission was later revived in 2009 .
 Nazhestkin internalized the Cold War rhetoric employed by the MPLA against its local rivals . The UPA was fundamentally an ethno-nationalist organization representing the aspirations of the Angolan Bakongo Bakongo .
 The Soviet-Czechoslovak intelligence plan for Angola was quite elaborate, at least on paper . The plan was an elaborate plan for the country's intelligence .
 The centerpiece of the Czechoslovak strategy for Angola from January 1962 involved infiltrating Holden Roberto’s UPA using various means . Holden Roberto's UPA used various means to infiltrate the UPA .
 The ultimate goal was to establish a common front between the MPLA and UPA, using clandestine means if necessary, if necessary . The MPLA was fighting for independence from the UPA in the 1980s .
 Holden Roberto also made moves to claim leadership over the Angolan nationalist movement . Meanwhile, Holden Roberto has also claimed leadership in Angola .
 In December 1961, the MPLA accused the UPA of capturing and executing a group of their men, who were on an exploratory mission to northern Angola, fueling fears that the competition was turning violent . The MPLA and UPA have been at odds for decades .
 The formation of GRAE was a significant propaganda success and legitimized Roberto’s leadership beyond his core Bakongo base . The formation was a major propaganda success . Roberto's leadership was legitimized beyond Bakongo's core Bakong base .
 Members of the Binza group continued to dominate the government . In early 1962, key MPLA ally Antoine Gizenga was detained and placed under house arrest .
 In fact, the reasons for such an attitude toward the MPLA were internal, he says . The reasons for the attitude were internal .
 Roberto was an asset to the Binza group since they could rely on his men to intercept the Katangese gendarmes who had escaped to Angola after the fall of Moise Tshombe's secessionist state .
 Adoula was friendly with Roberto (the two had played semi-professional football together before getting involved in politics) and permitted the FNLA to establish representation in Katanga . The two were friendly with each other before getting into politics .
 The decision was a significant blow to the MPLA because it meant the Zairean government would no longer provide safe haven for the organization . The MPLA was forced to leave the country in 2011 .
 In 1963, the MPLA was in the midst of its first major crisis . The OAU were not wrong . The MPLA is now in the throes of a crisis .
 At the MPLA’s first conference in December 1962, Neto was elected president . Neto's prestige and international credentials made him a natural candidate for the leadership position .
 Neto then abolished the position of secretary-general, occupied by Viriato da Cruz, setting the two men on a collision course . Neto and da Cruz have been at odds for years over the future of Brazil's president .
 Cruz left Léopoldville, but when he returned in 1963, he found the MPLA stripped of official recognition by the Zairean authorities .
 The conflict culminated in a physical fight for control over the MPLA office in Léopoldville . On July 7, the conflict culminated into a physical fighting .
 The root causes of the schism have been the subject of much speculation . The root cause of the split has not been revealed .
 On the surface, the crisis had all the features of a power struggle between Cruz and Neto . Neto is the president of Brazil's largest state-run state .
 Others have emphasized fundamental differences, which centered on issues of race, ideology, and the Cold War .
 In October 1962, Neto approached the United States embassy in Léopoldville, looking to establish contacts . Neto had approached the U.S. embassy in October 1962 looking for contacts .
 Cruz’s views on race might have been influenced by the ideas of Mao Zedong . Cruz has a long history of controversial statements about race .
 He was inspired by the Chinese revolution after his trip to China in 1958 . He often participated in Beijing-sponsored events .
 Cruz was not the only one who disagreed with Neto’s political strategy . Neto was elected president of Brazil in 2010, but he has been criticized for his policies .
 In 1963 Neto announced he would establish a ‘common front’ with a number of small Bakongo nationalist organizations . Andrade was among many who opposed the decision, citing their dubious connections to Portuguese authorities .
 He remained part of the MPLA, but continued to be critical of Neto's leadership style . He remained critical of his leadership style and continued to criticize Neto .
 The International Department did not necessarily back Neto in his struggle with Viriato da Cruz . Cruz branded Neto as “pro-Soviet,” Neto’s struggle with Cruz, at least initially .
 Viriato da Cruz was well known to the Soviets, while Neto had spent the previous decade in and out of prison and was thus a relatively new figure . Neto spent the last decade in prison and had spent that decade in a prison .
 Neto’s regular Soviet contacts in Léopoldville was Oleg Nazhestkin . One of Neto's regular contacts in the Soviet Union was Nazhestin .
 Nazhestkin acted as Neto’s regular liaison in Léopoldville, handing over cash and relaying messages from Moscow . After returning to the Zairean capital in 1961, he returned to the country's capital .
 Nazhestkin had been intrigued by Neto since their first clandestine meeting in Léopoldville, in 1962 . Neto was one of the world's most famous artists . He was also fascinated by his work in Brazil .
 Neto seemed a gentle, intelligent, and kind man, Nazhestkin says . Neto was a leader determined to wage an armed struggle against the government . Nazhestin: Neto's image did not quite correspond to his idea .
 Nazhestkin liked that Neto had his ‘own philosophy, as well as integrity . Neto has his own philosophy and integrity, he says . Nazhestkins: Neto's "own philosophy" and integrity .
 Neto's positive impression of Neto did not quite match with those of the International Department members, though . Neto has been praised by some of the world's top diplomats .
 Diplomacy of Liberation 81 instructed the KGB to investigate Neto’s contacts in the United States, even if the International Department actually advised African leaders to find allies among U.S. officials who opposed Washington's policy on Portugal . As Nazhestkin recalled,
 Sources do not tell us exactly how and why Neto’s relationship with the International Department soured . The schism in the MPLA might have contributed to this division .
 When the crisis unfolded in 1963, Prague cut all financial assistance to the organization . Prague continued to maintain relation with both Neto and Cruz, but cut financial aid to them .
 The MPLA leadership suggested Czechoslovakia wanted to split the organization . As a result, relations with Neto soured, relations between the MPLA and Neto deteriorated .
 The StB also developed a clandestine relationship with the MPLA’s Henrique “Iko” Carreira who first came to Czechoslovakia for training in internal security in 1963 .
 In November 1963, the Soviet presence in Léopoldville ended abruptly because of the renewed political crisis in Zaire . The Soviet presence ended abruptly .
 As the Simba rebellion gathered strength in eastern Zaire, the Soviet embassy was expelled from Léopoldville . The embassy was once again expelled .
 The Soviets engaged in a last-ditch attempt to enact their plan for Angola . Having lost their foothold in Zaire for the second time in three years, the Soviets engaged . The plan was made for Angola after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Holden Roberto approached the Soviets, seeking assistance . In a surprising twist, in late 1963, Holden Roberto asked the Soviets for help . Holden Roberto was killed by the Soviets in November 1963 .
 As 1963 drew to a close, Holden Roberto grew impatient with the lack of support from Washington . Jonas Savimbi was one of the leaders of the Soviet Union's failed Angola .
 In late 1963, he publicly attacked the U.S. for its policy in Angola . He approached representatives of the Soviet Union and China, seeking support .
 Roberto admitted that his contacts with Moscow had so far been limited because he did not want to become a ‘second Lumumba’ and feared losing access to Zaire . In his conversations with Soviet representatives on December 4, 1963, Roberto said that his .
 On December 17, a group of Soviet officials met him at Nairobi’s Ambassadeur Hotel . The Soviet Union visited him in December .
 Roberto relayed requests for weapons, medicine, and provisions for Angolan refugees . According to a report by secretary of the Soviet Solidarity Committee Dmitrii Dolidze, Roberto seemed “visibly worried and nervous” as he relayed his requests .
 He insisted that the FNLA controlled 75 percent of Angolan territory . He also insisted that he was not “pro-American,” and that he intended to go to China .
 Roberto was not open to the idea of any common front with the MPLA in which the two organizations would be equals . Over the course of the conversation, however, it became clear that Roberto was open .
 He charged Neto with collaborating with the Portuguese secret police and the colonial administration . Neto was accused of collaborating with secret police, colonial administration and secret police .
 The Soviets were clearly concerned about Roberto’s stance on the MPLA, they invited him to the Soviet Union . Although the Soviets were worried about Roberto's stance on MPLA .
 Roberto’s challenge spurred the new president, Lyndon B Johnson, to act . In Washington, Roberto's challenge prompted the president to act on the issue .
 Johnson's administration recognized that Roberto’s move was a pressure tactic designed to extract additional support from Washington . Johnson’�s administration recognizes that Roberto's move was intended to pressure Washington .
 The CIA, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and the Africa Bureau of the State Department pushed to expand funding . Therefore, in early 1964, the CIA and Attorney General . Robert Kennedy pushed for expanded funding .
 Opposition to Roberto’s leadership crystallized around the figure of Jonas Malheiro Savimbi . Jonas is a 30-year-old who has been in charge of the Brazilian government since 2007 .
 Savimbi was born in 1934 in Munhango, Eastern Angola . He belonged to the Ovimbundu, Angola’s largest ethnic group . Born in 1934, he was born into a family of three .
 In Lisbon, he became involved in nationalist politics and got to know many student activists, including Neto Neto . Neto is a member of the Portugal-Portuguese nationalist movement . He says Neto was a student leader in the 1970s and 1980s .
 He was responsible for reorganizing the UPA into the FNLA/GRAE and harnessing African support . He was also responsible for the reorganization of the U.S. Army into a military-led force .
 By 1963, Savimbi had become increasingly critical of Roberto for favoring his own Bakongo ethnic group, his dictatorial leadership style, and his failure to take military action in Angola . However, by 1963, Roberto had become more critical of his actions .
 Savimbi also argued that the FNLA should seek assistance from the socialist countries in order to obtain arms for armed struggle . The FNLA is currently fighting for independence in the South African Republic .
 In early 1964, he approached representatives of Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union, and the GDR . He approached representatives from the Czech, Soviet Union and GDR in Prague .
 Savimbi emphasized his left-wing views and contacts with Portuguese and French Communists, he said . In his pitch to the Czechoslovak ambassador to Egypt, Frantisek Zachystal praised Neto for enjoying popular support in Angola . In the pitch, he emphasized Neto
 East Berlin advised East Berlin to extend formal recognition to the FNLA/GRAE without necessarily asking for permission from Moscow . The East German ambassador Ernst Scholz was particularly impressed with Savimbi's work .
 Once the common front was established, Adoula’s government would have no choice but to support it . The common front would have to be established, he says .
 Savimbi also compared his revolutionary stance with that of Holden Roberto, who never intended to go to either China or the Soviet Union . Holden Roberto maintained close contact with U.S. officials and maintained close contacts with the United States .
 He also cautioned against recognizing the FNLA/GRAE because it would strengthen Roberto . Roberto. Roberto .
 His opening presented an opportunity for the Soviets to enact their plan . His opening thus presented a . opportunity for them to enact .
 The organization had lost support from Zaire and the OAU and was reeling from the split between Neto and Cruz . The organization was reeling after Neto's split from Cruz .
 On November 2, the Zairean authorities ordered the MPLA to leave the country . The MPLA was forced to leave Zaire on November 2 .
 The ban on activities in the Zaire presented a major problem because it denied the MPLA access to the crucial territory of northern Angola . The MPLA was the center of the 1961 uprising .
 MPLA’s remaining option was to establish a new center of operations in neighboring Congo-Brazzaville, a former French colony . The MPLA's remaining option is to establish new headquarters in neighboring DR Congo .
 Congo-Brazzaville had no direct access to Angola proper . It bordered on the Angolan enclave of Cabinda, which Neto picked as a new target for operations .
 In August 1963, the first president of Congo-Brazzaville was defrocked priest Abbé Fulbert Youlou . He was deposed in a coup d’etat after three days of street riots .
 Alphonse Massamba-Débat promised to fight corruption and establish relations with socialist countries . His successor, Alphonse Massambambébat, promised to combat corruption .
 In 1964, Neto gathered his supporters in Brazzaville for a conference, which reconstituted the MPLA under his leadership . With support from Massamba-Deébat, in 1964, in January 1964, he gathered support for the new party .
 The MPLA then went on a diplomatic offensive to restore recognition from the OAU and discredit Roberto and Savimbi . Roberto was assassinated in 1992 .
 Khrushchev made the decision impulsively and without consulting the International Department . The decision was made without consultation, according to a report .
 Evsiukoy: Cunhal used his connections with the Soviet leadership to get the decision reversed . The decision was reversed by the Soviet leader, according to the former president of Yugoslavia .
 Nazhestkin was forced to leave Léopoldville in November 1963 with other embassy staff . He continued to monitor the situation among the Angolan liberation movements . He was forced out of the embassy in November .
 Nazhestkin sharply criticized Cruz for his “factional” activities in 1964 . He argued that by joining with the FNLA, he had proven that he was motivated solely by personal ambition . In a brief from June 1964,
 Savimbi warned the Soviets against engaging in any more “flirtations” with Holden Roberto . In a conversation with Latip Maksudov in Cairo on July 30, SavIMbi said the Soviets should not engage in ‘flirtation’ with Roberto
 Roberto was only using the prospect of visiting China or the USSR as a bargaining chip to extract more support from the United States . He argued that official recognition of the FNLA/GRAE would severely damage the prospects of the ‘progressive forces”
 He also warned about Cruz’s close links with the Chinese, highlighting the fact that Beijing had advised him to join the FNLA/GRAE with the prospect of taking over the movement .
 Savimbi left Angola for training in China after talks with Neto failed . He re-emerged three years later as a major challenger to the MPLA in southeast Angola .
 In July, the rebels quickly approached Léopoldville, and Moise Tshombe, the former leader of the Katanga secessionists, was recalled from exile and replaced Cyrille Adoula as the new prime minister . The rebels are now in control of Lé
 Tshombe pursued a hostile policy toward the FNLA/GRAE as he reengaged with South Africa and Portugal, bringing in a mercenary army to fight the Simbas . Adoula was an ardent supporter of Roberto’s .
 The Soviets received regular reports from their Czechoslovak counterparts in Léopoldville, Czechoslovakia, who still had a diplomatic presence there .
 Roberto's fortunes were declining following Adoula's departure, while the MPLA's were on the rise because of increased support from Massamba-Débat . According to the Czechoslovak journalist Dugan Provaznik, Roberto’s fortunes were .
 The Soviets must have calculated that engaging seriously with the FNLA/GRAE in Zaire under Tshombe was unrealistic and could bring about reputational risks rather than benefits . The Soviets would have calculated it was unrealistic to engage seriously with FNLA and GRAE under
 Evsiukov’s immediate superior, Veniamin Midtsev, lashed out at Roberto for allegedly colluding with Tshombe in a military campaign against the Simbas . Pravda published an article by Pravd's immediate superior .
 Soviet policy was fundamentally shaped by the changing realities in Zaire, as seen through the prism of their Marxist-Leninist worldview . Zaire was ruled by the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '60s .
 The rationale for the ‘common front’ strategy rested on the MPLA’s need to establish a foothold in Zaire . The MPLA's need for a foothold was based on the need for it to be established in the country .
 Jonas Savimbi flaunted his left-wing credentials and his willingness to create a ‘common front” with Neto . The same held for Jonas Savibi, who flaunted left-left credentials . Jonas Savinbi said he was prepared to work for Neto
 In the end, Neto’s continuous diplomacy and interventions from allies like Alvaro Cunhal “saved” the MPLA from the ad-hoc withdrawal of Soviet recognition of the Soviet Union . Neto's continuous diplomacy .
 The Sino-Soviet split intensified the schism Diplomacy of Liberation 87 in the MPLA . Cruz’s contacts with China did not seem to be a problem for the Soviets, at least initially .
 The Soviets and Czechoslovak partners tried to undermine Roberto’s influence in the movement and establish a common front, using clandestine means if necessary .
 The goal of creating a “common front was not achieved . Although we do not know if the Soviets or the Czechoslovaks were successful in “infiltrating” the FNLA/GRAE .
 The MPLA lost access to Zaire and would strive to stake a claim to national leadership from a new base in Congo-Brazzaville in the following years . MPLA would stake claim to a new leadership from new base .
 Over the long term, expulsion from Zaire deepened the divide between the MPLA and FNLA and solidified ties with their respective regional and international patrons . The expulsion of Zaire from the country deepens the divide .
 Angolan nationalists’ fortunes hinged on access to Zaire, the PAIGC relied on the access to Guinea . The Angolan nationalist’s fortunes depended on Zaire's ability to reach Zaire .
 PAIGC was “finishing off preparations for armed struggle,” says Miroslav Adamek . Guinean Ministry of Defense had even agreed to provide trucks to transport arms to the border with Guinea-Bissau .
 Cabral's older brother Amilcar was planning to visit the USSR to discuss the requests in person . Cabral was also planning to travel to the Soviet Union to discuss requests .
 Amilcar Cabral’s trip to the USSR in early 1962 was significant . Cabral made a lasting impression on Petr Evsiukov. Cabral's visit to the Soviet Union in 1962 made him famous .
 Cabral had visited the Soviet Union several times, this was his first meeting with Evsiukov . Cabral was greeted at the Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow by the Russian president .
 Evsiukov described Cabral as “physically attractive,” “erudite” and a man who could debate complex issues in a way that would not offend his interlocutors, he said .
 Cabral’s timetable for hostilities ran into problems in late 1961 . Guinean authorities seized a shipment of arms from Prague upon arrival in Conakry .
 Cabral argued that the main cause was his conflict with the Guinean minister of defense, Keita Fodéba . In conversations with Czechoslovak interlocutors, Cabral said that he had a conflict with Keita .
 Fodéba did not like it when Cabral criticized the army for not cultivating their peanuts themselves . Cabral worked as an agricultural adviser to the Guinean authorities upon his arrival to Conakry .
 When Cabral expressed staunch opposition to the plan, they started putting obstacles in the PAIGC’s way . Cabral said he was ‘staunch opposition’ to the proposal .
 Cabral says Fodéba was among the foremost supporters of the union . Cabral: "Fodébé was one of the most prominent supporters of union" Cabral also said that the union was founded by the former president .
 The Soviet Union had established a close relationship with Sékou Touré after the Guineans famously rejected membership in the French Community in a 1958 referendum . The Guinean voted against membership of the French community in 1958 .
 The crisis was precipitated by a wave of strikes involving students and teachers protesting against poor working conditions . Some voiced left-wing criticism of the government .
 The Soviets were eager to restore Diplomacy of Liberation 89 relations with Guinea . There was no indication Solod had directly participated in opposition activities .
 Cabral continued to lobby the Guinean authorities to release the Czechoslovak arms . Cabral also engaged in hectic diplomacy to find alternative routes to smuggle weapons into the country .
 Newly enthroned Moroccan King Hassan II wanted to continue his father’s legacy and support liberation movements . Hassan II is the son of King Hassan III, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 Cabral arrived in Rabat and was offered arms by Moroccan king . Cabral allegedly dispatched a special mission to ask Sékou Touré for permission for Moroccan aircraft to land matériel in Conakry .
 Hassan allowed Morocco to be used as a transportation hub for arms from Algeria and elsewhere but refused to help with illegal smuggling . Hassan also allowed Morocco as a transport hub for illegal arms .
 Cabral also held successful talks with the Algerian president Ben Bella . He promised to either airlift a shipment of arms or smuggle them to Conakry by boat . Cabral and Ben Bella also met in Algeria to discuss arms .
 The congress was an important event for Cabral because it represented an opportunity to assert his primacy over the nationalist movement . Cabral was the president of Brazil's National Socialist Party in 2003 .
 A number of his rivals had been invited to attend the event . However, as he discovered, a number of rivals had also been invited there .
 As the congress began, Diallo convinced his colleagues to let Cabral attend and make a speech . Cabral was invited to make his speech at the congress .
 The Guinean authorities responded by arresting four high-ranking members of the PAIGC for illegal smuggling . Guineans responded to the arrests by arresting the four members .
 Cabral argued in conversation with StB officers in Rabat, Morocco, that the incident was no mistake . Cabral: "It's not a mistake. It's a mistake"
 PAIGC would soon emerge as a dominant nationalist movement in Guinea . But there was still no firm backing from Senegal, another important ‘launching pad’ for military operations in northern Guinea .
 Senegal had provided support for numerous local lusophone nationalist organizations with links to the political establishment . Senegal's support for Senegal's anti-Islamist movement is discussed in chapter three of this article .
 FLING opposed Cabral’s binationalist vision and contested the PAIGC national leadership on racial grounds, arguing against the presence of Cape Verdeans in the movement . As the name suggests, FLING .
 FLING conducted some military operations at the northern border in 1963, and it would later receive some assistance from China . China would later assist FLING .
 FLING/ PAIGC juxtaposition on racial grounds parallels the MPLA/FNLA competition in Angola . In some ways, the FLING-PAIGC and MPLA competition parallels that of the FNLA competition .
 The PAIGC grew to dominate the guerrilla campaign, the importance of FLING diminished . FLING was FLING .
 Cabral’s diplomacy in this period was closely entangled with the politics of its main host state—Guinea . Cabral was closely involved in Guinea's politics of the 1990s .
 To claim leadership of the liberation movement, the PAIGC needed to launch an armed campaign against the Portuguese . To claim control of the movement, FLING was still contested by local rivals like FLING .
 Much of Cabral's early politics involved finding ways to smuggle arms to Conakry . Cabral’s early politics was found to be involved in smuggling of arms .
 In contrast to the MPLA, the PAIGC emerged as the dominant nationalist movement in Guinea . Cabral’s diplomatic skills and international connections helped him become the country's dominant nationalist party .
 He established a close personal relationship with Petr Evsiukov, which proved fundamental to the PAIGC’s long-term success in establishing itself as the dominant nationalist movement .
 Mozambican nationalist movement would face similar problems in its early years . Mozambicans would have faced similar problems as they did in the 1930s .
 On June 25, 1962, activists established a new anticolonial front, FRELIMO, with Eduardo Mondlane as its president . Mondlane was the leader of the anti-colonial movement in Mozambican .
 A native of the southern Gaza province, Mondlane received better access to socioeconomic and educational opportunities than those Mozambicans living in the rather remote and underdeveloped north of the country .
 Only three former MANU members were elected to the new eleven-man Central Committee . Central Committee is dominated by former UDENAMO activists from the south .
 Leo Milas was appointed as the Secretary for Information and Culture . He has been criticised for his appointment as the Minister of Information .
 Milas claimed to have been born in Mozambique, but he did not speak Portuguese or any African languages . Suspicions about his true identity arose upon his 1962 arrival in Dar es Salaam .
 On January 5, 1963, a number of high-ranking members of FRELIMO accused Milas of being a CIA agent and physically attacked him . Milas was attacked by members of the Frelimo, who claimed he was an agent for the CIA .
 Central Committee issues orders to expel David Mabunda, Paulo Gumane, and Fanuel Mahluza for their alleged role in the incident . Vice-president Uria Simango and Marcelino dos Santos backed Milas, and the Central Committee issued orders to expulsions
 Mondlane was in the United States for much of the infighting and continued to trust Milas, even placing him in charge of planning military operations . Mondlane says he trusted Milas even though he was in U.S.
 Milas was actually born in the United States and his real name was Leo Clinton Aldridge . His real name is Leo Clinton Milas .
 Mondlane's critics sought support from Moscow, painting the internal conflict in Cold War terms . In the meantime, Mondlane’s critics sought help from Moscow . Mondlane: “I’m not going to go to war. I’ll go to the war
 Marcelino dos Santos played a critical role in backing Mondlane’s leadership . As the Soviets tried to understand the nature of the crisis, he played a crucial role .
 Marcelino dos Santos and Latip Maksudov argued that the schism in the AAPSO had nothing to do with ideological differences or Mondlane’s proUnited States orientation . Santos argued that Mondlane's pro-U.S. orientation was not to blame
 The real reason that David Mabunda had left for Cairo was because he could not handle the hardships of life in Dar es Salaamam, says Marcelino dos Santos . Marcio dos Santos argued that David could not cope with the hardships in the city .
 Mondlane was supported by Oscar Kambona, who supported Mondlane . Mondlane died at the age of 92 . He was the first African politician to be elected to the presidency of the country .
 Kambona had regular contact with representatives of the socialist countries in Dar es Salaam as Tanganyika’s first minister of foreign affairs . One of the most influential politicians .
 In 1963, Kambona was appointed the first head of the OAU’s Liberation Committee, based in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania . He was appointed in 1963 as head of OAU's Liberation Committee .
 Tanganyikan politics in 1963 were conducive to FRELIMO’s mobilization for armed struggle . Tanganyanan politics in the 1960s were conducive for FRELimo’�s mobilization .
 Portuguese colonialism was one of the central topics at the founding meeting of the OAU . All delegates signed a charter pledging to support the liberation of the entire continent .
 Julius Nyerere formally declared that safe havens for guerrillas should be established along the Mozambique-Tanganyika border . For his part, he formally declared .
 Nyerere also intensified his efforts to convince Washington and London to pressure Portugal and South Africa to accept Diplomacy of Liberation 93 majority rule .
 Pressure was building for FRELIMO to prepare for guerrilla war . Nyerere increasingly lost faith in the possibility of a negotiated settlement . Frelimo was preparing for a guerrilla war.
 In February 1963, Mondlane met Attorney General Robert Kennedy in Washington, D.C. Mondlane was a member of the Kennedy administration . Mondlane: "It's been a long way since I met Robert Kennedy. It's a long road to the end of the road"
 Kennedy found Mondlane a “terrifically impressive fellow” who could ensure a peaceful solution to the Mozambique problem . Kennedy called Mondlane an “impressive” fellow who could help secure a peaceful resolution .
 Kennedy arranged for the Ford Foundation to give $99,700 to the Mozambican Institute in Dar es Salaam . Mondlane had established the institute to cater to refugees who had fled to Tanganyika .
 Marcelino dos Santos provided a link with the socialist countries . Meanwhile, Marcio dos Santos gave a link between the two countries .
 Santos was keen to establish a close relationship with Beijing . Santos was inspired by the Chinese revolution and was inspired to become involved in the revolution .
 When he visited China in 1963, he met Chairman Mao Zedong himself and allegedly received an offer of financial assistance . He allegedly received a financial assistance from Chairman Mao .
 Santos urged Mondlane to also go to Beijing to seal the deal . Santos urges Mondlane also to go to China to seal a deal .
 Santos also lobbied the Soviet embassy in Dar es Salaam, submitting a request for military training, humanitarian assistance and financial assistance . Santos also submitted a request to the Soviet Embassy for medical training and humanitarian assistance .
 The crisis started on the island of Zanzibar, a former British colony with close connections to mainland Tanganyika . The island is a former colony of the British-held island of the island .
 On January 12, 1964, a group of revolutionaries overthrew the sultan, set up a revolutionary council, and proclaimed the People’s Republic of Zanzibar .
 The events spurred antigovernment protests in Kenya, Uganda, and Tanganyika . The events sparked anti-government protests .
 In Dar es Salaam, soldiers mutinied over low pay and the retention of European officers in top positions . Soldiers mutinee over pay, retention of top positions and retention of officers .
 Nyerere exploited the power struggle in Zanzibar to push for unification with the mainland . Convinced that events in East Africa were linked, he pushed for unification .
 On April 24, the agreement was signed, and the new state was named the United Republic of Tanzania . Tanzania is now officially known as the United States .
 The turmoil in East Africa put a temporary stop to FRELIMO’s military preparations . Frelimo's military preparations were put on hold after the crisis in the region put a stop .
 Tanzanian authorities confiscated a consignment of Algerian weapons for FRELIMO . They only released them only in May after they were released in May .
 The Soviet Union and other socialist countries applauded events in Zanzibar, extended diplomatic recognition, and offered economic assistance . The former Soviet Union offered diplomatic recognition and economic assistance to the island .
 Zanzibar was the first country in Africa to grant diplomatic recognition to the GDR, leading to an inflow of East German aid . The island nation was first African country to grant recognition to East German government .
 British intervention and union agreement were a major disappointment for the Soviets . The Soviets believed it represented a backlash against the revolution .
 The Soviets and Czechoslovaks were disappointed with Oscar Kambona, who had a pivotal role in negotiating with the mutineers in Dar es Salaam . The Czechs and Soviets were particularly disappointed with him .
 Evsiukov writes in his memoirs that Mondlane’s prestige was “unquestionable” We do know that Moscow was suspicious of Mondlane and supportive of what they called “progressive” critics of the party .
 The events of 1964 in East Africa must have played a key part in Soviet calculations . In fact, events of the year 1964 in the region must have been key for the Soviet Union .
 The union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar frustrated Soviet hopes for an ‘African Cuba’ The revolution raised the region’s importance in Cold War terms .
 The ‘Leo Milas’ controversy complicated matters further . Mondlane was only rarely present in Dar es Salaam before 1964 .
 The Soviets sympathized with Mondlane’s critics, but extended limited support to FRELIMO due to lobbying from Marcelino dos Santos and the realization that the organization enjoyed exclusive support from Nyerere . The Soviets were sympathetic to Mondlane's critics .
 FRELIMO mounted no significant challenge to FrelimO . Power struggles and debates over race, class, and privilege among Mozambicans in Dar es Salaam continued to center on Eduardo Mondlane and his wife Janet .
 The Chinese launched a massive propaganda offensive to spread their revolutionary model in Africa in the early 1960s .
 The Chinese also used radio broadcasts, cultural events, and film screenings to spread their ideas to a wider local audience .
 Some of the men who were trained in China in the 1960s were inspired by the Maoist model of guerrilla warfare, which was based on peasant mobilizations . The men were trained by Maoists in China .
 He escaped the Angolan military in 1961, and joined the PAIGC in Conakry in 1963 . He was born in 1961 in Angola .
 Chinese challenge manifested itself in leadership struggles in the MPLA and FRELIMO, especially as Sino-Soviet disagreements intensified in the early 1960s . As previously discussed, the Chinese challenge manifests itself in .
 By 1964, there were ninety-two men and women from the Portuguese colonies studying in the Soviet Union . By 1964 there had been more than 90 people studying in Soviet Russia .
 First arrived in the Soviet Union as a student after escaping Portugal to join the PAIGC in 1961 . He first arrived in Russia in 1961 and joined the Communist Party in 1961.
 It was clear it would not be possible to provide free bread for everybody, and one of his professors even warned international students against blindly emulating the Soviet experiment .
 Silva recalled it was still ‘novel’ for Soviet citizens to see an African person on the streets of Moscow . Silva recalled daily experiences, including daily experiences with Soviet citizens .
 The reactions of Soviet citizens to African students varied, ranging from expressions of friendship to overt hostility . African students were students in the Soviet Union .
 Tensions emerged over African students' romantic relationships with Soviet women . Tensions also emerged over the relationship between African students and Soviet female students .
 African students often complained to the authorities about abuse, discrimination, and sometimes instances of physical violence, but the Soviet authorities regularly dismissed their concerns . African students regularly complained about abuse .
 The Congress of the Federation of African Students in the USSR adopted a pro-Chinese stance in 1963 . In the highly charged atmosphere of 1963, the Congress adopted a . pro-China stance .
 The fact that the students targeted Cape Verdeans was particularly dangerous since the PAIGC was dedicated to a binationalist vision of unity between the mainland and the archipelago . The fact of the attack was particularly particularly dangerous .
 Osvaldo Lopes da Silva had previously complained to the Ukrainian authorities about racially charged acts of violence . Silva helped put down the revolt, despite having previously complained about racial violence .
 Students were told to adhere to the party line, and in 1965 the MPLA and the PAIGC voted against the Maoists in the Federation of African Students .
 The rebellious students basically expressed their opposition toward Cabral’s binationalist project . Silva confirmed that the rebellious students were basically expressing their opposition to Cabral's binationalism .
 In 1963, Ghanaian Emmanuel John Hevi published a highly critical account of his time in China . Hevi highlighted the strict control, poor living conditions, and discrimination experienced by African students .
 It is not clear if African students in the Soviet Union were aware of these allegations or how they perceived them . It is unclear if they knew of the allegations .
 MPLA, PAIGC, and FRELIMO tried to control students’ behavior, these attempts often proved problematic . The MPLA tried to try and control students' behavior, but failed .
 Students sometimes defy party orders by marrying local women, failing to return to their countries of origin, or defecting to the West . Students sometimes defied party orders and caused problems by marrying locals .
 Moscow monitored all expressions of “pro-Chinese” sentiments among African students . Moscow carefully monitored all expression of ‘pro-China’ sentiments among students .
 Those who continued to support the Maoist line openly would be expelled . Those who supported Maoist lines would be expulsed from China .
 The MPLA leadership sought to establish a ‘common front’ with Roberto’s FNLA in order to gain access to Zaire and ultimately take over the movement . Roberto's FNLA was born in Zaire .
 As new evidence shows, the Soviets backed the MPLA’s plan by trying to subvert the FNLA through clandestine means . The MPLA was overthrown by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Holden Roberto's FNLA was defeated by the Soviets .
 Roberto was a formidable rival, who likewise used international diplomacy successfully to bolster his claim to national leadership . However, Roberto was also a formidable opponent, who also used diplomacy successfully . Roberto was known for his use of international diplomacy to boost his claims to power .
 Neto’s contacts with the Portuguese Communists helped him maintain support from the Soviets at a time of intense internal infighting within the MPLA . The MPLA was expelled from Zaire after the expulsion of Neto's allies .
 While the MPLA faced stiff competition in Zaire, the PAIGC’s local competition in Guinea was much weaker . The MPLA had a much stronger local competition than Zaire .
 Amilcar Cabral used diplomacy to forge exclusive relationships with a number of African states and international donors to smuggle weapons into Guinea . Cabral's Diplomacy of Liberation 99 smuggled weapons into the country .
 Cabral established a close relationship with Petr Evsiukov in 1962 . Cabral’s well-known diplomatic skills are a testimony to his diplomatic skills . In 1962, Cabral became a close friend of Petr Evsusukov .
 Moscow erred on the side of caution regarding providing weapons, mainly because of a delicate relationship with Touré’s Guinea . Guinea has a relationship with Russia and Guinea .
 Czechoslovakia remained the key ally, providing cash, arms, and training for Cabral . Among the socialist countries, Czechs remained a key ally . Cabral was killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 It was only after the PAIGC began guerrilla warfare in early 1963 that the movement would secure its dominant position in Guinea . As we will see in the following chapter, it is only after guerrilla warfare began that the group would secure their position in the country .
 Tanzanian support was fundamental to FRELIMO’s claims to nationalist leadership . Meanwhile, Tanzanians supported FrelimO's claims to national leadership .
 Mozambican early nationalist politics were highly fractured and dominated by disagreements over Mondlane’s election as president . Early nationalist politics was dominated by disputes over the election of Mondlane . Mondlane was elected president in 1953 .
 The Soviets were highly suspicious of Mondlane for ideological reasons and initially doubted FRELIMO’s long-term viability . Mondlane was a member of the anti-communist movement .
 The Soviets provided only limited material support for FRELIMO in 1964 in the context of what they considered revolutionary developments in Zanzibar, which raised the importance of Tanzania more generally .
 Mondlane’s allegiance would remain complicated because of uncertainty around his allegiance . However, starting in the mid-1960s, increasing concerns about a burgeoning relationship with China . The relationship would continue to be complicated as Mondlane's allegiance remained uncertain .
 The Sino-Soviet split was damaging to the nationalist movements . It potentially ensconced the African revolutionaries in a tug-of-war between Beijing and Moscow .
 Chinese claims of unity based on nonwhite identity risked exacerbating existing divisions based on ethnic, linguistic, and racial lines . For the MPLA’s and the PAIGC’’�s multiracial and largely assimilado leadership, . the . MPLA's
 Leaders of the liberation movements were susceptible to challenges on ethnic or racial grounds . As the schisms within the MPLA and FRELIMO and among PAIGC students in the Soviet Union showed, as did the students .
 Cabral in particular, but also Mondlane and Neto to an extent, grew skeptical of Maoism . Since China’s ideas of anti-imperialism based on race could be employed to mount a critique to national leadership, it is not surprising .
 China would curtail its assistance to the MPLA and PAIGC and only maintain a strong connection with FRELIMO because of Beijing’s close connection with Tanzania . In the following years, as we will see, as well as as we would see, the Chinese would curtail
 Critics of racial and ethnic-based privilege among the leadership did not disappear . However, critics of race and ethnic privilege among leaders have not disappeared .
 In the course of the anticolonial struggle, they would frequently resurface during moments of crises . In fact, in fact, they often resurface in moments of crisis .
 The continuous ascendancy of their modernizing visions would depend on the African revolutionaries’ ability to obtain the ‘means of war’ to fight against the Portuguese .
 The onset of guerrilla campaigns meant a much greater commitment was required, especially from the Soviet military . Soviet troops were involved in the fight against the Soviet government .
 The next chapter thus turns to the militarization of Soviet involvement in Africa in the mid-1960s .
 Khrushchev's protéégés were unhappy with his leadership style and foreign policy . The organizers of the palace coup were all of Khrushchchev’s protéés .
 The Soviets believed they underestimated the role of armies and thus increasingly used supplies of arms and training to strengthen relations with key African allies . The Soviets were drawn into deeper involvement on the continent .
 The chapter also shows how the Soviets became the key supplier of military equipment and training to Lusophone nationalist movements . The Soviets were also key suppliers of military training and equipment .
 The extent of Soviet involvement would be limited due to the MPLA’s logistical problems after their expulsion from Zaire . However, the extent of the Soviet involvement in Zaire was limited . The MPLA was expelled from the former Zaire state in 1994 .
 The Soviet relationship with FRELIMO once again proved particularly complex . The Soviet Union and Frelimo were at the center of the Cold War in the 1950s .
 Moscow supplied arms and material support for the organization . The Soviets were continuously distrustful of president Mondlane .
 In 1966-1968, FRELIMO plunged into an internal crisis, culminating in Mondlane’s assassination in Dar es Salaam in 1969 . Mondlane was assassinated in 1969 in the city of Dar es Sala .
 The Soviet intelligence services closely followed FRELIMO’s rivalries through a variety of clandestine sources . The Soviets adopted a rather critical view of its leadership, eventually adopting a rather skeptical view of the leadership .
 The Soviet military held high hopes that their training programs would win African revolutionaries over to their side . Still, the Soviet military had high hopes of winning them over .
 African soldiers saw Soviet military technology as a symbol of modernity and a practical tool of their own liberation . As the oral histories in this chapter will show, African soldiers thought Soviet technology was modernity .
 As the anticolonial wars began, the strategy of guerrilla warfare also became a contested subject . The strategy was contested subject of debate over guerrilla warfare .
 In Guinea-Bissau, Cabral opted for a “cautious approach” toward military operations in order to limit casualties . Cabral opts to take a cautious approach to military operations . The West African nation is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 MPLA suffered from logistical and supply problems in eastern Angola and Cabinda . FRELIMO’s guerrilla operations were hampered by an internal crisis . Frelimo suffered from internal problems in Angola .
 New evidence shows the Soviet military were frustrated by the lack of progress in Angola . The MPLA believed Neto was not doing enough to forge broad political alliances . New evidence suggests Neto did not forge broad alliances with the Soviets .
 This chapter recovers the role of military strategy in understanding how the relationship between the Soviets and the Lusophone nationalist movements developed and evolved in the 1960s .
 The collective leadership that took over from Nikita Khrushchev was well aware that early Soviet optimism about a quick revolutionary transformation of the African continent was premature .
 Moscow believed that by following the “Soviet model of development” African countries would achieve fast economic growth and move toward socialism . In the late 1950s, Moscow hoped that by . following the . ‘Soviet model,’ the newly independent African nations would achieve . fast economic
 Leaders like Guinean president Sékou Touré reaped the benefits of Soviet aid but gave little in return . Report: Guineans reaped benefits of the Soviet aid, but gave nothing in return.
 In practical terms, there were many continuities with the pre-Khrushchev period . The Soviet Union is now a state of state in Russia .
 The cadres at the International Department and its Africa desk stayed at their posts . The head of department Boris Ponomarev, his deputy Rostislav Ulianovskii, and his Africa section Petr Manchkha, all stayed at posts .
 The International Department probably became even more prominent after Khrushchev’s departure . Brezhnev preferred a collegiate decision-making style and increasingly left each department to make decisions in their own domain .
 Once Khrushchev was ousted, the CC CPSU approved the construction of a large training facility for mainly African revolutionaries at the village of Perevalnoe in Crimea .
 "coup contagion" in Africa stimulated a discussion about policy implications . Meanwhile, the “coup . contagion’s’ impact on policy implications is still being debated .
 Soviet deputy foreign minister Iakov Malik stated that the socialist countries faced a double bind . In late April 1966, he said that Czechoslovak and Soviet countries were in a "double bind"
 On the other hand, they had to face the continuous assault of the “neocolonial and imperialist” forces, which exploited internal problems in newly independent states, writes .
 He argued that socialist countries should become more attuned to what was happening with the army and police and continue cooperation, especially in the military sphere . He said socialist countries need to become more aware of what is happening .
 KGB Chairman Vladimir Semichastnyi admitted to his Bulgarian counterparts on March 18, 1966, that the security services had underestimated the value of clandestine work among the military forces in Africa .
 The Soviets believed the coups were a temporary setback and that socialist countries should strengthen alliances with African military and the security services . The Soviets thought the coupps were temporary and that they were only temporary setbacks .
 Situation in Africa became a hotly debated topic during the first coordination meeting of solidarity committees from the Warsaw Pact countries in June 1966 . The situation in Africa was a hot topic of discussion at the first meeting .
 Czechoslovakia sought to limit the costs of involvement in Africa . Czechs sought to keep costs of Africa from becoming a major source of conflict .
 Prague was among the first to pursue an active Africa policy since the 1950s . By the mid-1960s, many among the bureaucracy were starting to reevaluate their commitments to Africa .
 Czechoslovakia experienced a significant downturn in the early 1960s and shortages of foreign cash . The economy grew at an impressive rate after World War II but experienced a downturn in 1960s . The Czech Republic is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Warsaw Pact invaded Czechoslovakia in 1968 to crack down on liberalization . Prague Spring ended abruptly after Warsaw Pact invasion in August 1968 . The Warsaw Spring was the start of the Prague Spring movement .
 As Soviet tanks rolled into Prague, thousands of Czechoslovak citizens protested the invasion . Thousands of Czechs protested against the invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Many Czechoslovak intelligence personnel supported the Prague Spring . Some defected from their posts following the intervention . Many Czechs supported the uprising .
 The intervention in Czechoslovakia was a public relations disaster with long-term consequences for the communist movement . In Africa, official reactions were mixed .
 Zambia's Kenneth Kaunda and Tanzania's Julius Nyerere openly condemned the invasion .
 The public reaction to events in Czechoslovakia was particularly dramatic in Tanzania . The events took place in the country's capital, Darbansan .
 In 1968, the Youth League spearheaded a number of policing campaigns, including “Operation Vijana,” which were designed to eliminate all signs of “imperialist behavior” and dress . The Youth League led the campaign .
 The Cultural Revolution prevented Beijing from capitalizing on events in Czechoslovakia . Elsewhere in Africa, the Cultural Revolution did not prevent Beijing capitalizing .
 China had been an active player in Africa since the early 1960s . The Cultural Revolution ushered in a period of self-imposed diplomatic isolation . Beijing recalled many of its ambassadors and scaled down overseas commitments .
 The Chinese started to pursue more aggressive anti-Soviet tactics in the Third World . The Chinese pressured African liberation movements to break contact with Moscow .
 In response, the Soviets launched their own campaign to counter the Chinese, including in international forums . In response to the threat, the Soviet Union launched its own campaign against China .
 In 1965, attendees at the fourth AA PSO conference in Winneba, Ghana, agreed to hold the subsequent, fifth, conference in Beijing, China . In 1965 the conference was held in China .
 The decision risked completely sidelining the Soviets from the AAPSO, and the Soviet Solidarity Committee mobilized its contacts to reverse the decision . The decision was made in favor of the Soviets, and it was reversed .
 Cabral was one of the delegates who successfully pushed for the motion to reverse the decision made at Winneba . Cabral died at the age of 50 at the end of the war .
 The AAPSO purged the AAPSO of pro-Chinese liberation groups . The Nicosia meeting also purged pro-China liberation groups. The meeting was held in Cyprus on Sunday .
 AAPSO hosted an International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Portuguese Colonies and Southern A frica in Khartoum, Sudan, in January 1969 . AAPSO was founded in 1969 .
 The MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC were declared the only “authentic” representatives of the liberation struggle in their respective countries . The conference also included the MPLA and Frelimo .
 Rostislav Ulianovskii spoke about his impressions of the conference to the Presidium of the Soviet Solidarity Committee . Ulianevskii was the deputy of the CC CPSU International Department .
 Ulianovskii argued the Vietnam War showed African revolutionaries that it was “impossible to defeat imperialist racism” without Soviet military assistance . The Vietnam War saw African revolutionaries realize it was impossible to defeat imperialism without Soviet assistance .
 Leaders like Eduardo Mondlane and Agostinho Neto had come to understand the utility of scientific socialism and the value of the Soviet approach to questions of ethnicity and race .
 By the late 1960s, the Soviets believed they had managed to restore their prestige in the Third World . The Soviets thought they had . managed to . restored their prestige .
 The collective leadership that took over from Khrushchev shared much of the same commitment to proletarian internationalism, and there was no bureaucratic overhaul, ensuring many continuities . The collective . leadership shared the . same commitment .
 The Soviets continued to be preoccupied with challenges on the “right” and “left,” especially those emanating from China . The Soviet Union was preoccupied by challenges on both sides of the spectrum .
 The most significant change involved the reevaluation of the importance of the African army and security services . The most important change involved reevaluating of the role of African security forces .
 Starting from the mid-1960s, the Soviets sought to strengthen their alliances with African allies by providing weapons and military training . The Soviets sought the support of African allies in the 1960s .
 PAIGC launched its armed struggle by attacking the Portuguese garrison at Tite, in southern Guinea-Bissau, January 23, 1963 .
 The official PAIGC narrative, now firmly rooted in the literature, credits the party leadership with pre-planning the attacks . The official narrative is that the PAIGc leadership pre-planned the attacks.
 Among the small group that was involved in the attacks was Dauda Bangura . Among the group that were involved in attacks was Bangura, a member of the group . The attacks were carried out by a small group of people known only as Bangura.
 Bangura claimed that the order to fire the “first shots” did not come from the PAIGC in Conakry . The decision was instead taken on the local group’s own initiative, Bangura said . Bangura claims that the decision was made on the
 In a detailed study of Cabral’s correspondence, Juliao Soares Sousa confirms Bangura's account . Cabral's correspondence with Bangura is published in a book published by the same publisher .
 Czechoslovakia was the only country actively involved in the conflict in 1961 . The Czech Republic was one of the countries involved in negotiations .
 In 1961, the StB decided to support Cabral’s bid for dominance over the nationalist movement . The StB supported Cabral's bid to become dominant in Brazil's nationalist movement in 1961 .
 The StB helped the PAIGC design and spread anti-war propaganda among the Portuguese garrisons . It also helped in infiltrating one of its Senegal-based rivals, and shipping arms to Conakry .
 The StB also feared the PAIGC could lose momentum in competition with local rivals if they further delayed hostilities . The local authorities feared they would lose momentum if they continued hostilities .
 He argued that “sabotage’s” could only alarm the Portuguese, pushing them to reinforce their military presence . That would make it harder to launch guerrilla action, he said .
 Cabral insisted that he engage in diplomacy to find an alternative route for weapons via Algeria or Morocco . Instead, Cabral said he would find a way to get weapons via Morocco or Algeria .
 When Cabral secured a route to smuggle arms via Morocco in December 1962, the StB decided to deliver another shipment of weapons . The StB delivered the weapons via Morocco .
 Czechoslovak weapons clandestinely reached Conakry via Morocco via Morocco . Operation BETA was later canceled . Czechoslovakia was later forced to withdraw weapons from the country .
 He was twenty years old in December 1961 when PAIGC guerrillas came to his village to mobilize people . He was 20 years old when he was mobilized by his village's residents .
 Domingos Ramos was a charismatic commander who apparently convinced the villagers to join the struggle . Among them was Domingo Ramos, who apparently persuaded them to join forces .
 In most cases, the whole village was moved to the bush under the control of the guerrillas . The process involved moving the whole of the village into the bush .
 Young people would be organized to patrol villages, make shelters, and recruit others . They would also receive basic military and political instruction from more experienced combatants . The young people would patrol villages and make shelters .
 Armed with a new weapon, he would patrol the villages and talk to people, convincing them to join the fight . Armed with the new weapon he would patrols the villages . He would then convince people to join him .
 Message was for Africans to follow the example of Guinea and take back their land from the colonizers . The message was for African nations to follow Guinea's example .
 The weapons served as “encouragement” to show that they had the means to fight the Portuguese army . The weapons were used to show the Portuguese Army that it had the ability to fight .
 Once armed attacks against the Portuguese began in January 1963, the rebellion quickly spread . The rebellion against the government of Portugal in 1963 spread .
 Cabral’s guerrillas had reasonably easy access to Tombali by land and sea . The province bordered on Guinea, and Cabral's guerillas had access to the region by land, sea .
 In early 1964, the guerrillas mounted a concerted resistance against a large-scale Portuguese operation to retain control over the island of Como . In early 1960s, the Guerrillas fought back against the Portuguese operation .
 The fight over the rice-growing marshy island in southern Guinea-Bissau saw the Portuguese deploy 3,000 ground troops to the island, backed by aerial support . The Portuguese deployed the island in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Both sides suffered casualties, and the Portuguese eventually withdrew, having lost the support of the local population . The Portuguese were forced to withdraw from the area .
 Cabral faced a major challenge to his authority in his bid to take over Como . Cabral has been in charge of Como since 2003 . He has been a key figure in Brazil's development of the country .
 Reports emerged that many regional military commanders were abusing the civilian population for personal gain . By 1964, reports had emerged that some regional military leaders were abusing civilian population .
 Regional commanders often used deep-set beliefs to attack local rivals . Although the PAIGC stood for a modernizing platform, it stood for modernizing platforms .
 Witchcraft was a common charge, and people accused of being futseru could be attacked or killed . Witchcraft and espionage were often accompanied by accusations of espionage and betrayal .
 Some guerrillas used their status to take away girls and women and subject them to sexual violence . Some of the girls were forced to live with sexual violence, according to reports . Some women and girls were subjected to sexual abuse, the report says .
 Insubordinate military commanders were ordered to attend, and those who refused were arrested and imprisoned . Those who refused to attend were arrested, imprisoned .
 The Congress pledged to establish a network of essential social services for the civilian population . Basic health facilities, “people’s stores,” and bush schools will be set up in the countryside .
 Another set of measures included putting the guerrillas under centralized control . The guerillas are now under control of a central government .
 Cabral set up the Conselho de Guerra (War Council), which would supervise all military operations . Cabral was president of Brazil in the 1970s . He was the first president of the country to be elected to the presidency .
 In September 1964, Czechoslovakia dispatched an StB officer, Frantigek Polda, to counsel Cabral in Conakry . Cabral was killed by the Soviet Union in September 1964 . Czech-Czechoslovakia also dispatched an officer to advise Cabral .
 Polda’s task was to organize the FARP general staff and train recruits, especially in intelligence and security matters . He was also tasked with organizing FARP's general staff .
 Cabral would report back on his conversations with Cabral and share his opinions about the military situation and political developments in the organization .
 Czechoslovak instructors taught the recruitment of agents and collaborators, operative techniques like wiretapping, the basics of investigation and interrogation, and the fundamentals of criminalistics . Czechoslovakia was one of the most successful countries in the world .
 Guinea-Bissau recruits arrived in Leningrad in June 1964 for a six-month training course . The first group of recruits from Guinea Bissau arrived for six months training . The country was ruled out of Africa by the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 Perevalnoe was a large training facility that could host several hundred men at the same time . Early courses could accommodate no more than several dozen men from each organization .
 Its secluded location off the main road between Simferopol, the capital of Crimea, and Alushta, a famous vacation destination on the Black Sea, was to protect the guerrillas’ identities and limit unsupervised contact .
 Outside of the extra secrecy, Perevalnoe functioned like a regular Soviet military school . The school was founded in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Trainees' daily lives were governed by the strict rules of military discipline and hierarchy . Trainees’ daily lives would be governed by rules of strict military discipline .
 Leadership of liberation movements selected trainees for particular specializations and reviewed performance reports . The leadership of the liberation movements selects trainees .
 Those in anti-aircraft defense initially practiced how to operate Soviet heavy machine guns . They were designed to hit low-flying targets at close range .
 Military training became closely tied to the provision of Soviet arms . New systems would have to be introduced to by guerrillas at Perevalnoe . Military training was closely linked to Soviet arms supply .
 These involved informal ‘cultural events’ ranging from outings to popular tourist sites and model communal farms to film screenings . These involved outings, outings, and model farms .
 The formal political training classes included an introduction to Marxism-Leninism . The history of slavery and colonialism in Africa was also taught .
 Soviet instructors heralded the political training program as a success . Soviet instructors reported that exposure to the combination of discussions and sightseeing tours convinced the cadets of the benefits of the socialist system .
 It is difficult to evaluate whether military training in the USSR actually had such a significant impact on the trainees, as Gorbunov suggests . It is not clear if military training actually had an impact on trainees .
 Sae Breia was among the first group of twenty-five recruits to go for military training in the USSR in June 1964 . He was one of the first to be sent to the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 He recalled that the time he spent in Leningrad was transformative because what they learned about slavery and the Russian Revolution made them angry and even more convinced they should fight the Portuguese . He said that the experience was transformative .
 The screenings of World War II films, with their stories of personal sacrifice, were also memorable for many cadets . The screenings also included the role of the USSR in the defeat of Nazism .
 Trainee is operating a Soviet heavy machine DShK gun . The weapon was a common weapon of guerrilla warfare in the Portuguese colonies in the 1960s .
 Fundacao Mario Soares e Maria Barroso/Arquivo Amilcar Cabral. classes as a continuation of their studies . Cabral students will continue their studies in the future .
 As he recalls in 2017 his experiences in Perevalnoe exposed to him hierarchies inherent in the Soviet system . As he recalled in 2017, he recalled how his experiences exposed him to hierarchies in Russia .
 The extent of Czechoslovakia’s involvement with the PAIGC during the early stages of armed struggle was extraordinary . The extent was extraordinary, says the author of the book .
 Prague was the first to offer a comprehensive assistance package to the PAIGC and pushed Cabral to proceed with ‘acts of sabotage” to maintain dominance over its local rivals . Prague was also the first city to offer assistance package .
 Cabral resisted StB’s “advice,” and it is clear that the initiative for armed action came from local activists rather than being dictated from abroad . Nonetheless, Cabral resists StB's ‘advice .
 Perevalnoe increasingly became a critical contact zone for interaction between African revolutionaries and their Soviet instructors . As the war progressed, Perevalneo increasingly became the site of contact between African revolutionary groups .
 Moscow and Prague hoped arms and training would allow the FARP to put pressure on the Portuguese to negotiate . The FARP is based in the Czech Republic and Russia .
 The prospect of a quick military breakthrough would prove fleeting . However, the prospect of such a breakthrough would be fleeting .
 The years following the Cassaca Congress were exceptionally fortuitous for the guerrillas in Guinea-Bissau . Fidel Castro, Amilcar Cabral, and the Debates over Military Strategy in Guinea Bissau were extremely fortuitous .
 Cabral planned to move to a new stage of the war to eliminate Portuguese fortified posts . Cabral had secured training and military support from the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia .
 The leadership had also decided to start armed struggle on the Cape Verde archipelago . The leadership has also announced the start of an armed struggle .
 Cabral had decided to expand operations across the whole country and start liquidating the garrisons . Cabral conveyed to Czechoslovak Minister of the Interior Josef Kudrna .
 Prague allocated $1.85 million worth of arms to the PAIGC in 1965 . Prague believed that prospects of a breakthrough were good and allocated the money .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevara visited Conakry as part of his Africa tour to find volunteers to join the Simba rebellion in Zaire . In late 1963, the Argentinean-born revolutionary visited the city to recruit volunteers for Zaire rebels .
 Guevara pressed the Cuban leader Fidel Castro to provide military training for Cabral’s men, especially Cape Verdeans, since he believed conditions for armed struggle in the archipelago were good .
 In July 1965, a handful of Cape Verdeans journeyed to Cuba for military training . The mission took place in July 1965 and ended in August 1965 .
 Cuba also provided goods—sugar, cigars, uniforms, uniforms and transport vehicles . Cuba also supplied sugar, cigars and uniforms .
 By 1967, it became clear there would be no easy victory against the Portuguese . The FARP had become much better equipped and supplied than at the beginning of the war .
 The PAIGC faced a particular problem in expanding its operations in the Gabu region in Eastern Guinea-Bissau . The government has been unable to find a solution to the problem in Gabu .
 One reason for difficulties was that the region was dominated by the Fula . One reason is that it was dominated in the region by Fula, the region .
 Balanta generally provided the bedrock of support for the PAIGC in the south . The Fula were often resistant to the nationalist drive, and many had been co-opted to serve in the Portuguese army . Many of the Balanta supported the nationalist movement .
 The Fula saw the Portuguese had much more advanced weapons than the PAIGC, recalled Dauda Bangura, and thus did not believe it would be possible to defeat the colonial power . The Portuguese had more advanced arms than the Fula, recalled Bangura .
 When the war escalated in 1966, the majority of the population fled to such villages near Portuguese posts at Madina de Boé and Beli . The majority of those who fled fled to the villages were Portuguese .
 Located close to the border with Guinea, the fort blocked the guerrillas’ access to the eastern hinterland . The fort is located close to Guinea’s border with the eastern part of Guinea .
 PAIGC launched a major attack against Madina do Boé on November 11, 1966 . The operation failed tragically, resulting in multiple casualties . It was the first major operation to try and destroy Madina Boé .
 Cabral was particularly distraught by the death of Domingos Ramos, who was hit by a mortar shell during the failed operation . Cabral said he was distraught by Ramos' death .
 Ramos was a charismatic leader and an effective mobilizer . Ramos was the commander of the eastern front after the Cassaca Congress . Ramos became the leader of the Soviet Union's eastern front . He was a popular leader and a charismatic mobilizer who became a popular figure .
 The disaster at Madina do Boé made Cabral rethink his military strategy . Cabral was forced to withdraw troops from the region after the disaster .
 Operations in the Gabu region would have to be more carefully planned to avoid significant losses, says Josef Janou§, on February 13, 1967 .
 Cabral preferred a war of attrition to avoid high casualties . The Cubans argued in favor of more extensive operations . Cabral wanted to avoid casualties, but the Cubans wanted more .
 In November 1966, the Soviets and their Czechoslovak counterparts gathered to discuss the war in Guinea-Bissau . The Soviets and Czechoslovaks met in a secret meeting in November 1966 .
 They acknowledged that the guerrillas’ morale was low, and their military reconnaissance was lacking . The guerillas acknowledged that they were low morale, and that they had little military reconnaissance .
 The solution was to “work out a strategic and tactical plan” for the PAIGC in consultation with the Cubans and then “choose and teach a few qualified men” who could carry it out, he says .
 Czechoslovak adviser Frantisek Polda believed FARP should be organized into larger military units capable of ‘preplanned” military operations . The full details of the plan are unclear, although the full details are unclear .
 Cabral pushed back, arguing that the commanders did not yet have the proper training . Cabral argued that the training was necessary for the commanders to be trained .
 Polda remained wedded to Cabral's advice, Cabral’s opposition notwithstanding . Cabral: ‘Polda’ is a good man, and Cabral is a great man,’.
 Cabral again argued for caution since the FARP lacked anti-aerial defense and feared retaliatory bombings . Cabral hoped that the new 122mm mortars he had obtained from the USSR would lead to a breakthrough . The FARP was defeated by the Soviet Union in the Second World
 Cabral says the liberation struggle increasingly resembles a “war game,” Polda countered . Cabral replied that was precisely part of the “psychological warfare” to put pressure on the Portuguese government . Poldas: The struggle increasingly resembled a "war game
 In 1968, a group of thirty Cape Verdean recruits arrived for advanced weapons training in Skhodnia, near Moscow . Cape Verdesu recruits were sent to Russia for weapons training . The training was carried out in the Soviet Union .
 The majority of the men in the group arrived in Moscow from Cuba from Cuba, where they had been undergoing training for a clandestine mission to launch an armed struggle in Cape Verde . Pedro Pires, Silvino da Luz, Olivio Pires and Osvaldo Lopes
 In Cuba, military preparation involved “basic guerrilla training,” while in Skhodnia, the group learned to operate advanced artillery, including 120mm mortars . The group also learned to use advanced artillery .
 Most seemed to share an appreciation of Soviet military technology . However, most seemed to be impressed by the Soviet technology .
 Cabral sought additional advanced weapons from the Soviet Union . Cabral continued to seek additional advanced arms from the Soviets .
 Petr Evsiukov recollected that the GRU's chief Petr Ivashutin acted as a champion of Cabral’s struggle . The GRU chief was also a champion for Cabral's struggle . Petr Evsusukov said that Cabral was a victim
 Cabral came to Moscow with his second wife, Anna Maria, with a request for additional heavy weapons . In his memoirs, he described the request for heavy weapons from Cabral . Cabral's memoirs: "Cabral's request for more heavy weapons was answered in Moscow
 Ivashutin believed the Soviets should help, but the minister of defense, Marshal Andrei Grechko, rejected his request . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1944 .
 Ivashutin and Evsiukov agreed that the former would introduce Cabral and Anna Maria to Grechko at a state reception, hoping a personal interaction would reverse the decision . The pair agreed that Cabral would be introduced at the state reception .
 Evsiukov recalled that Grechko was quite “excited” and in a “good mood” during the state reception . Evsukov said Grechco was quite excited and in “a good mood’ during the reception . Grech
 It is more challenging to determine Soviet views about Cabral’s military strategy . Cabral's military strategy is more difficult to determine than Soviet views .
 Osvaldo Lopes da Silva became an artillery commander on the eastern front after finishing military training in the USSR in 1969 . He became a artillery commander in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Predvechnov also criticized Cabral’s strategy of relying too much on acquiring advanced weapons from the USSR to boost morale . Predvechenov: Cabral relied on Soviet-made weapons for morale boost to boost the morale .
 Predvechnov referred to Grad-P, a system that was made available to the FARP in 1969 . Grad--P was the system that the Soviets made available in 1969 to FARP . Grad P guns were the first weapons available in the Soviet Union .
 A lightweight version of the BM-21 “Grad” weapons system, Grad-P was developed in the 1960s for the North Vietnamese where it was known as 122mm DKZ-B rocket launcher . The Grad--P weapon system was developed for North Vietnam in the
 The weapon soon became a popular means of guerrilla warfare because of its transportability and ability to withstand humid conditions . The weapon was soon popular among guerrilla warfare forces .
 Grad-P could be operated individually and was lighter than a mortar . Unlike the heavy machine guns from World War II that had dominated Soviet deliveries before that, it could be lighter than the mortar gun .
 Lack of military progress in Guinea-Bissau led to the emergence of debates over military strategy . The lack of progress in the country's military has led to debates over how to deal with the crisis .
 Cabral was well aware that the guerrillas might have claimed vast “liberated areas,” but the Portuguese still commanded the skies . Cabral: “The Portuguese still command the skies.” Cabral .
 He pushed the Soviets to provide additional weapons systems, including anti-aerial defense . He thus wanted to move cautiously and continuously pushed for more weapons .
 It is not fully clear how the Soviets evaluated such a strategy, but there are indications that Prague, Moscow, and Havana shared similar criticisms of Cabral’s tactics .
 It is unclear whether this move was connected to the Prague Spring or any disagreements with Cabral . Debate about military strategy would continue, however .
 In the meantime, similar conversations about military strategy in Angola would emerge in the mid-1960s .
 The MPLA and Guerrilla War in Cabinda and Southeast Angola, 1964-1970 . MPLA faced tremendous logistical challenges in starting military operations in Angola .
 Neto and his followers crossed the Zaire River from Léopoldville to the neighboring Congo-Brazzaville . Neto's followers lost access to Zaire in 1964 .
 One included starting guerrilla operations in Cabinda, an Angolan enclave that bordered Congo-Brazzaville . One of the Angolan's goals was to establish a base in the region .
 The party could also smuggle men and weapons across Zaire to northern Angola . But it was a treacherous path where guerrillas risked capture by Mobutu’s troops .
 The final possibility involved moving the center of operations to southeast Angola . The final option would be moving the operations to the southeast of Angola .
 The relationship between the MPLA and Cuba was forged after Che Guevara’s talks with Neto in early 1965 in Brazzaville . The MPLA was formed after the talks between Neto and Cuba in 1965 . Neto was the first president of the MP
 Cubans provided protection for Massamba-Débat’s government in Congo-Brazzaville . The Cubans also advised Neto on military strategy .
 In May 1965, after the first Cuban advisers arrived in Brazzaville, MPLA guerrillas ventured across the border to Cabinda and engaged in hit-and-run skirmishes with Portuguese patrols .
 MPLA leadership disagreed with Cuban advisers about the need to launch larger-scale operations to attack Portuguese forts . As was the case in Guinea-Bissau, the MPLA leaders disagreed with the Cuban advisers .
 One such MPLA-Cuban operation involved a plan to engage about one hundred guerrillas and a few pieces of 75mm artillery in an attack on the Portuguese fort of Sanga Planicie .
 MPLA did not want to proceed, arguing that the proposed size of the unit was too large and the operation too risky . The MPLA argued that the operation was too risky and the size was too big .
 Neto was keen to restart operations in northern Angola, the heartland of the rebellion in 1961 . Neto also wanted to restart operation in northern Anglia, where the rebellion began .
 Zairean territory is almost 400km through thick jungle and across Zaireans territory . However, that involved trekking nearly 400km into thick jungle . The trip was almost impossible to complete .
 Zairean authorities' attitude to the trip was even more perilous than the journey itself was the attitude of the authorities . The journey was the most perilous of the journey, with the risk of death .
 In November 1965, the powerful chief of the Zairean army, Colonel Joseph Désiré Mobutu seized, power in a bloodless coup d’état . The powerful chief . of the . army seized power in November 1965 .
 The others were apprehended by the Zairean authorities, arrested, and imprisoned . They were captured and imprisoned by the authorities . The others are still imprisoned .
 By June 1967, the MPLA had run out of weapons and realized the futility of the enterprise . The MPLA was forced to abandon the mission in 1967 .
 Cubans, who provided the training for the columns, ended their support for the MPLA in June 1967 . The Cubans were the ones who trained the columns .
 Havana claimed their mission in Congo-Brazzaville was over, but there was clearly no love lost between the two sides . Havana claimed that their mission was over but there were no signs otherwise .
 Starting in 1966, the MPLA began to infiltrate southeast Angola from a new base in Zambia . The MPLA has been fighting in southeast Angola since the 1960s .
 Zambia’s first president, Kenneth Kaunda, was reluctant to allow liberation movements to operate from Zambia . The country was landlocked and relied on neighboring Southern Rhodesia to transport its copper . Zambia's first president was initially reluctant .
 Southern Rhodesia announced a Unilateral Declaration of Independence to preserve white minority rule in 1965 . The country was ruled by a white minority government .
 In opposition to the UDI, Kaunda allowed liberation movements to open offices in Zambian territory . Zambian liberation movements were banned from entering Zambia .
 Most weapons for the liberation movements in Eastern Africa arrived at the port of Dar es Salamam in Tanzania . Most weapons were sent to the port in East Africa by the liberation movement .
 Zambia initially refused to allow arms that were transported from Tanzania . Zambia also refused to accept arms that had been transported from the country .
 UNITA has reemerged as a rival to the MPLA in southeast Angola . Jonas Savimbi’s UNITa has re-emerged in the country's southeast . The MPLA has been in power for more than a decade .
 Savimbi was an Ovimbundu, an ethnic group that dominated southeast Angola . Savibbi was a member of the Savimbundu tribe that dominated the region .
 He and his organization, UNITA, gained local followers and support from the Zambian authorities . He gained local support from authorities .
 Only in October 1966 did Lusaka lift an unofficial ban over the movement of men and arms across the Zambia-Tanzania border . Zambia lifted the ban on men and women crossing the border in 1966 .
 According to Slipchenko, Kaunda reacted against the Portuguese soldiers launching a cross-border raid across the Angola-Zambia border yet remained reluctant to support the liberation movements wholeheartedly .
 Soviet financial assistance jumped from $50,000 to $100,000 in 1965 . Moscow began providing the MPLA with weapons . Moscow also provided weapons .
 Moscow has fulfilled ‘all of the MPLA’s requests’ for assistance, he said . The MPLA had requested uniforms, medicine, equipment for the printing press, hospital equipment, cash, and arms via Dar es Salaam .
 Soviet journalists also started to support the MPLA’s effort to construct its image as the only liberation movement dedicated to armed struggle in Angola .
 He came back with field notes that he published in a series of articles in Pravda between May and June 1965 . He published the field notes in a number of articles published in the magazine .
 Tomas Kolesnichenko is one of Pravda’s leading foreign correspondents . He was followed by Tomas Kolenichenko, known for his lively writing style and flair for adventure .
 In early 1966, Kolesnichenko published a series of reports for Pravda, in which he depicted scenes from the “liberated areas” and featured conversations with popular guerrilla commanders .
 These romanticized reports from the “liberated areas” served several purposes . The reports were romanticized in a romanticized way .
 They helped build heroic metanarratives of anticolonial struggle for international consumption . They helped the liberation movements construct heroic met-arratives .
 By invoking the struggle for justice and socialism in faraway lands, they were also meant to validate the socialist experiment and increase the prestige of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was founded in the 1950s .
 Ignatev’s interest in Guinea-Bissau in particular was shaped by a close personal relationship that he developed with Amilcar Cabral, whom he first met in November 1965 . He first met Cabral in 1965 .
 Ignatev ventured to Guinea-Bissau for the first time the following year . Cabral’s suggestion prompted Ignateev to travel to Guinea Bissau .
 He became a regular visitor to Guinea-Bissau, returning in 1968 to shoot a film about the PAIGC . He returned to the country in 1970 and 1973 to film his films .
 Ignatev also went to Angola and Mozambique and would often serve as a go-between for the leadership of the liberation movements and Soviet officials . He would provide firsthand information about developments on the ground .
 The Soviet embassy in Congo-Brazzaville argued in February 1967 that the MPLA had failed to win over the local population . The majority of guerrillas had come from around Luanda and northern Angola .
 In particular, the movement needed to develop ‘clear and attractive slogans’ to pull different groups, especially the peasantry, into fighting the Portuguese .
 The people needed to have a clear understanding of the benefits of independence, says David Cameron . The independence vote was a referendum on whether or not it should be held in Scotland .
 The embassy acknowledged the logistical problems of moving guerrillas and weapons via Zambia .
 The MPLA had experienced leaders and organizers who were united around Neto, but military operations were still scattered . The embassy continued, but the MPLA was still scattered in the country .
 There was little coordination of military operations and no radio contact between small groups of guerrillas . There was no coordination of operations and little radio contact .
 For the most part, the Soviets had to rely on conversations with different MPLA representatives and, most likely, Cubans who were closely involved in guerrilla operations .
 Access to what the Soviets termed “reliable information” about military progress would become an important issue for Moscow . Moscow would often determine the level of assistance given to the Soviets .
 In late 1966, Zambia’s permission to transfer arms across the border opened up new opportunities for the anticolonial campaign in southeast Angola . Zambia allowed the transfer of arms to southeast Angola in late 1966 .
 Genadii Fomin, the head of the Third African Department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Vadim Kirpichenko, are among the heads of the Africa desk at the KGB’s First Directorate . Petr Evsiukov and Petr Manchkha are
 Kirpichenko recalled that their primary focus was Angola, and their task was to ‘find anybody’ who had firsthand evidence of military operations . He said the task of the U.S. was to "find anybody" with firsthand evidence .
 The MPLA's main base at Dolisie in Congo-Brazzaville, they met a Soviet doctor who confirmed that guerrillas had been arriving at the hospital ona daily basis .
 Kirpichenko recalled Neto made a good impression since he did not exaggerate the MPLA’s achievements . Neto had realistic expectations of Soviet assistance, Kirpichenkov said .
 Fomin shared with the GDR’s consul at Dar es Salaam, Gottfried Lessing . Lessing was impressed by the ‘unity and political clarity” of the MPLA’�s leaders, Fomin said .
 The opening of the new route for weapons to reach Angola through Tanzania and Zambia created possibilities for increasing pressure on the Portuguese in southeast Angola .
 Starting in 1965, Neto started receiving assistance from Yugoslavia, which he preferred to the countries of the Eastern Bloc because of its nonaligned status . Neto preferred Yugoslavia because it was a nonaligned member .
 Tito strongly criticized the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia . The two discussed military strategy in Angola . Tito and the Soviet Union were in touch with each other in the 1960s .
 Initially, the Soviets did not seem to have a problem with Neto’s relationship with Tito . Tito and Neto's relationship with the Soviet Union did not appear to be a problem .
 MPLA’s Anibal de Melo met Ambassador Slipchenko in Lusaka on September 4, 1969 . He shared his frustration about his recent trip to Moscow .
 Neto and Melo were right to detect the Soviets’ frustration with the lack of military progress in Angola . The Soviet Union was frustrated with lack of progress in the country .
 In a note for the CC CPSU from June 1970, the KGB made a scathing critique of the MPLA’s progress in southeast Angola . The KGB argued that the efficacy of armed action had decreased .
 The MPLA’s leadership had “underestimated the value of underground work” in big cities like Luanda, he says . They had no clandestine cells in urban areas, he adds . MPLA had ‘underestimate the value’ of underground underground
 The MPLA was further hindered by ‘tribal’ tendencies in southeast Angola, which were exacerbated by arbitrary attitudes toward the local population . MPLA also suffered from tribal tendencies in the region .
 Soviet relations with the MPLA at least partly revolved around disagreements over military strategy . Soviet relations at the time were mainly based on military strategy rather than political relations .
 The Soviets were critical of Neto’s military strategy in Cabinda . Neto's military strategy was similarly critical of the Cuban government . The Soviets consulted with the Cubans before Neto took over Cabinda in the 1970s .
 The Soviets believed that the MPLA was not doing enough to embed themselves in the local population . The MPLA did not embed themselves with the local people .
 Moscow was well aware of the MPLA’s logistical limitations and increased support in 1967 . New documents show that the Soviet military was quite critical about what they perceived as a lack of military progress .
 The full extent of Soviet conversations with Neto is not available . The evidence suggests that the relationship was often conflictual and that military and political strategy was subject to much debate . Neto's relationship with the Soviet Union was often highly contentious .
 Neto never really established a close relationship with his Soviet liaisons . Personalities mattered since, in contrast to Cabral, Neto had a personal relationship with Cabral .
 The Soviets also developed a skeptical view of the FRELIMO leadership . As we will see, the Soviets also had a skepticism about the leadership of Frelimo .
 First attack claimed by FRELIMO took place on September 25, 1964, when a number of guerrillas attacked the post of the chefe do posto in the small town of Chai in Cabo Delgado .
 In 1964, FRELIMO had only “250 men trained and equipped” who engaged in hit-and-run attacks against the Portuguese . In 1968, Eduardo Mondlane admitted in his 1968 book, The Struggle for Mozambique, in 1964, that FREL
 Mondlane argued armed action was the only option because the Portuguese were not ready to accept self-determination . But he knew he could no longer delay violent action because of pressure from activists, Tanzanian authorities, and local competitors .
 In June 1964, a rival organization, MANU, had staged an attack in the northern Cabo Delgado province . Father Daniel Boorman was killed in June 1964 .
 Once FRELIMO started its campaign in late 1964, Mondlane engaged in hectic diplomacy to obtain further military support from the socialist countries . Mondlane's diplomacy was hectic to obtain support from socialist countries.
 The Soviets provided weapons and ammunition, as well as medical supplies and other types of humanitarian assistance . The Soviets also provided weapons, ammunition and medical supplies .
 The Soviets continued to deny such requests because of Mondlane’s connections to Washington . Mondlane's connections to the U.S. continued to be denied such requests .
 Allegedly, the head of the KGB’s First Directorate, Aleksandr Sakharovskii, also supported Ulianovski's decision to deny Mondlane an invitation to the Congress .
 Simango was born in 1926 to a peasant family in Sofala province, central Mozambique . He was ordained as a Church of Christ pastor in 1956 . Born in 1926, he was educated by Protestant missionaries in the country .
 Moscow took Mondlane’s contacts with Washington seriously, especially since they believed British influence in Tanzania was still strong . In fact, Moscow thought British influence still strong in Tanzania .
 The Soviets worried about growing Chinese influence in Tanzania, which became increasingly prominent after the revolution in Zanzibar . At the same time, the Soviets were worried about Chinese influence .
 After Tanganyika and Zanzibar signed an act of union in 1964, a number of Marxist politicians moved to the mainland . They joined Julius Nyerere’s cabinet and joined him .
 Beijing announced in 1967 that it would construct a railway linking the copper mines of landlocked Zambia to the port of Dar es Salaam . Beijing committed a $401 million, interest-free loan to finance the project .
 China’s influence in Tanzania extended beyond developmental assistance . China's influence in the country extended beyond the developmental assistance.
 A longtime proponent of ‘African socialism, Nyerere was inspired by the Chinese revolution . He was also a proponent of "African socialism"
 In the words of Priya Lal, the Cultural Revolution and Nyerere’s wjamaa ‘shared imaginaries’ such as a dedication to self-reliance, discipline, hard work and commitment to rural transformation .
 FRELIMO military commander Samora Moisés Machel was a member of the Frelimo military . He was a military commander in the 1960s and '60s .
 After attracting attention because of his outspoken views on Portuguese colonialism, he fled to Dar es Salaam in 1963 . He fled to Tanzania in 1963 to escape Portuguese colonialism .
 In 1965, he was sent on a mission to open a new front in Niassa province . He was sent to the country in 1965 to help open a front in the country's capital .
 He was also responsible for training recruits at a base in Nachingwea . He became quite popular with rank-and-file recruits .
 In Nachingwea, Machel was first introduced to Mao Zedong’s ideas by Chinese instructors who worked at the camp . Machel says he was introduced to the ideas by instructors at the Chinese camp . The camp was first established by the Chinese in 1964 .
 As Machel often claimed, his Marxism resulted from his own experiences of colonialism and racial discrimination . He often claimed that his Marxism was based on his experiences .
 The Mozambicans were inspired by a variety of African, Third World, and European “socialisms,” often rooted in their own experiences . Naturally, it was not always easy for the Soviets to establish exactly who was “pro-Chinese”
 Mondlane tried to play on Soviet sensibilities during his trip to Moscow in November 1966 . Mondlane visited the Soviet Union in 1966 and spent the year in Moscow .
 In conversations with Soviet interlocutors, he acknowledged the achievements of Soviet socialism in Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan . He complained about China’s ‘anti-Soviet tactics,” especially the way they played out at international conferences .
 Mondlane did not seem to have “political clarity” and exhibited ‘opportunistic tendencies” during his trip to Moscow . As Genadii Fomin shared with Gottfried Lessing in Dar es Salaam in February 1967, Mondlane appeared to be having
 By 1968, the Soviets believed Mondlane had “moved left” in terms of his views, but they would never trust him completely . The Soviets would never fully trust Mondlane completely .
 The Soviets maintained clandestine sources within FRELIMO, who informed the Soviets about internal developments . The Soviets seemed to have developed a more favorable view of Simango .
 Pro-U.S. and pro-China lines would continue to preoccupy the Soviets, as they tried to make sense of the crisis that would thrust FRELIMO into internal turmoil in 1966-70 . As we will see, the juxtaposition of the pro-U
 The crisis that enveloped FRELIMO in 1966-69 consisted of an interconnected series of intraparty conflicts, culminating in the murder of Eduardo Mondlane in 1969 . The View from Moscow: FRELimo crisis was an interrparty crisis .
 Mestico-assimilado elites epitomized by such figures as Eduardo Mondlane and Marcelino dos Santos . The conflict was defined by struggles between “northerners” and “southerners,” mestico .
 Debates around race, class, and ideology are closely intertwined with rivalries over access to political power . Debates over race and class have long been intertwined with political power in America .
 The crisis was further complicated as warring factions sought supporters in TANU, Tanzania’s ruling party . Warring factions seek supporters in the ruling party, which is Tanzania's ruling party.
 The Soviets acted mainly as observers in this process as they tried to untangle the shifting political alliances to determine which “side” reflected their interests . The Soviets were mainly observers in the process .
 Filipe Magaia was FRELIMO’s first chief of defense and security . He was killed while crossing a river after nightfall with a group of guerrillas inside Mozambique .
 FRELIMO claimed Magaia’s death was an accidental shooting, it quickly became a subject of controversy . Although Frelimo claimed it was an accident, the death quickly became an issue of controversy.
 Earlier that year, Magaia had allegedly criticized the leadership in Dar es Salaam for not heeding advice from the military commanders . The leadership had not heeded advice from military commanders, leading to mounting casualties .
 A Roman Catholic priest, Gwenjere joined FRELIMO in Dar es Salaam in 1967 . He started teaching at the Mozambique Institute . He is a former member of the Frelimo Party .
 He caught Mondlane’s eye due to his intelligence and was dispatched together with Simango to speak at the UN General Assembly .
 In March 1968, tensions exploded into the open when students at the Mozambique Institute openly rebelled against FRELIMO’s leadership . Students at the institute rebelled in March 1968 .
 The Mozambique Institute was a key project envisioned by Mondlane and his wife, Janet, to educate and train cadres for a future independent Mozambiquique . Mondlane's wife Janet was also the founder of the Institute .
 FRELIMO required students to attend a military preparation course at the Nachingwea camp during the school holidays . By 1967, it had become clear that educational priorities had given way to the needs of the revolution .
 Students spoke out against the leadership and campaigned to remove the white professors from the institute . With Gwenjere’s support, students spoke out and campaigned for removal .
 A Makonde entrepreneur from Cabo Delgado province, Nkavandame initially joined FRELIMO because he became frustrated that the Portuguese were hindering his efforts to set up an agricultural cooperative in the north .
 FRELIMO appointed Nkavandame the head of the civil administration in Cabo Delgado province in 1963 . He continued to modernize Makonde agriculture based on the ‘free British capitalism” model he had experienced in Tanzania .
 Nkavandame was responsible for FRELIMO-administered stores and trade in Cabo Delgado province, amassing a small fortune in the process .
 Fearing he would be sidelined, Nkavandame allied with Mateus Gwenjere to replace Mondlane with Uria Simango . Fearing that Mondlane would miss out on his place, Nvandame replaced him with Simango instead .
 Nkavandame's supporters entered FRELIMO’s offices in Nkrumah Street, Dar es Salaam, and engaged in physical altercations with Mondlane’S supporters . Mondlane's supporters were involved in violent clashes with Frelim
 Nkavandame and Gwenjere called for FRELIMO’s Second Congress to be convened and elections for new leadership . FRELimo's Second Congress will be held and elections held in November .
 Nkavandame hoped that ifa FRELIMO Congress could be held in Tanzania, he could amass enough support . He hoped to amass support for the Frelimo Congress in Tanzania .
 Mondlane managed to undercut his opposition by holding the Congress in Mozambique in late July 1968 . Mondlane held the Congress, which was held in late 1968 .
 Many Tanzanian politicians were of Makonde origin, like Nkavandame and the majority of rank-and-file recruits . Many politicians were born in the Makonde .
 Makonde Tanzanians often found common cause with those who opposed FRELIMO president Mondlane . Mondlane received strong support from Nyerere, but was assassinated in 1953 .
 Sijaona was a minister of state for refugees in the office of Vice President Rashidi Kawawa . He shared his dislike for Mondlane on racial grounds with Nkavandame, a Makonde .
 At a meeting in Mtwara, Tanzania, in August 1968, Nkavandame and other Cabo Delgado leaders charged FRELIMO with executing military and civilian leaders who had opposed leadership in Dar es Salaam .
 Nkavandame then issued orders to bar FRELIMO from entering Cabo Delgado . Frelimo was then banned from entering the region .
 Paulo Kankhomba, FRELIMO’s deputy chief of operations, defied the ban and entered the province in December 1968 . He was allegedly killed, allegedly by local Makonde militants, in Makonde .
 He persuaded Tanzanian authorities to place Gwenjere under house arrest and suspended Nkavandame from his post . He persuaded authorities to put him under a house arrest .
 Nyerere’s support for Mondlane undoubtedly allowed him to overcome opposition at crucial moments in the crisis . The former president's support for the opposition was crucial at crucial times .
 The Soviets received information about FRELIMO’s internal politics through a variety of sources . The Soviets got the information from sources in order to keep up with the Soviets .
 A native of southern Gaza province like Mondlane, Chissano had participated in the student activist organization NESAM before pursuing a degree in medicine in Portugal and then France .
 Records show that Chissano started collaborating with the KGB after receiving training in the USSR in 1965 . These records show he started working for the KGB in 1965.
 Recent revelations about Chissano's contacts with the KGB made quite a furor in the press . The Soviets had many sources of information about developments in the Mozambican liberation movement .
 They had regular conversations with the top leadership, especially with Mondlane, Santos, Simango, and Chissano . They also spoke to Mondlane and Santos, especially .
 In October 1968, one “trusted source” of the GRU submitted a full report on the situation inside the organization after the Second Congress and the August meeting in Mtwara .
 The source detailed the tense exchange between Mondlane and Nkavandame . Simango was playing both sides in the standoff between the two men, the source said .
 The report also described the close connections between Lawi Sijaona and Nkavandame . The report was also described as a close connection between Lawa Sijona and Lawa .
 As he sat down to work and opened his mail, Mondlane was instantly killed by a parcel bomb . It was hidden in a book bearing a stamp from Moscow .
 Evidence pointed to the so-called Aginter Press, a clandestine network of sleeper agents who fought against Portugal’s enemies in Africa . The assassination had clear signs of Portuguese involvement .
 Most people pointed to Sijaona and Mondlane’s key critics, including Nkavandame, Simango, and his ally Silvério Nungu . Local collaboration was also likely, and most pointed to local collaboration, also likely .
 Sijaona was very likely involved, but there is little evidence that Simango or Nungu played a role . Simango is very likely to have been involved in the attack .
 As George Roberts has argued in his detailed reconstruction of the various theories, the plan was most likely concocted by the Portuguese and executed with African collaboration . The Portuguese most likely to have concocted the plan .
 KGB's deputy chairman Nikolai Zakharov argued that Mondlane’s foreign policy had been sharply criticized by Algeria, Cuba, and especially China . Russia had maintained relations with both socialist and capitalist countries .
 Mondlane angered some among the Tanzanian establishment by maintaining a relatively independent stance . Many of them still hoped to create a federation between Tanzania and Mozambique .
 Czechoslovak intelligence service also tried to comprehend the mystery behind Mondlane’s murder . Czechoslovakia's intelligence service tried to understand the murder .
 The StB declared that Mondlane’s assassination was part of a wider trend of ‘political murders’ to target the late president and his supporters .
 The men who potentially profited from the murder were Simango, Silvério Nungu, and Lazaro Nkavandame . The men were also involved in the murder of Simango .
 The PIDE must have been involved as well as “elements in the Tanzanian government,” in particular Lawi Sijaona, says the author . Lawi is also believed to be in charge of the PIDE .
 Kirschner had arrived in Dar es Salaam in 1966 and worked undercover, teaching civics at the Mozambique Institute . He arrived in the country in 1966 to teach civics .
 In his role, he had established friendly relations with the teachers at the Institute and FRELIMO’s leadership, he said .
 The report shows the StB had a much more favorable evaluation of Mondlane than their Soviet counterparts . The report was published by the St.B, which had a more favorable rating than their counterparts .
 Kirschner was recalled to Prague in October 1968 and subsequently “released” from his duties at the StB due to his opposition to the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . He was recalled from his post in 1968 to Prague .
 In April 1969, Uria Simango, Samora Machel, and Marcelino dos Santos established the Council of the Presidency . The council of the presidency was established in 1969 .
 Simango expected to occupy Mondlane’s position after his death . He was forced to share power with the others . Simango was expected to take over Mondlane's position .
 For about six months, the triumvirate managed to keep the appearance of unity . For six months of the past year, the trio managed to stay united . For the past six months they have been at odds .
 Simango accused Machel and Santos of usurping power, eliminating political rivals, and plotting to kill him . In November, Simango released a pamphlet, “Gloomy Situation in FRELIMO,” in which he accuses Machel of usurped power .
 He also criticized the late Mondlane for allowing the Portuguese to dominate the Mozambique Institute . He accused his widow Janet of conspiring with the CIA to infiltrate the organization .
 Simango denied he was racist at the time, as did his biographer Ncomo, who argued the vice president wanted to prevent FRELIMO’s domination by southern elites . Simango denies he was a racist .
 Petr Ivashutin argued that FRELIMO was a weak organization, rooted in the “peasant masses,” with little experience of armed struggle, and riven by intra-ethnic tensions . In a lengthy analysis of the triumvirate in July 1969,
 He described Simango, Santos, and Machel as “petit-bourgeoisie” who mistakenly shared the “pseudo-revolutionary’s Maoist concept of popular partisan warfare .
 The only significant difference between the two factions was their attitudes toward white Mozambicans .
 Ivashutin acknowledged that the nationalist movement in Mozambique was important because of the country’s location, bordering Southern Rhodesia and South Africa . At the same time, he acknowledged the movement was important due to its location .
 The GRU says the move allowed for the possibility of expanding its signals intelligence capability . From the GRU’s perspective, it also allowed for . the possibility to expand its signals . intelligence capability, it says .
 Simango outlined familiar arguments about the dominance of southerners in leadership positions . In a conversation with Arkadii Glukhov in Dar es Salaam on September 25, Simango said . Simango: "Southerners dominate leadership positions"
 He also argued that Janet Mondlane was dangerous because she was a “white American,” and the CIA could continue to exercise control over the movement through her .
 After the release of "the Gloomy Situation" in November, Simango approached the Soviets again with an explanation . Simango: "It's not the first time I've heard from such an explanation"
 He never wanted to make the criticisms public, but the inaction of the Tanzanian authorities left him no choice, he says . He says he was left with no choice but to criticise the government .
 He charged FRELIMO’s leadership with corruption, “tribalism,” and political killings . Once again, he charged FrelIMO with corruption and tribalism . He also charged the leadership with political killings and corruption .
 Simango was looking to improve relations with the USSR, but the GRU doubted his intentions . Simango wanted to improve ties with the Soviet Union, but it was doubted .
 Predvechnov argued that FRELIMO had always been determined to lock Soviet influence out of the organization . In a striking passage, Predvechenov wrote that FrelIMO was always determined to prevent Soviet influence in the organization.
 Sources say Filipe Magaia and Paulo Kankhomba were assassinated by those who feared the strengthening of Soviet influence over the movement . Frelimo military commanders allegedly close to the USSR .
 Ivashutin argued the CIA could use Mondlane's close relationship with Machel to influence internal politics . In an evaluation of developments inside FRELMO one month later, IvashUTin mirrored Simango’s assessment .
 Simango was suspended from the Presidential Council and deported from Dar es Salaam . Shortly after the publication of ‘Gloomy Situation in FRELIMO’ Simango has been deported from the country .
 After Mozambique became independent in 1975, FRELIMO brought Simango and other critics like Nkavandame back to the country . Simango died in 1975 at the age of 60 .
 Machel would come to dominate FRELIMO until he died in a plane crash in 1986 . Machel was one of the most powerful men in the world . He died in 1986 in a crash in which he was killed .
 The Soviet view of developments in Africa was fundamentally ideological . The Soviet views were fundamentally ideological, according to the author .
 Moscow believed the African military was a neocolonial institution, prone to Western influence and outright meddling . Moscow believed that the African army was prone to meddling .
 They are also concerned about the challenge posed by China, especially in East Africa . They say they are worried about the challenges posed by the country .
 The Soviets were trying to correct what they considered their mistake of underestimating the role of African militaries in politics . The Soviets thus attempted to correct their mistake .
 The Soviets drew in allies by ramping up assistance and making new clandestine contacts . The eventual goal of extending the reach of Soviet navy and signals intelligence was to extend the reach .
 Military training was meant to earn loyalty from young soldiers and convince them of the attractiveness of the socialist system . At the same time, military training was aimed at earning loyalty from soldiers .
 Soviet officials became involved in advising, training, and providing military supplies to allies . Thus, the Soviet military was increasingly drawn in as officials become involved .
 The level of assistance depended on the vastly different dynamics of the Soviets’ relationships with Cabral, Neto, and Mondlane . Cabral and Neto's relationships with each other were key to their success .
 By the mid-1960s, the Soviets had developed a close relationship with Cabral, based on his personal associations with men like Evsiukov . Cabral's relationship with the Soviets was based on the Soviets' close-knit circle of friends .
 Since military advisers wanted to enable victory, heated disagreements emerged about guerrilla strategy . Since then, the U.S. military was focused on winning the battle .
 Soviet, Czechoslovak, and Cuban advisers shared at least some criticisms of Cabral’s military strategy . Although many details of these discussions are still unclear, many details are still unknown .
 Cabral used contacts with Soviet liaisons to obtain new weapons systems . Still, Cabral managed to resist pressure and managed to obtain weapons systems from the Soviets .
 The majority of Cabral’s guerrillas experienced Soviet modernity mainly during their time in military training . Cabral's Guerrillas spent most of the time in Soviet training .
 Soviet military technology seemed to most significantly impact rank-and-file soldiers, who felt that weapons equaled liberation . However, rather than ideology or ideology, ideology or organizing principles, seemed to have most significant impact on the Soviet military .
 It seems that the provision of arms was initially limited, mainly due to logistical challenges . Although we do not have the exact figures, it seems to be that it is not the first time arms have been provided .
 Moscow did ramp up assistance to Neto after 1967 . The Soviets became critical of the MPLA’s campaign in Cabinda and southeast Angola .
 The Soviets did not believe the MPLA was doing enough to create a truly broad movement . They often questioned the efficacy and scope of military operations . Fundamentally, the Soviets didn't believe the movement was creating enough .
 Neto looked to Yugoslavia and elsewhere for alternative sources of military support . Criticisms of this kind fed into their rocky relationship with Neto, who looked for alternatives .
 The new evidence does not shed light on any disagreements between the International Department and the Soviet military or the KGB and the GRU on the MPLA’s progress .
 It is very likely that the Soviet military played an important role in shaping views of developments on the ground . Neto had a complicated relationship with Moscow, which contributed to the complicated relationship he had with Moscow .
 Military strategy played less of an essential role in Soviet views of FRELIMO in the 1960s . Military strategy did not play an important role in the Soviet view of Frelimo in the 60s .
 Documents reveal bleak view that the Soviets and especially the GRU developed of their relationship with the Mozambicans . The documents reveal a strikingly bleak view of the relationship between the Soviet Union and Mozambican .
 GRU had multiple sources inside the organization but still struggled to come to grips with its factionalism . The GRU became convinced the leadership was fundamentally anti-Soviet .
 Soviets distrusted Mondlane because of his contacts in Washington and feared CIA influence . Soviets feared influence from the CIA, but feared it from Mondlane .
 Initial allies like Marcelino dos Santos were not seen favorably . They resented what they believed was growing Chinese influence . On the other, they resented the growing influence of China .
 GRU initially saw Machel as a popular yet amenable figure who could be influenced by Mondlane’s widow . Machel was assassinated by the death of Mondlane's widow in 1994 .
 As the crisis within the organization deepened, the Soviets were being pulled in different directions, as various factions all sought support from international patrons .
 GRU argued that the Soviet Union should increase its military support for FRELIMO to strengthen its foothold in the organization . Nevertheless, GRU said that the GRU would increase its support for the organization to strengthen it .
 Once Machel centralized power in 1970, the Soviets would proceed to court him with offers of new assistance packages for the guerrilla campaign . The Soviets would then offer him assistance packages .
 The full story of cooperation between Prague, Havana, and Moscow is still buried in the archives of the Czech Republic .
 The level of Czechoslovak involvement with liberation movements such as the PAIGC was extraordinary . There clearly existed cooperation between advisers on the ground and those at higher levels . Czechoslovakia's involvement in liberation movements was 'extraordinary'
 StB evaluations of Mondlane point to one such example . This collaboration did not preclude differences of opinion, and Mondlane is a good example .
 The Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 did not seem to impact its relations with the nationalist movements in any significant way . It did not appear to impact relations with nationalist movements .
 By the mid-1960s, Prague was already seeking to limit its commitments to anticolonial movements for fundamentally economic reasons . The events of 1968 only accentuated the trend, and the events of that year accentuated that trend .
 The evidence available shows that Havana, Prague, and Moscow were broadly aligned in terms of their view of the guerrilla struggle in the Portuguese colonies . Havana and Prague were aligned in the view of their views of the struggle, says the historian .
 As the next chapter shows, the often-heated discussions of military strategy would continue . The next chapter of this chapter will be the first of the series .
 The Soviets would have to square the ever-intensifying demands of the anticolonial movements with their burgeoning détente with the U.S. However, the Soviets would also have to balance the growing demands of anti-colonial movements with the growing denteente with U.
 Caetano was married with four children . Unlike his ascetic predecessor, he was not ascetic .
 Salazar had never ventured beyond Portugal’s borders, while Caetano had traveled widely, spoke French, and fashioned himself as a moderate . Salazar never ventured into the country's borders, and had never traveled abroad .
 Caetano also shared Salazar’s resolve to retain the empire at any cost . The former president also shared his resolve to keep the empire in power .
 In 1970, he authorized major military offensives against the nationalist movements in the colonies . In 1970 he authorized a major military operation against nationalist movements .
 The offensives put immense pressure on the liberation movements, intensifying internal divisions—to devastating effect . The liberation movements were put under immense pressure, intensified internal divisions .
 Caetano found that the new incumbents of the White House were fairly accommodating . He found that Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger were relatively accommodating .
 In the face of domestic opposition to the Vietnam War, Nixon and Kissinger sought to reduce commitments in the Third World . In the 1970s, Kissinger and Nixon tried to reduce commitment to the war .
 In Africa, their strategy entailed relying on regional ‘policemen’ like Joseph Mobutu in Zaire to contain communism . The strategy was based on regional "policmen" like JosephMobutu, who was in charge of the Zaire .
 They favored closer relations with Southern Rhodesia, South Africa, and Portugal . They also believed that white minority rule in southern Africa would continue .
 Nixon and Kissinger’s realpolitik foreign policy provided an opening for a rapprochement with the Soviet Union known as détente . At the same time, Kissinger and Nixon's realpolitika foreign policy helped provide an opening .
 Détente started in Europe with West German chancellor Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik . Brandt aimed to settle the status of East Germany to ensure a durable peace in Europe . Arguably a conservative reaction to the crises of 1968 .
 They also launched a parallel rapprochement with China and employed “triangular diplomacy” with the Soviets to encourage progress in ongoing talks on arms limitations . They also employed ‘triangular diplomatic’ with the Soviet Union .
 The 1970 Moscow Treaty recognized the postwar border in Europe, and the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty limited the build-up of antiballistic missiles .
 Détente would have been impossible without CC CPSU general secretary Leonid Brezhnev . Leonid was the leader of the Soviet Union during the Cold War . He was assassinated in 1968 by the Communist Party of Soviet Union .
 As Rui Lopes has argued, détente actually helped strengthen Portugal’s Western alliances since it legitimized the notion of working with disreputable regimes . Détente solidified divisions between the Global North and South .
 The impact of détente on Soviet policy in the Third World has been subject to substantial debate . Détente has been criticised for its impact on foreign policy in Third World .
 The Cold War in the Third World did not exhibit any signs of abating . Although there was a considerable relaxation of tensions in Europe in the 1970s, the Cold War continued to grow .
 The United States failed to constrain its ally, Israel, during the Yom Kippur War and backed a coup against Salvador Allende, Chile’s socialist president, in 1973 . The U.S. failed to restrain its ally during the war and backed the coup against
 In 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan . Meanwhile, the Soviets and Cubans became involved in crises in Angola and Ethiopia, and in 1979, they invaded Afghanistan. Meanwhile, they were involved in the crises in Ethiopia and Angola .
 The Soviets saw U.S. actions during the Yom Kippur War as evidence that Washington was still determined to exclude Moscow from engagements in the Third World . In fact, the Soviets saw events such as United States actions as evidence .
 The KGB developed a “new Soviet African strategy,” which entailed greater support for liberation movements in southern Africa . In Africa, the argument continues, the KGB developed .
 By the mid-1960s, the Soviet intelligence services believed Western countries would not shy away from using military means and “subversion” to protect their interests in Africa . As discussed in the previous chapter, by the mid-'60s, by this time, Western countries had
 They saw Nixon’s policy in Africa as a continuation of confrontation by other means . They worried about the �emergence’ of China, they said .
 The Soviets also faced a challenge posed by European social democracies, especially after the Nordic countries began providing humanitarian assistance to the liberation movements .
 In the face of Portuguese offensives, guerrilla warfare strategy once again became a subject of significant discussion . In the past two years, the U.S. has seen significant progress in the fight against Portugal .
 The Soviets were willing to ramp up military assistance and provided new weapons systems, such as the modified portable rocket launcher Grad-P . The Soviets hoped their clients would heed their advice and devise more ambitious military strategy .
 In Angola, the Portuguese offensive wreaked havoc on the MPLA, resurrecting internal debates about political and military strategy . The MPLA has been plagued by internal divisions and internal instability .
 The Soviets suspended assistance to the MPLA to put pressure on Neto to come to an agreement with his internal critics . Neto's internal disagreements had exploded into a major internal crisis by 1973 .
 The Soviets increased assistance to FRELIMO, now centralized under the leadership of Samora Machel . Meanwhile, the Soviets increased aid to Frelimo .
 In the early 1970s, the Portuguese tried to break the military stalemate with a number of daring operations to capture the PAIGC leadership in Conakry .
 Cabral pressed the Soviets for new military technology to overcome Portugal’s air superiority . Cabral obtained the surface-to-air Strela-2 “Arrows” missile complex in 1972 .
 New evidence reveals how the Soviet military evaluated debates on guerrilla strategy in Guinea-Bissau, their differences with the Cubans and their response to Cabral’s murder .
 The chapter highlights that détente played only a limited role in Soviet relations with the liberation movements . Détente was a 'limited role' in relations between Soviet and liberation movements, the chapter says .
 Andropov argued that the West viewed coups in Somalia, Libya, and Sudan with alarm . The West was determined to counter Soviet influence, he said . The Soviet leader said the West was trying to counter the Soviet influence .
 The key Western tactic was to rely on proxies, such as Morocco, Ethiopia, and Zaire in their attempts to subvert Soviet influence on the African continent .
 Andropov shared his view that the West believed the Soviet Union was not planning for a “broad offensive” in southern Africa . The West did not believe the Soviets were planning a broad offensive, he said .
 Ina note to the Central Committee in April 1970, the KGB outlined several worrying trends vis-a-vis African attitudes toward the liberation movements . The KGB outlined a worrying trend in African attitudes to the liberation movement .
 Host states such as Tanzania and Zambia ‘constrained the development of nationalist liberation struggle’ because they feared retaliation from white minority regimes while pocketing the military hardware designated for the liberation movements . Meanwhile, vital host states such a . host states ‘fear retaliation from
 The 1969 Lusaka manifesto prioritized ‘peaceful means of struggle’ against white minority regimes . A major symptom of the trend toward accommodation was the 1969 manifesto, which prioritized 'peaceful uses of struggle'
 Soviet military intelligence highlighted Africa’s central role should there be another war . The Soviet military said Africa would have a central role if there was another war.
 GRU’s Lev Tolokonnikov argued that Western countries were stepping up their military cooperation with African countries in exchange for permission to construct U.S. military bases .
 In particular, he emphasized the role of South Africa as a source of crucial minerals and resources . South Africa's role grew in importance following the closure of the Suez Canal after the 1967 Six Day War .
 The role of African armies was on the rise, and Western countries targeted the military to exert influence . Western countries were targeting the military in the 1980s and 1990s to gain influence .
 The breakthrough in Soviet-American relations after signing the SALT I treaty in 1972 did not do much to change the KGB’s outlook on Western policy in Africa .
 Nixon was making serious efforts to weaken Soviet influence on the continent . He was strengthening his cooperation with white minority regimes and Portugal .
 The U.S. was no longer interested in ‘direct interference’ in African countries . The development of long-term commercial and political relations would bring the desired benefits, he said .
 In the early 1970s, China emerged from the peak of the Cultural Revolution . Beijing was eager to reconstruct its role on the international stage . The country's role in the 1970s was to rebuild its international image .
 China’s rapprochement with the United States enabled its admission to the U.N. In 1971, China was allowed to join the United Nations . China is now one of the world's most powerful nations .
 The CCP revived diplomatic relations with most African countries . It pursued an increasingly active international agenda to win over allies at Moscow’s expense . Russia has revived diplomatic ties with Africa .
 China’s militant anti-Soviet stance had derailed relations with the MPLA and the PAIGC in the early 1970s . Beijing sought rapprochement in the 1970s, when it was in power .
 GRU believed that China’s growing influence could be countered with Soviet military assistance . The GRU wanted to counter the growing influence of China's growing influence .
 Petr Ivashutin and General Nikolai Dagaev argued that the key to China’s success was the quick provision of economic and military aid on preferential terms . In an October 1970 overview of China's activities in Africa in Africa, Petr Ivashesutin argued .
 The Soviet military should be allowed to make independent decisions about dispatching advisers quickly on request, expanding propaganda related to military assistance programs, and ensuring that military aid satisfied the requirements of the recipients .
 The Soviets in Africa faced a challenge from European social democracies . Europe's social democracies were key to their success in Africa .
 The response of the Nordic countries was at least partly shaped by changes in European public opinion . The Nordic countries' response to the crisis was shaped by public opinion changes in Europe .
 solidarity organizations in Europe and the U.S. had started to campaign against white minority rule in southern Africa . Since the late 1960s, a number of solidarity organizations had started .
 Campaign focused on Portugal’s plan to construct a hydroelectric dam on the Zambezi River at Cabora Bassa in Mozambique's Tete province . Campaigners focused on plans to build a dam on Zambezzi River .
 Solidarity groups believed the scheme served to attract white settlers and entrench Portuguese rule . They campaigned vigorously against participation of Western capital .
 Swedish firm ASEA withdrew from the project due to widespread opposition . In 1969, the Swedish company ASEA pulled out of the project because of widespread opposition.
 The clearest indication of a change in public opinion came in 1970 when Pope Paul VI held a brief audience with Marcelino dos Santos, Agostinho Neto and Amilcar Cabral at the Vatican .
 The Soviets never publicly voiced opposition to the support of the support from the Nordic countries . The Soviets did not publicly voice their opposition .
 Soviet military support was an open secret, but public acknowledgment demonstrated that Moscow wanted credit for supporting the anticolonial campaigns . Soviet support was a public acknowledgment, but it was a secret .
 The Soviet military and intelligence services did not believe détente had a significant effect on the Cold War in Africa . Détente did not have a significant impact on denteente .
 The USSR’s solutions to challenges from the West and China were familiar and included expanding aid and contacts with African militaries . The USSR's solutions to these challenges were familiar .
 The Soviet military and the GRU wanted greater involvement and more ‘independence’ to provide a viable alternative to Western and Chinese assistance . The GRU and the Soviet military sought greater involvement .
 There is little evidence to suggest that Soviet policy in Africa added up to a new, coordinated strategy . However, there are little evidence that Soviet policies in Africa were successful .
 Soviet military lobbying for more international assistance might have been at least partly motivated by material gain . As Vladislav Zubok has argued, the Soviet military’s lobbying for international assistance may have been motivated by materials gain .
 The 1970s saw the emergence of what has been described as Brezhnev’s “little deal,” which involved a system of perks and privileges . The system often functioned via the shadow economy, allowing certain sections of society to enjoy daily comforts .
 Documents show that the Soviet military was not incompatible with strategic considerations . They fit into a fundamentally ideological worldview shared by the military, the authors say .
 The early 1970s saw the expansion of military assistance from the socialist countries . As far as the liberation movements were concerned, the liberation movement was expanding .
 The impetus for such developments came as the Soviets observed the changes in military strategies adopted by the Lusophone nationalist movements .
 General Francisco da Costa Gomes borrowed from the French in Algeria, employing a quadrillage garrisoning system, which divided the country into sectors, each permanently controlled by troops, to isolate the guerrillas .
 These tactics caused widespread deprivation and starvation in the MPLA-controlled zones, while transportation problems hindered resupply .
 It was also consistent with what the Soviets and the Cubans had been advising for some time . However, it was not the first time the U.S. had been advised by the Soviets or Cubans .
 Belokolos argued that the Soviets should support Neto’s plan by providing logistical assistance and advice on operations . In a lengthy report to Moscow, he argued that Moscow should provide logistical assistance .
 In a progress report from April 1972, Soviet ambassador to Tanzania, Viacheslav Ustinov, noted that guerrilla campaigns were limited to mainly sporadic hit-and-run tactics .
 The liberation movements did not prioritize extending the geographical reach of military operations . They did not build “underground cells” across the country . The liberation movement did not prioritize extending the geographic reach of operations .
 MPLA and FRELIMO understood that they had to reorganize small guerrilla detachments into a regular army . Ustinov: "Now, now, the MPLA ... and FrelimO understood" that they must reorganize guerrilla groups into regular army and set up
 In February 1972, Costa Gomes launched Operation Attila, a large-scale offensive in southeast Angola . The offensive included aircraft dropping defoliants to destroy crops and communication lines . The operation was launched in February 1972 .
 Savimbi had built up his following among the Ovimbundu of southeast Angola . Having established UNITA in 1966, he established his own party in 1966 .
 Costa Gomes and Savimbi agreed that they would not fight each other but would cooperate to eliminate the MPLA with intelligence support from UNITA . The two sides agreed to cooperate, including on locations of MPLA bases, including locations .
 By late 1972, the colonial authorities estimated that the offensive had reduced the insurgents’ strength by more than half of the total number of men recorded in 1970 .
 The majority of the MPLA’s top-level commanders and political leadership were of Mbundu or multiracial origins . They came from Luanda and northwest Angola and Luanda .
 The commanders often had little in common with the rank-and-file soldiers, many Ovimbundu in southeast Angola .
 Some commanders in southeast Angola did indeed “abuse their positions” by ordering the rank-and-file soldiers to carry heavy loads on long marches from Zambia to the southeast . Neto’s close MPLA associate Lucio Lara later acknowledged that some commanders ‘abuse
 As Neto acknowledged in a conversation with Ambassador Belokolos on March 18, 1972, the MPLA experienced incidents of “tribalism,” but reassured that these would not impact the armed struggle . In 1972, Neto said that these incidents of tribalism
 Brazzaville-based recruits also criticized Neto and Lara for misappropriating funds and matériel from socialist countries .
 According to MPLA vice president Domingos da Silva, the crux of the conflict lay in disputes over relations with the Soviet Union . The conflict was triggered by a dispute over relations between the two countries .
 He contended that the MPLA was split between pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese factions . The MPLA is a pro-China party, but not pro-Russian .
 Silva argued Neto secretly belonged to the pro-Chinese faction . Silva argued that Neto wanted to limit Soviet influence in Brazil . Silva said Neto had been secretly allied with the Chinese party .
 Revolta Activa became particularly prominent in 1974, but discord was clearly fomenting for some time . Revolita Activa was particularly prominent during the period .
 Neto always believed that northern Angola should be the core base of operations for the guerrilla movement . Neto believes northern Angola is the best place to base operations in Angola .
 An agreement with Roberto would mean the Zairean authorities would allow the MPLA to cross into northern Angola . As Neto explained to his Soviet interlocutors, the agreement would mean an agreement with Zaireans would allow MPLA cross into Angola .
 The agreement could mean much greater Zairean and, therefore, United States influence on the Angolan liberation movement . As the Soviet embassy in Kinshasa argued in a telegram to Moscow, the agreement .
 The outcome could mean a ‘pro-Western’ regime in the country after independence . The outcome of the vote could be a "pro-western" regime .
 Neto’s agreement with Roberto did little to calm growing discord inside the organization . It is true that Neto and Roberto did not calm growing discontent inside the club . Neto's deal with Roberto will not calm the growing discord in Brazil .
 In April 1973, the MPLA made a dramatic announcement that some of its members had conspired to assassinate Neto . Neto was assassinated in 1973 . The MPLA was accused of conspiring to kill Neto, but Neto survived .
 MPLA leadership proceeded to arrest the plotters and imprisoned them in the Kalombo camp in western Zambia . The plotters were imprisoned in a camp in west Zambia.
 Under interrogation, the men confessed that their ringleader was Daniel Chipenda . The men confessed to their involvement in the kidnapping .
 After fleeing Portugal in 1961, he joined the MPLA, was elected the youth leader . He became a popular commander on the eastern front, partly partly because of his Ovimbundu heritage .
 The MPLA’s Henrique “Iko” Carreira arrived in Lusaka with orders for him to depart for the front in Angola . Chipenda recalled to an interviewer much later, in May 1973, the MPLA's Henrique "Iko"
 He then remained in Lusaka and maintained an uneasy standoff with Neto . He then stayed in the country and maintained a standoff with neto .
 MPLA camps in western Zambia became divided between Neto's and Chipenda’s supporters . The camps were shaken by outbursts of violence in recent months .
 He argued that Neto had mishandled complaints about abuses committed by MPLA field commanders in southeast Angola . The MPLA has been accused of arbitrary executions and other abuses .
 Chipenda claimed that he opposed the Chinese-inspired campaign because it would stir up “racist accusations” against the leadership . Chipenda maintained that a “fundamental structural adjustment” was required to address underlying issues .
 He also denied that there was ever any coup against Neto, arguing that the arrest and subsequent torture of the Kalombo detainees sparked the Eastern Revolt .
 Chipenda was the one who did not want to be accountable to the people and therefore was expelled . He was expelled from the university, he said . Chipenda is one of the people who was expelled for not being accountable .
 The Eastern Revolt presented a significant challenge to Neto's leadership . It drastically curtailed the MPLA’s attempts to organize military operations in southeastern Angola .
 As the crisis within the MPLA unfolded, the Soviets tried to mediate between Neto and Chipenda . Neto's government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1979 .
 In September 1973, Petr Evsiukov and GRU’s Ivan Plakhin arrived in Dar es Salaam for talks . Petr Evsukov: "I’m not afraid. I’ll never be afraid to be afraid of Russia’
 A record of the conversation is not available, but the schism with Chipenda was likely on the agenda . Chipenda is likely to be at odds with the president .
 The presence of Plakhin, who was responsible for coordinating aid to the liberation movements, attests to the seriousness of the matter . Further, he said the presence of the . presence of . Plakhins attests .
 On October 18, Neto wrote directly to Leonid Brezhnev, describing the schism in the MPLA as part of an “imperialist plan” to derail the Angolan nationalist movement . Neto: The schism is part of a plan to derail
 On December 21, 1973, Viktor Kulikov, the chief of the Soviet General Staff, presented a damning evaluation of Neto’s actions during the crisis . Neto's actions were criticized by the Soviet general staff .
 Neto used brute force and executed alleged plotters when confronted with criticism, Kulikov said . Instead of understanding the causes behind the crisis, he said, Neto tried to use brute force .
 When majority of guerrillas in the Zambian base camps rebelled in August 1973, Neto responded by cutting supplies . Neto cut supplies after the majority of the base camps revolted against him .
 The outcome of all these mistakes, concluded Kulikovy, was the almost complete cessation of MPLA military operations . The outcome was the end of the MPLA operations .
 The military adopted Chipenda’s version of the crisis, but the KGB might have seen the conflict differently . Although the military adopted the military's version, the KGB may have seen it differently .
 Neto's first KGB contact from Zaire in the early 1960s, Oleg Nazhestkin, recalled that he and his superiors never trusted Chipenda . Neto’s first KGB . contact from . Zaire . in the 1960s .
 Another piece of evidence comes from Marga Holness, a British activist who worked as Neto's interpreter in Dar es Salam .
 Around the time of Chipenda’s revolt, she was approached by an official she recognized as a Soviet embassy staff member in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania .
 The man told her that he did not share the views of the Soviet embassy in Zambia . The man said he was not satisfied with the view of the embassy .
 It is impossible to discern if the official was a KGB officer . Unfortunately, it is impossible for the said official to be an official from Russia .
 A highly negative view of Neto might have been perpetuated by the Soviet embassy in Zambia . GRU’s Vladimir Bezukladnikov, a World War II veteran who served as the counsellor at the embassy in Lusaka, may have been behind the
 The suspension of assistance came unexpectedly to Neto Neto . Neto was suspended from his job at the start of the year .
 He argued that the Soviets followed the conclusion reached by the Zambian authorities, who were prejudiced in Chipenda’s favor .
 Soviet financial assistance was the primary source of cash for the organization, and therefore the termination of aid was putting the organization in an extremely difficult position .
 Since the mid-1960s, the Soviets believed Neto’s dictatorial leadership style and reliance on mesticos was preventing the organization from fully connecting with rank-and-file recruits across Angola .
 The MPLA was elitist and non-representative of all ethnicities, they believed, which prevented substantial progress in the guerrilla campaign . They believed that the MPLA did not represent any ethnicities .
 The Soviet military and the International Department saw Neto’s conflict with Daniel Chipenda in the same light . Neto and Chipenda were both involved in the conflict .
 To them, Chipenda represented the Ovimbundu and a chance to make the MPLA genuinely popular in the southeast . Chipenda is a former MPLA member .
 By suspending assistance, the Soviets wanted to put pressure on Neto to come to an accommodation with Chipenda . Neto has been accused of corruption in the past by the government .
 As 1974 approached, the Angolan nationalist movement was deeply divided, and Portuguese pressure seemed to have worked . The Angolan nationalists were deeply divided .
 Arriaga vowed to crush the insurgency by the end of the year . Arriaga was a strong supporter of the dictatorship and a three-star general when he arrived in 1970 .
 Operagéo Né Gérdio was to strike FRELIMO’s Cabo Delgado province in northern Mozambique province . The offensive was to cut supply links with Tanzania, supported by heavy bombardment . Operation was to attack the country's capital, capital
 Arriaga’s offensives pushed the guerrillas out of Cabo Delgado, but it failed to end the war . Arriaga: “I’m not going to give up, but I’ll never give up. I want to keep fighting
 Guerrillas did not directly engage the armed forces but fled to the bush . The guerrillas were not directly engaged in the conflict with the military .
 FRELIMO also started to build new bases along the Zambian border, moving from Cabo Delgado to Tete province . Frelimo also moved to Cabo delgado from Tete to Tede province .
 Lisbon cancels all further offensives because of spiraling costs and mounting casualties . Lisbon has been hit hard by the cost of fighting in recent years . Portugal's military has canceled all further operations because of the costs and casualties .
 Arriaga reinforced the deployment of African troops in Grupos Especiais . Then, Arriaga created units of African commandos in the local security service . Arriaga: "African commandos" are now in charge of local security forces .
 The bombing raids were devastating for the local population, but FRELIMO managed to survive and adapt . The bombings were devastating but Frelimo survived .
 Samora Machel realized he needed a more significant commitment from international patrons to overcome the effects of Arriaga’s offensives . Machel, who was now firmly in charge of FRELIMO, realized that he needed more support .
 In the summer of 1971, Machel left for a tour of Eastern Europe, the USSR, and China . Machel toured China, Russia, and Eastern Europe .
 FRELIMO leadership had long been dissatisfied with the extent of the Soviet commitment . Frelimo leadership was unhappy with the commitment of Soviet commitment to the country .
 Machel took part in the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the CPSU, held from March 30 to April 9 . The real purpose of Machel’s trip was to obtain modern arms .
 Machel’s close associate, Sérgio Vieira, recalled that Machel complained to General Kulikov that FRELIMO had not received any of the modern arms on display in Moscow . Vieira: Machel's close associate recalled that he had complained that F
 The Soviets had a complicated view of FRELIMO’s new president, his close relationship with Janet Mondlane, and what they believed was his “pro-Chinese” stance . The Soviets believed the president was pro-Chinese .
 Machel was eager to play Moscow against Beijing in a bidding war for more aid . As the Soviets frequently observed, Machel often observed, the Soviets often observed . Machel wanted to play Beijing against Moscow in a bid to get more aid from Moscow .
 Guerrillas managed to subvert the construction of the important Cabora Bassa project . The guerrillas achieved some military successes in Cabo Delgado, Niassa, and Tete provinces in 1972 .
 The introduction of modern Soviet weapons systems into FRELIMO's arsenal would dominate the USSR’s relations with Machel for the remainder of the war . The introduction to modern weapons systems dominated the USSR's relations with Frelimo .
 Soviet arms experts were dispatched to a camp near Arusha in Tanzania to provide training on the spot . The operation to introduce the weapons meant that Soviet weapons experts had to be dispatched to the camp .
 FRELIMO recruits were also selected to receive specialized training in the Soviet Union . A group of Frelimo recruits was also selected for specialized training .
 In a conversation with Ambassador Ustinov on June 20, 1972, in Dar es Salaam, Machel emphasized that FRELIMO was betting on the new weapon, which they hoped to use against Portuguese tanks in Tete province . Machel: "FRELIM
 These instructors effectively passed on advanced skills quickly, unlike those in the Soviet Union, who wasted a lot of time teaching the men how to operate rudimentary weapons .
 Grad-P should be limited to only classes, including political ones, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "All the other classes" should be focused on learning how to operate Grad P.
 The Soviets also supported FRELIMO’s campaign to attract international attention to Portuguese conduct during the colonial war in Mozambique .
 On July 10, 1973, The Times in London published an article detailing a massacre perpetrated by the Portuguese army in Wiriyamu, a collection of villages in Central Tete province . The article was published by a British priest named Adrian Hastings .
 In 1972, the Portuguese discovered that FRELIMO men and supplies were coming through Wiriyamu . The Portuguese had discovered that the Frelimo men had been coming through .
 On December 16, 1972, they launched a punitive operation, slaughtering hundreds of men, women, and children . Hundreds of men and women were killed in the attack .
 As Machel shared with Ambassador Slipchenko, the Vatican had gotten ahead of FRELIMO in publicizing the Portuguese atrocities, he said . The Vatican got ahead of the Frelimo, he added .
 Ukraine has asked Slipchenko to support several measures at the UN in order to seize the initiative . He did not want the Vatican to gain political capital . Slipchenko said he wanted to support measures at UN to seize initiative .
 The Soviets started a campaign in the press after learning about Wiriyamu .
 They also supported attempts to condemn Portugal at the U.N. at the United Nations . The Portuguese government has been accused of corruption .
 Marcelino dos Santos testified about the events in Wiriyamu at the United Nations, comparing them Nazi death camps, Sharpeville in South AF rica, and Pidjiguiti in Guinea-Bissau . Marceline dos Santos said the
 In the final years of the war, FRELIMO slowly expanded its operations south of the Zambezi River . In the last years, Frelimo slowly expanded operations south .
 FRELIMO's alliance with ZANU was more than matched by Portugal’s close relationship with Southern Rhodesia and South Africa . Portugal secretly included agreements on cooperation in fighting nationalist movements in southern Africa .
 The weapon was potentially a game-changer in the context of the colonial wars in the Portuguese colonies . It could strike much more effectively at low-flying aircraft, thus eliminating Portugal’s key advantage over the guerrillas .
 PAIGC was the first to receive Strela-2 from Moscow . As will be discussed shortly, it will be the first time they have been given the Russian-made device .
 The Soviets hoped that military technology would be the winning card in their competition with Beijing in East Africa . The Soviets wanted to use military technology to counter Beijing's influence in Africa .
 Slipchenko argued that Dar es Salaam had started to look toward closer cooperation with the Soviet Union . In a lengthy report on China’s influence in Tanzania, he argued .
 Tanzania’s disappointment with Chinese military technology and training, making the country vulnerable in its developing conflict with neighboring Uganda . Among the many reasons for this was Tanzania's disappointment with China military technology, training .
 The Tanzanians also realized that they did not have a modern air force or an anti-aerial defense system . They had to turn to the Soviet Union for the latter . Tanzanian air force and anti-air defense system were developed by Soviet Union .
 Dar es Salaam realized that the Soviet weapons supplied to the liberation movements were more effective than what China had delivered to the Tanzanian army . In addition, Dar es . Salaama realized that Soviet weapons . supplied to liberation movements was more effective .
 The Soviets stepped up their support for FRELIMO in the early 1970s . Overall, the Soviet Union stepped up its support for the country's government .
 Competition with China might have played a role, the main reason for the delivery of modern weapons was the extension of guerrilla warfare beyond the remote Cabo Delgado province .
 The Portuguese offensive was devastating for the civilian population and slowed the insurgency in northern Mozambique . FRELIMO managed to survive and solidify alliances with international patrons . Although the Portuguese offensive devastated the civilian .
 Soviets provided Mozambicans with support over its international strategy, highlighting Portuguese atrocities such as Wiriyamu . The Soviets provided the Mozambican with support .
 Most important role was as the supplier of weapons for guerrilla warfare . However, they were also suppliers of weapons to insurgents .
 The Soviets realized that by transferring military technology and providing training, they could effectively compete with rivals “on the left” such as China . In fact, the Soviets realized they could compete with China by transferring technology and training .
 In 1974, FRELIMO managed to extend its operations into the central Manica and Sofala provinces . Frelimo managed to . extend its . operations into . Manica, Sofala and Manica provinces in 1974 .
 The military stalemate with the Portuguese would only be broken in Guinea-Bissau . The Portuguese have been locked in a stalemate for more than a decade .
 Portuguese campaign against the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau was led by General Antonio de Spinola .
 He asked urgently for reinforcements, eventually building the army’s fighting capacity up to 40,000 men . This is the highest level ever for the country's army .
 Spinola sped up the Africanization of the Portuguese army . He employed up to 10,000 African commandos, many from the Fula ethnic group, to fight alongside white army officers . Spinola was also responsible for speeding up the army's Africanization .
 He also decided to abandon some forts and focused on defending only those crucial for cutting guerrillas’ supply lines to Guinea . The Guerillas have been fighting in Guinea since 2009 .
 These measures included building schools and hospitals in rural areas and providing better access to food and water . These measures include building schools, hospitals and providing access to schools .
 African farmers received improved access to credit, while loyal chiefs were given sponsored trips to Portugal and Mecca . Loyal chiefs were also given sponsorship trips to the Middle East and Portugal .
 War in Guinea-Bissau had stalled, but PAIGC managed to make some progress, such as at Madina do Boé in 1969 .
 The stalemate made Spinola increasingly impatient, and in 1970, he gambled on a bold scheme to attack the PAIGC’s headquarters in Guinea .
 The plan included sending a raiding party to free Portuguese prisoners of war held at a PAIGC detention center in Conakry and arresting Cabral and other high-ranking party members . The plan, codenamed Operacao Mar Verde, included sending out raiding party .
 They succeeded in freeing the Portuguese prisoners of war and inflicting some damage on the PAIGC’s buildings and vehicles . They succeeded .
 The men who failed to escape were questioned and quickly identified their real sponsors . However, the men who didn't escape were later identified as the sponsors of the men .
 After the attack on Conakry, Havana revived their program to train the local police force and provided additional weapons and ammunition . All at a whopping cost of $2 million .
 Cubans believed that the survival of Touré’s regime was at stake, especially since the status of the PAIGC in Guinea could be endangered in the event of a coup .
 Argiielles was the head of Décima Direccién, the special task force in charge of all Cuban military missions abroad . He was the leader of the Cuban military mission to combat terrorism .
 Guinea-Bissau war is also on Touré’s agenda . He came to discuss the new training for his militia, but the war was also on his agenda .
 Argiielles criticized Cabral for prioritising diplomacy and giving only minimal attention to military operations . During a meeting with the Soviet ambassador to Guinea, Anatolii Ratanovy, on December 17, 1971, he said Cabral prioritised diplomacy rather than military operations.
 Soviet assistance and modern weapons were being used ineffectively, argued Argiielles . Cabral did not plan for large-scale operations and limited the war to ambushes, he said .
 In his report to Moscow, Ratanov disagreed with Argiielles’s assessment . The Russian ambassador to Moscow said he was disappointed with the assessment .
 The Cubans were too critical of Cabral, relying extensively on military commanders like Vieira, Vieira . Vieira was a key military commander in the country's military .
 One reason for Cubans’ criticism, speculated Ratanoy, might be that Cabral did not want an even closer relationship with Cuba . The Cuban president is expected to take office in 2015 .
 In late 1971, a high-ranking Soviet delegation arrived in Conakry to discuss the stalemate in Guinea-Bissau . The Soviet delegation met in late 1971 to discuss a stalemate between the two countries .
 The delegation included Petr Evsiukov, the GRU’s general Ivan Plakhin, and Nikolai Tiazhev, who was recently appointed to coordinate questions related to military assistance in Guinea .
 The delegation stayed in Conakry, but also made a trip to “liberated areas” inside Guinea-Bissau . The delegation also visited ‘liberated’ areas in the country’s capital city .
 Evsiukov remembered sailing past a Portuguese military post at Guiledge, in southern Guinea-Bissau, without any precautions . In his memoirs, Evsukov recalled sailing past the Portuguese post without taking precautions .
 Evsiukov thought Portuguese inaction was "strange" Cabral explained it as a result of clandestine contacts he had with some officers among the Portuguese high command in Guinea-Bissau . Cabral said he had clandestine contacts with some of the Portuguese officers .
 New evidence suggests that Cuban criticisms of Cabral’s military strategy was on the agenda . The details of these negotiations are still unavailable .
 The specifics come from conversations between Tiazhev and members of the Cuban military mission in Guinea . The specifics of the conversations are based on conversations from members of Cuban military in Guinea.
 As Cabral’s Cuban adviser, Eduardo César, informed Tiazhev on December 31, 1971, there still existed major differences among the PAIGC leadership on military strategy . Tiazhv: "There still exists major differences"
 Some military leaders were unhappy that Cabral was mainly focused on politics and diplomacy . Cabral did not pursue a more aggressive military strategy, they say .
 Talks with the Soviet delegation, César continued, seemed to convince Cabral of the need to crush the enemy .
 Cabral argued that the FARP lacked heavy weaponry and mote assistance from the socialist countries was necessary to a renewed offensive . Still, continued César, continued Cabral, argued that FARP lacks heavy weaponry . Cabral: "Mote assistance was necessary"
 Cuban leadership realized it was “unreasonable’ to demand’ that the PAIGC engage in large-scale operations . These could lead to multiple casualties and result in a decline in morale, Tiazhev says .
 It is not clear whether the Soviet efforts to persuade the Cubans change their stance were entirely successful . It is unclear whether the efforts were ever successful .
 In May 1972, Fidel Castro stopped in Conakry on his way to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . Castro was traveling to Europe and the USSR .
 He arrived to discuss economic and military aid to Guinea as well as the war in Guinea-Bissau . He arrived in Guinea to discuss military and economic aid to the West African nation .
 Castro met with Soviet ambassador Anatolii Ratanov on May 7 . Castro had a long meeting with Ratanova . Castro was visiting the Soviet ambassador to Moscow .
 Castro was critical of Cabral’s military strategy . Castro remained critical of the military strategy, he says .
 Ratanov argued that Castro was wrong to criticize Cabral because the Cuban leader had underestimated the difficulties of the war in Guinea-Bissau .
 Ratanov was particularly aghast at Castro's suggestion that the Guineans should help by sending troops . Cabral regularly expressed anxiety about Touré’s meddling with the government of Guinea .
 Cabral shared his irritation with some Cuban advisers who wanted him to accept some “premature decisions” on military strategy . Cabral: Some Cuban advisers wanted to accept ‘premature’ decisions’ on military strategies .
 FARP was preparing for the “intensification of armed struggle,” but they still lacked anti-aerial defense . The FARP is preparing for an ‘intensified” armed struggle . They still lack anti-air defense .
 Czechoslovak-trained Otto Schacht is first from the left in the first row, holding a gun . He was the first Czech-trained officer to carry a gun in the World War II era . He is one of the most famous Czechs in the world .
 The Soviet delegation travelled to Guinea-Bissau and engaged in consultations with the PAIGC leadership in Conakry and the Cubans . The visit was part of a series of consultations between the Soviet delegation and the Cuban leadership .
 Strela complex was designed to break Portuguese aerial power in Vietnam War . The weapon could provide the solution to breaking aerial power of Portugal . It was developed in response to the threat posed by the Vietnam War.
 Amélia Araujo and her daughter Teresa stayed late at Escola Piloto on January 20, 1973 . They stayed late to learn about Cabral’s murder and the Soviet response .
 Cape Verdean Maria da Luz ‘Lilica’ Boal founded the school . It educated the children of PAIGC commanders and others selected from the interior to prepare for further education .
 Lilica Boal recalled that suddenly their meeting was interrupted by reports of “shots fired” at Miniére . The location of PAIGC headquarters in Conakry was the location of the shooting .
 After hearing about the shots, Teresa remembered that they drove off in a car with her parents in the direction of Miniére . Teresa said she and her parents drove off with her in the car with their parents in a direction . Teresa's parents were killed in the shooting .
 As they approached the location where Cabral’s house was located, they were told they could not proceed any further . Cabral was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Only eyewitness account of Cabral's murder comes from his wife, Anna Maria, as she relayed it to Soviet journalist Oleg Ignatev . The only eyewitness account we have is that Cabral was murdered in the Soviet Union .
 Ignatev happened to be in Guinea-Bissau in January 1973, covering the war for the Soviet daily Pravda. Cabral was a good friend of Cabral’s . Ignateev was a close friend of the Portuguese president .
 He rushed back to Conakry to record her version of events, published in Pravda in March 1973 .
 Cabral and Anna Maria had almost reached their apartment after returning from a reception at the Polish embassy when they noticed a group of armed men approaching their car . Cabral, Anna Maria and Cabral were almost reaching their apartment when they were attacked .
 Kani ordered Cabral to get out of his car and tried to tie him up with a piece of rope . Cabral was tied up by Kani and Kani tied him up in a rope .
 Once Cabral was dead, the assassins seized his right-hand man, Aristides Pereira, drove him to the port, threw him onto a barge, and sailed away . The assassins seized Pereira and threw him away on the barge .
 Another group of conspirators arrested other Cape Verdeans in the PAIGC leadership and incarcerated them in La Montagna prison in Conakry .
 Sékou Touré learned about the coup and ordered his soldiers to release the incarcerated PAIGC leaders and arrest the conspirators . However, the plot unraveled after the coup leader learned of the plot and ordered the release of the incarcerated leaders .
 Ratanov agreed to help and drove to the port, where a Soviet navy vessel was docked . Ratanova agreed to the help of the Soviet navy, which was in the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet captain convinced the Soviet captain to chase the vessel without official approval from Moscow . He then convinced him to chase it, and it was a risk since he was acting without approval from the Kremlin .
 Most commentators agree that the plot was the outcome of a Portuguese secret operation . The plot was likely to be the result of a secret operation by the Portuguese government .
 Portuguese secret police exploited what they saw as long-standing tensions among Cape Verdeans and Guinean-Bissauans . The Portuguese police exploited the tensions between the two countries .
 Cabral amnestied those who had been accused of plotting against the party in 1972 . Cabral was the leader of Brazil's first state-run-run government .
 Mamadou Ndjai was temporarily put in charge of security at the PAIGC headquarters . He was placed in temporary charge of the security staff at the headquarters .
 Cabral had been fired for personal misconduct but then restored to his post . Cabral believed in the rehabilitation of party members .
 Cape Verdeans are believed to have been targeted by the coup . The coup is thought to have targeted the island nation . It is not known why the coup was carried out .
 Julio de Carvalho was deployed in the south of the country when he heard the news on the radio . He was deployed to the country's south of Rio de Janeiro .
 He and another commander, Umaro Djald, immediately went out to tell the soldiers . He immediately went to tell them of the situation .
 In reality, the PAIGC faced an acute crisis in the aftermath of Cabral’s death . The death of the late Cabral was a national embarrassment for the organization . In reality it was a crisis for the organisation .
 Portuguese started to drop propaganda leaflets saying, “Cabral is dead, the war is over” Almost immediately, the Portuguese started dropping propaganda leaflets . “Almost immediately,” the Portuguese began to drop leaflets saying that Cabral was dead .
 Villages everywhere held tchur (funeral proceedings), and people were crying and saying that now the Portuguese would come and take the land . People were crying, saying that . now . now the . Portuguese would . come to the land and take it, he said .
 The Political Bureau in Conakry realized they had to convince people that Cabral’s murder did not mean an end to the struggle for independence . Cabral's murder was not the end of the struggle to become independent, the Political Bureau said .
 Pedro Pires sent radio messages and emissaries to explain that the war would continue . Aristides Pereira was still recovering from his injuries when he was injured .
 In his reports for Pravda, he emphasized Cabral’s bravery in dealing with his assassins, reinforcing his image as a slain revolutionary hero . Cabral was killed by a bomb blast in 1944 .
 Ignatev stressed that Cabral was murdered by mere criminals who worked for the Portuguese . In his commentary on Cabral's murder, Ignateev stressed that criminals were mere criminals .
 His reports were meant to help ensure the PAIGC’s success and provide support for an organization in crisis . His reports will be published in the U.S. and Canada .
 Over many years, he had developed close personal relations with many Soviet liaisons, including Evsiukov . He had developed many close personal ties with Evsiokov, including his Soviet liaison .
 Evsiukov appealed to the CC CPSU to rename a square in Moscow after Amilcar Cabral . He then appealed for a square to be renamed after Cabral in a square .
 Vladimir Shubin participated on behalf of the Soviet Solidarity Committee . He was awarded a gold medal for his role in the events in the Soviet Union .
 Soviet military feared Cabral's ouster could leave PAIGC vulnerable to outside interference . Soviet military also feared that with Cabral gone, the PAIG could be vulnerable to external interference .
 General Kulikov argued that the Guineans and the Cubans were trying to exert control over the organization .
 Guinean authorities in Conakry kept the PAIGC leadership under arrest for several days . They seized control of the warehouses and took over all communications and transport .
 Guinean soldiers join FARP to fight in Guinea-Bissau . Cabral rejected the offer because he feared the loss of autonomy .
 The Cubans were also guilty of putting pressure on Cabral for stepping up operations “at all costs” and maintained direct contact with the military leadership, the report says .
 Cabral did not allow the Cubans direct involvement in planning military operations, which caused dissatisfaction . Cabral was criticized for not allowing Cubans to direct military operations .
 Vladimir Shubin from the Soviet Solidarity Committee is third from left in the front row of the photo shoot . He was the leader of the USSR's first political party in the Soviet Union .
 Moscow provided military funding and matériel in the sum of 21. million rubles and 4. million in humanitarian aid . Between 1963 and 1973, Moscow provided 22.million rubles in military and humanitarian assistance .
 The influx of Soviet arms and the removal of all limits on the use of ammunition led to more aggressive offensive tactics . The influx led to an aggressive offensive offensive tactics against the Soviet Union .
 In the autumn of 1972, a group of twenty-four men led by Manuel “Manecas” dos Santos was selected to undergo a three-month course to learn how to operate the Stela-2 complex .
 On March 28, 1973, the PAIGC shot down the Fiat G-91 that belonged to Almeida Brito, the chief of the Portuguese air force . The plane was shot down by a Portuguese Air Force fighter jet .
 The Portuguese canceled all aerial operations after Brito’s death . The Portuguese did not expect the arrival of Strela missiles .
 A year earlier, the party had organized an election to the “National Assembly” in the so-called liberation zones . The party won an election in the liberation zones a year earlier .
 On November 2, 1973, the UN General Assembly passed a motion welcoming Guinea-Bissau's independence . The motion condemned Portugal’s continuous presence in the country . In a show of international support for the PAIGC, the motion was passed by the UN .
 By early 1974, it had become clear that the endgame in Guinea-Bissau was close . By 1974, the end of the war in Guinea was in sight .
 Contacts between the Portuguese military and the PAIGC already existed . Marcelo Caetano started looking for a way out of the war in early 1974 .
 In March 1974, a three-person mission went to London to discuss a negotiated settlement with Caetano’s envoy . The mission was to negotiate a settlement with the envoy of the Spanish president .
 The meeting, he recalled, did not go well because the Portuguese negotiators refused to discuss Cape Verde’s independence . The meeting went badly because of the Portuguese refusal to discuss the island's independence .
 This chapter shows that superpower détente and the Cold War in Africa ran along two parallel tracks . Conclusion: Détente led to a peace agreement in Africa . The Cold War ran along a parallel track in Africa, the author says .
 The International Department and the Soviet military held sway over day-to-day relations with the liberation movements . While détente negotiations were overseen by senior Soviet diplomats and Brezhnev personally .
 The Soviet military and the KGB believed that the West remained committed to countering Soviet influence in Africa . The West would not shy away from using “subversion” and sponsoring coups to maintain a strategic advantage .
 The Soviet military believed Nixon’s appeasement of white minority regimes and Portugal only confirmed the ongoing competition in the Third World . These views did not change as détente progressed, and the Soviet military did not . The views were not changed as denteente progressed .
 Since the late 1960s, the Soviet military had propagated a more active approach to guerrilla strategy . The Soviet military believed hit-and-run operations would not impact the well trained and well-equipped Portuguese army .
 By 1971, the MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC had made new plans to ramp up the intensity of attacks . They received new weapons systems such as the Grad-P and Strela-2 complexes from Moscow .
 In Guinea-Bissau, the Strela-2 complex had a particularly decisive impact on the war . The complex complex was built in the 1970s and '80s .
 The Soviets had also come to believe that the provision of advanced military technologies would play an important role in their continuing competition with China in East Africa .
 The Soviets’ personal relations with African revolutionaries were also important . The Soviets' personal relations were important to African revolutionaries .
 As viewed from Moscow, the fundamentally intra-MPLA conflict between the mestico leadership and the Ovimbundu rank-and-file was closely tied to debates about relations with the socialist countries and failures in the military field .
 Since the 1960s, the Soviets believed that under Neto, the MPLA was not representative enough of the Black majority in Angola and thus failed to achieve military progress . The Soviets believed Neto's government did not represent enough of Angola's Black majority .
 The Soviets accepted Chipenda’s version of events in 1973 and opted to suspend assistance . That is why it was unsurprising that the Soviets accepted that Chipenda had been involved .
 As of 1974, relations with the MPLA were at a new low, and the Portuguese were in the driver’s seat from a military perspective .
 These factors would prove crucial for the way events unfolded in Angola after the Carnation Revolution in Portugal in Portugal . The events would be crucial for how events unfolded .
 The Soviets’ close relationship with Cabral led to a very different reaction to military developments in Guinea-Bissau . Simultaneously, the close relationship between Cabral and the Soviet Union led to an entirely different reaction .
 The Soviet military believed the PAIGC could have carried out a much more active guerrilla campaign . As was also the case in Angola, the Soviet military thought the guerrilla campaign could have been successful .
 New evidence shows they disagreed with Havana's harsh criticism of Cabral’s strategy . Still, new evidence shows that Havana disagreed with its harsh criticism .
 Cabral engaged in a delicate and ultimately successful balancing act . Cabral argued that only Soviet military technology could make possible the necessary breakthrough against the Portuguese . In the end, Cabral was successful .
 The acquisition of Strela-2 missiles in 1973 led to a tipping point in the war . Cabral’s long-term strategy worked, the acquisition of the missiles led to an end to the conflict .
 By 1974, the PAIGC was well positioned to take advantage of any changes in Portugal . In contrast to the MPLA, by 1974, they were well positioned in Portugal's political climate .
 By 1974, the army was war weary, unwilling to keep fighting a war that increasingly looked unwinnable . The army was unable to continue to fight the war .
 In 1974, a clandestine organization known as the Armed Forces Movement emerged . The Armed Forces movement was formed in 1974 .
 The MFA was composed mainly of junior military officers who were initially dissatisfied with the army’s new system of promotions and privileges . It was composed of junior officers unhappy with the new system .
 Their agenda soon became more radical, and they started plotting a coup to overthrow the dictatorship . The coup was planned by the rebels, who wanted to oust the government .
 General Anténio de Spinola returned to Portugal in September 1973 . He was exhausted with the war in Guinea-Bissau .
 Portugal eo futuro was written in 1961 when Salazar blamed the military for the loss of Portuguese India . He spent months writing a book in which he described a negotiated solution to the colonial wars .
 The MFA seized all the key strategic locations in Lisbon, including radio and television stations, the airport, and bridges . First, the government seized radio and TV stations, and the airport .
 detachments loyal to the MFA rolled into the capital, encountering little resistance . Once the first stage of the coup was complete, detachments were able to roll into the city .
 Prime Minister Marcelo Caetano had fled to the Carmo barracks, the headquarters of the National Republican Guard . The prime minister is believed to be in hiding in the barracks .
 The MFA surrounded the barracks, and after several hours of negotiation, Caetano agreed to surrender to General Anténio de Spinola . After several hours, the general agreed to give up .
 Crowds swamped the city, festooning soldiers with red carnations . Meanwhile, jubilant crowds swamped streets of the capital .
 On April 25, the MFA Coordinating Committee appointed the Junta of National Salvation, which abolished censorship and freed political prisoners . The Junta has abolished censorship, freed prisoners and freed prisoners .
 In May, Portugal established the first Portuguese provisional government, comprised of a broad coalition of political parties . Portugal's first provisional government was established in May by a coalition of parties .
 The MFA Coordinating Committee preferred quick transfers of power to the liberation movements . The committee prefers quick transfer of power from the liberation movement .
 Lisbon struck deals to transfer control to the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau and to FRELIMO in Mozambique . In 1974, Lisbon struck a deal with the Frelimo to take control of Guinea Bissau . Lisbon also struck deals with FREL
 In Angola, the liberation movement was split between three nationalist organizations . The FNLA, MPLA, and UNITA relied on regional allies and international donors .
 In January 1975, the Portuguese negotiated a power-sharing agreement between the three movements with independence set for November 11, 1975 . The Portuguese negotiated the agreement in January 1975 .
 This chapter argues that the Soviet response to decolonization was more significantly shaped by the evolution of events in Portugal than previously thought . The Soviet response was more significant shaped by events in the Portugal than thought, it argues .
 The Soviets saw events in Portugal and its colonies in ideological terms . Portugal was one of the most important colonies in the world .
 The leader of the Portuguese Communists, Alvaro Cunhal, was appointed minister without portfolio in the first provisional government . Shortly after the coup, he returned to Lisbon to a hero's welcome .
 The Soviets believed that these developments signified a major victory for the so-called progressive forces, but they were also anxious about a counter-coup in Portugal . The Soviet Union was anxious that a counter coup in Portugal could take place .
 To bolster Cunhal’s position, the Soviets established diplomatic relations with Portugal and urged liberation movements to moderate their pressure on Lisbon during decolonization talks .
 Moscow denied aid to Neto and pushed for the unification of various MPLA factions in the aftermath of the coup in Lisbon . It has already been established that Moscow .
 New evidence shows why the Soviets resumed military assistance to the MPLA by January 1975 . The MPLA had been fighting for independence from Angola since April 1968 .
 It details how Agostinho Neto lobbied the Soviets, arguing his close connections to the MFA made him the clear candidate for the top job in independent Angola . Neto was the leader of Angola's first independent government .
 The Soviets decided to restore military support for the MPLA because they perceived events in Luanda as part of an international conspiracy backed by Zaire and the United States . They believed Soviet arms could maintain the military equilibrium .
 The Portuguese hoped the Portuguese could ensure relative peace in Angola before independence . An escalation of armed clashes between MPLA and FNLA loyalists in the spring of 1975 shook their confidence in a diplomatic solution .
 Documents provide the details of the Soviet decision to arm the MPLA and the logistics of arms transfers via Congo-Brazzaville . The new documents provide the . details . of the . logistics of the arms transfers .
 Records also confirm that Soviet cooperation with the Cubans in Angola was minimal until independence was announced on November 11 .
 On the one hand, many rejoiced that now, at last, negotiations and peace might be possible . On the other hand, some said they were relieved at the prospect of peace .
 Mateus Oscar Kido was in training at Perevalnoe when he heard the news about the fall of the dictatorship . The Mozambican was training at the time of the coup .
 The PAIGC responded with a propaganda drive and other mobilizational measures to demonstrate strength . Since uncertainty was high, the PAIGc responded with propaganda drive .
 The organization invited its close allies to establish formal diplomatic relations . In April, the organization invited close allies into formal diplomatic ties . The move was welcomed by Russia and the United States .
 The PAIGC also began rallying support among population in the urban areas, de facto taking over the towns in Guinea-Bissau . The government has also begun rallying support for the people in urban areas .
 Cape Verdeans in the PAIGC were particularly concerned about the status of the archipelago since there had been no fighting there . Cape Verdescoans were concerned about their status as they were worried about the situation .
 They thus started to organize their supporters and ferried arms to the islands . They thus began to organize supporters . They began to ferry arms to islands .
 The MFA manifesto on decolonization, published on April 26, 1974, urged ‘peace’ and ‘dialogue’ to obtain a “political rather than military solution” in the colonies . There were no direct references to self-determination .
 The appointment of General Spinola as president of Portugal was also a source of mistrust . The Portuguese government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Spinola had criticized Caetano’s colonial policy, but he preferred moderate political change . Spinola pushed for a referendum to decide the future relationship with the colonies .
 Spinola’s agenda shaped the Portuguese negotiating position . Foreign minister Mario Soares began talks with the PAIGC in May . Spinola's agenda shaped negotiations between the two sides .
 Portuguese negotiators refused to accept self-determination for Cape Verde, which was fundamental to the PAIGC’s binational project . Second, the Portuguese negotiators . refused to . accept self determination for Cape . Verde . It is the first time the Portuguese government has refused to
 Portuguese offer to hold a referendum on Guinea-Bissau's future . Portugal has not agreed to hold referendum on the future of Guinea Bissau . The Portuguese government has ruled out the referendum .
 The PAIGC’s tough negotiating stance was reinforced when the OAU called on the liberation movements not to accept a ceasefire before Portugal committed to independence . The OAU has called for the liberation movement not to take part in a ceasefire until Portugal commits to independence.
 Realizing that his position was unworkable, Mario Soares flew to Lisbon in the middle of negotiations, trying to persuade Spinola to be more accommodating . Soares flies to Lisbon to try and convince Spinola that he is willing to accept a deal .
 Spinola launched a diplomatic offensive to gain support for his decolonization strategy . However, the president refused, and talks broke down on June 14’ Spinola then launched an offensive .
 He tried to convince the British government to support his referendum plan . He approached Senegal’s president Léopold Senghor, who promised to try to sway the PAIGC leadership .
 Spinola tried to get the president to publicly back his plan in a meeting with Richard Nixon in the Azores in June . Spinola's plan was rejected by the United States president Richard Nixon .
 He argued that the Soviets were responsible for the breakdown of talks because they wanted to establish military bases in Cape Verde . He warned Nixon about the threat of communism in Portugal .
 The Carnation Revolution offered the prospects of a revolutionary transformation in Portugal . On the one hand, the Carnation revolution offered the prospect of a revolution in Portugal, but on the other hand, it was not revolutionary .
 The PCP had dominated the underground resistance against the dictatorship, thus acquiring many followers among the professional middle class, the army, and the workers . The party had dominated underground resistance to the dictatorship .
 The PCP remained highly insecure, fearing a right-wing counter-coup in Portugal . On the other hand, the PCP remains highly insecure . The Portuguese party is worried about a possible counter coup .
 As a member of the first provisional government, Cunhal adopted a moderate position . He was the first prime minister of the provisional government .
 PCP urged restraint in labor disputes and compromised on the minimum wage . The PCP is hoping to cement an alliance with the urban middle class .
 The Soviets wanted to reinforce Cunhal’s position in the provisional government, which precluded them from putting excessive pressure on Lisbon over decolonization . The Soviets also wanted to keep Portugal under control .
 On June 4, the PCP advised the Soviets against establishing formal diplomatic relations with Portugal . The PCP also advised the Soviet Union against establishing diplomatic relations between Portugal .
 The PCP recommended that Moscow establish diplomatic relations with Portugal as soon as possible . However, only days later, the PCP said that relations should be resumed .
 Cunhal believed that by acting as intermediaries with Moscow, the PCP could solidify their position within the provisional government . The request had come directly from Spinola, the request had been made by Spinola .
 The USSR launched formal diplomatic relations with Portugal only four days later, on June 10, 1974 . Portugal became the first country to have diplomatic relations between the USSR and Portugal .
 The Soviet decision revealed a clash of priorities with the liberation movements, which wanted to maintain constant pressure on Lisbon . The decision was revealed in a clash between the Soviet and Lisbon .
 In July, Petr Manchkha and Andrei Urnov from the International Department went to Dar es Salaam for informal talks .
 FRELIMO’s president Samora Machel criticized the Soviets for establishing diplomatic relations with Portugal . Machel argued it could negatively affect the ongoing negotiations .
 The guerrilla campaign played a significant role in the collapse of the dictatorship, argued Machel . Machel argued that there were no positive results from the coup . The coup was a failed coup, he said .
 Despite this rocky start, domestic developments in Portugal favored the agenda of the liberation movements . Despite this, the liberation movement was largely successful in Portugal .
 On July 8, the first provisional government led by Palma Carlos resigned . The government has been in power since July 8 .
 Gongalves was a key figure in the MFA, and his appointment was deemed a leftist victory . He was close to Cunhal, and was appointed as a minister of state in 2010 . His appointment was seen as a left-leaning victory .
 One of the key architects of the MFA’s decolonization policy, Major Melo Antunes, became the minister responsible for decolonizing . In addition to the key architect of the policy, one of the . key architects became the Minister of Decolonization .
 On July 27, the MFA Coordinating Committee forced Spinola to sign Constitutional Law 7/74 . The law recognized the right to selfdetermination for the colonies .
 UN secretary-general Kurt Waldheim to visit Portugal to discuss decolonization . Waldheim's visit paved the way for the visit to Portugal to decolonize Portugal .
 In August, Mario Soares resumed talks with the PAIGC in Algiers, quickly reaching a settlement and an agreement on the withdrawal of troops . In September, Soares agreed to pull troops out of the country .
 Guinea-Bissau became an independent country under the PAIGC government on September 10 . The future of Cape Verde would be settled in a referendum on the future of the country .
 Mario Soares then turned his attention to the settlement in Mozambique . Soares says he is proud of his efforts to help the people in the country .
 After talks with Samora Machel in Dar es Salaam in mid-August, Soares changed course . Soares talks with Machel ended after talks with Soares .
 On September 7, the Portuguese announced an agreement to form a provisional government that would govern during a transition period . Full independence set for June 25, 1975 .
 FRELIMO would assume the dominant role in the provisional government, paving the way for single-party rule after the proclamation of independence in 1975 . In 1975, independence was proclaimed .
 Negotiations for the independence of Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique took place in record time after an initial delay . Guinea Bissau is the only African nation to have achieved independence in the past .
 The main reason behind the quick transfers of power was the stance of the MFA Coordinating Committee, which favored rapid decolonization . MFA's stance was that of the committee, which favors rapid decoloration .
 Although General Spinola claimed the Soviets wanted to derail the process, the opposite was the case . The Soviets did not want to derail it, according to the general . The U.S. was forced to withdraw from the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Moscow viewed developments in Portugal through the lens of the PCP priorities . Moscow urged accommodation between liberation movements and the provisional government .
 Their strategy did not align with that of the independence leaders, and thus the Soviets had limited influence over the negotiating process . Their strategy was not aligned with the leaders of independence leaders .
 The early stage of decolonization conveyed important lessons to the leadership of the liberation movements, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Decolonization was a very difficult time to learn from the early stages of decolonialization"
 Lisbon was willing to negotiate quick transfers of power, especially after Vasco Gongalves became the prime minister . The first lesson was that Lisbon was indeed willing to . Lisbon is now a more stable place in the world .
 The one obstacle to speedy decolonization was General Anténio de Spinola . General Spinola was one of the obstacles to the rapid decolonisation of the Americas .
 In September, Angola's president announced he was taking charge of the transition in Angola personally . He remained unhappy with the outcome of the talks, and announced that he would take charge personally . In September he called on the "silent majority" to support his policies .
 On September 30, after two days of unrest in the capital, Spinola resigned . Spinola was forced to resign after the unrest .
 His replacement, General Costa Gomes, announced the government would immediately proceed with decolonization in Angola . His replacement has announced that the government will immediately proceed .
 The liberation movements believed the threat to resume hostilities sped up the negotiating process and excluded potential local rivals . The liberation movement believed that the threat of a return to hostilities increased the negotiations .
 All three appealed to regional and international donors to reinforce their bids for a dominant position in Angola . Shortly after the coup in Lisbon, all three appealed .
 A violent outcome was neither predetermined nor predictable from the perspective of 1974 . These rivalries would make a peaceful transition increasingly challenging to achieve, but a peaceful outcome was not predictable .
 The Search for Unity in Angola, April 1974-January 1975 . The revolution in Portugal led to new attempts to unite the Angolan nationalist movement . The search for unity in Angola began in 1974 .
 In July 1974, Agostino Neto, Holden Roberto, and Jonas Savimbi met in Bukavu, Zaire, and pledged to act as a common front in negotiations with the Portuguese .
 Marien Ngouabi of Congo-Brazzaville, Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, Joseph-Désiré Mobutu of Zaire, and Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, were all assassinated .
 Kaunda favored Savimbi’s UNITA and was also sheltering Daniel Chipenda and his Eastern Revolt faction in Zambia . The former President of Zambia, who was in charge of the UNITa, was also a key figure in the Savim
 Mobutu had been a long-time supporter of Holden Roberto, and soon after the revolution in Portugal, he began to build up the FNLA’s military wing .
 Active Revolt is an MPLA splinter group based in Brazzaville and led by the MPLA’s former president, Mario Pinto de Andrade, and his brother Joaquim .
 Mobutu and Ngouabi courted the leaders of FLEC, the Cabindan separatist movement . Both had their eyes on the oil-rich Cabinda enclave and courted leaders .
 A constellation of conflicting interests would not bode well for unity in the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Neto's top priority was to restore Soviet support, which had been suspended in early 1974 due to his conflict with Chipenda . Neto’s top priority in 1974 was restoring Soviet support after conflict with the Soviets .
 We do not know the exact wording of the Soviet response, but Moscow did give a modicum of reassurance . Moscow did not comment on the issue, but it did give the Russians reassurance.
 Neto spoke to the Soviet ambassador to Brazzaville Evgenii Afanasenko on June 8 . Neto expressed gratitude for the Soviets’ response and their trust in him personally .
 The International Department was still committed to putting pressure on Neto to reconcile with Chipenda before resuming support . Neto's government has not yet resumed its support for Chipenda .
 Chipenda argued Neto’s unwillingness to compromise with the opposition had already alienated Kaunda and Nyerere . In a meeting with the Soviet ambassador in Zambia Dmitrii Belokolos on May 6, Chipenda said .
 The MPLA Congress finally opened near Lusaka on August 12, but it failed to achieve unity . MPLA congress failed to reach unity, but the party was united by its unity .
 Members loyal to Agostinho Neto insisted the delegates confirm him as the MPLA’s president . During the first week of the conflict, the conflict became apparent .
 When one of Chipenda’s supporters openly proclaimed his loyalty to the FNLA, Neto and his followers withdrew from the meeting . Neto announced they would hold their own congress inside Angola .
 Zambian authorities say they would “lock the border” if Neto goes forward with the plan . Neto's plan was rejected by the Zambian government . Zambian officials have threatened to block the border if he goes ahead .
 Kaunda, Ngouabi, and Nyerere tried to broker an agreement between Neto and Chipenda . Then, they tried to negotiate a deal between the two countries .
 Neto reached a compromise, appointing himself as president and Chipenda and Mario de Andrade as vice-presidents in the new Central Committee . Neto agreed to the compromise on September 3 .
 In September, Chipenda moved to Kinshasa (formerly Léopoldville), where he formed a tentative alliance with Holden Roberto .
 In late September, Neto held a new regional conference in southeast Angola . Neto has been in charge of Angola since 2003 .
 One of Neto's regular contacts in Brazzaville was Boris Putilin, aGRU officer who had arrived in the country a year earlier to liaise with the MPLA’ leadership .
 Chipenda’s group was “compromised” once they started to cooperate with the FNLA and Mobutu, a diplomat says . Putilin told a Polish diplomat, Chipenda's group is ‘compromized’ once they cooperated with
 Another major factor in the change in Soviet attitudes was the MFA’s support for Neto . Neto was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 MFA Coordinating Committee appointed one of their own, Admiral Anténio Alva Rosa Coutinho, as the new governor-general of Angola in July .
 Coutinho liked the MPLA for their explicitly nonracist ideology . He believed they enjoyed broad support among the Angolan bureaucracy and intelligentsia . Coutinho believed they had broad support in Angola's bureaucracy and intellectuals .
 Neto presented himself as the MFA’s preferred partner during the transition . Neto has been in charge of Angola's national football team since 2007 .
 Neto flaunted his backchannel communications with Mario Soares and close contacts with the Portuguese Communists . In conversations with Manchkha, Urnov, and Soviet ambassador Sergei Slipchenko in Dar es Salaam in July, Neto said .
 The newly released documents reveal that Neto claimed to have struck a secret deal with the MFA that guaranteed him wide-ranging Portuguese support on the ground in Angola during the transition . Neto said he struck a deal with MFA to guarantee him support in Angola .
 On December 1, 1974, Neto met ambassador Slipchenko for lunch in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania .
 MPLA and MFA struck secret agreement to coordinate their policies and prevent FNLA from coming to power in talks with Portuguese delegation in Algeria . Neto revealed that the agreement had been struck to prevent the FNLA becoming a power bloc .
 The president of Congo-Brazzaville, Marien Ngouabi, is also apparently on board with the plan . The plan was approved by the Congolese president of the Republic of Congo .
 In late December, MPLA defense minister Iko Carreira and Pedro van Dunem arrived in Moscow for talks . MPLA has been in talks with Russia since December .
 MPLA had entered into an alliance with the MFA, but the FNLA held a much stronger military position and could seize power by force . Carreira: MPLA entered into alliance with MFA but FNLA is stronger military force and can seize power .
 The implication was that to overcome the MPLA’s vulnerability, Soviet assistance was crucial . The MPLA's vulnerability was crucial to overcome it, the implication was .
 Soviet journalist Oleg Ignatev visited Luanda in September 1974 . He was in Luanda at the time of the visit .
 Holden Roberto has been building up his armed forces in Angola . 3,000 of his soldiers have already entered northern Angola, he said .
 The timing of the decision to resume aid to the MPLA was on the Soviet agenda if not fully finalized by that point . The timing reveals the decision was made by the Soviet Union in the fall .
 In late January 1975, Afanasenko spoke to Ngouabi again, seeking approval of the decision . The decision was made in a bid to secure the agreement .
 Having received Ngouabi’s approval, Afanasenko could inform the MPLA about the resumption of Soviet military assistance . The MPLA has never been involved in the conflict in the past .
 On January 30, 1975, Afanasenko relayed to José Eduardo dos Santos the Soviet decision to deliver weapons and war matériel to the MPLA via Congo-Brazzaville .
 Around twenty to thirty underwent a crash training course at the famous ‘Vystrel’ Higher Officer courses . Another approximately two hundred men would be dispatched to Perevalnoe in Soviet Crimea .
 These men would constitute the so-called Ninth Brigade of the FAPLA . They would later play an important role in countering FNLA attacks on Luanda .
 The CC CPSU Politburo initially only agreed to provide “political and some material support for the MPLA” but refused to become militarily entangled in Angola . Georgii Kornienko, then the head of the Africa desk at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, recalled
 The International Department drafted a resolution to give the MPLA a limited number of weapons . However, only a few days later, Kornienko recalled, the resolution was drafted .
 Kornienko was worried that the escalation of support could jeopardize arms limitation talks with the United States . He tried to persuade the foreign minister Andrei Gromyko not to endorse the resolution . The resolution was passed in a vote in Moscow .
 Gromyko still signed, grudgingly, since support for the liberation movements was the realm of Boris Ponomarey, the head of the International Department . Grobotko signed the agreement, but signed it gruellingly . Gropomarey was the head
 By the end of January 1975, the Soviets had recommitted to Agostinho Neto’s MPLA for three main reasons . The MPLA was one of the last bastions of the Soviet Union in Angola .
 The Soviets felt that Mobutu represented U.S. imperialism and thus Moscow saw Chipenda’s move as a betrayal .
 In contrast, Neto emerged as the key partner for negotiations with the Portuguese . Neto emerges as a key partner in negotiations with Portugal .
 Neto claimed he enjoyed a clandestine relationship with the MFA, which would ensure a quick transition to MPLA control in Angola . As the new documents reveal, Neto said he had a special clandestine relationship .
 Only a military challenge by the FNLA, backed by Zaire and the United States, could prevent such an outcome . Zaire, the U.S. and Zaire backed by the United Nations could prevent the outcome .
 Neto’s interpretation of events matched that of the Soviets, who saw developments in Angola and Portugal through an ideological lens . Neto: “The Portuguese government was in charge of Angola, Portugal and Angola in the early 1950s .
 It took Moscow nine months to renew military support for the MPLA, testifying to ongoing distrust of Neto . Still, it took Moscow to renew support for Neto, possibly an unwillingness to damage the détente with the United States .
 The MPLA and the Soviets still believed the transition to independence could be peaceful . However, the MPLA believed that the transition would be a peaceful process .
 President Barack Obama's first term in office would be the next six months . That perception would change in the course of the year .
 On January 15, the Portuguese government, Agostinho Neto, Jonas Savimbi, and Holden Roberto signed the Alvor Agreement outlining the transition to independence in Angola . The Portuguese government signed the agreement in 1975 .
 The transitional government would be run jointly by the Portuguese high commissioner and a three-person presidential council . The three organizations would form a transitional government, which would run jointly .
 Elections would be held in October with de jure independence to follow on November 11, 1975 . Elections would take place in October, 1975, followed by de facto independence .
 The agreement also called for the creation of a mixed military force to compensate for the withdrawal of Portuguese troops .
 The Alvor Agreement did not limit the number of troops the liberation movements were allowed to maintain outside the joint military force . However, the Alvor agreement was not agreed to limit the amount of troops maintained by liberation movements .
 MPLA, FNLA and UNITA were allowed to maintain separate barracks and installations in the city . In addition, MPLA and FNLA also allowed to keep separate barracks .
 MPLA and FNLA continued to increase their number of loyal soldiers in Luanda . Asa result, the MPLA has increased their numbers of loyal troops .
 In private conversations with the Cubans, Neto expressed dissatisfaction with the Alvor Agreement . He conceded that he accepted power-sharing due to the “growing influence of the FNLA and UNITA in Angola’s Angola, he said .
 The violence on the streets of Luanda had been festering since November 1974 . The violence was the first to occur in Luanda since the war .
 In the city, the FNLA had been amassing stocks of weapons, which could be easily transported from Zaire via northern Angola, and assembling men . The FNLA has been assembling men in the city .
 Admiral Rosa Coutinho, Agostinho Neto, Francisco da Costa Gomes, Holden Roberto, Jonas Savibi and Mario Soares are all set to play for the national team .
 Crowds cheered when Neto’s right-hand man Lucio Lara arrived in the capital on November 8 . MPLA established its headquarters in the city, with crowds cheering when he arrived .
 U.S. consul general in Luanda reported the first violent outburst in the city, which left fifty dead and a hundred wounded . Shortly afterward, Tom Killoran, the United States . Killoran reported that 50 people were killed and 100 wounded .
 On January 25, the FNLA kidnapped and assaulted the deputy director of a local radio station, whom they believed was an MPLA sympathizer . The station's deputy director was believed to be a sympathizer of the MPLA .
 The MPLA invited representatives of the socialist countries to visit Luanda . To showcase support for Neto in anticipation of his return .
 The head of the Soviet delegation was Aleksandr Dzasokhov, the general secretary of the . Soviet Solidarity Committee . The delegation was held in Moscow .
 In meetings with representatives of the socialist countries around the same time, the MPLA president highlighted the FNLA’s military dominance . Although the available records do not tell us about the contents of the talks with Dzasokhov .
 MPLA leadership argued that the FNLA had already smuggled well-trained guerrilla units into Luanda . FNLA would liquidate their competition unless they encountered a resolute response .
 The MPLA required weapons, cash, and means of transportation to safeguard the coastline and move arms from Cabinda and Congo-Brazzaville to Luanda . MPLA thus required weapons and cash to move arms .
 Neto also urged the socialist countries to open consulates in Luanda for ease of communications . Neto: "I want to see how easy it is to communicate with the people of Angola"
 The KGB reported that the FNLA continued to strengthen its military in the capital . “Air Zaire” delivered large arms shipments to Angola, the KGB reported .
 Jonas Savimbi’s endgame was less clear when the MPLA was ousted from Luanda . The FNLA provided an explicit and increasingly violent challenge to the MPla .
 UNITA had only 1,500 trained soldiers in 1974 . Savimbi had been building support in Ovimbundu-dominated southeast Angola since the late 1960s .
 In July, Afrique-Asie published documents revealing UNITA collaborated with the Portuguese military to wipe out the MPLA in southeast Angola in 1972 . The documents were published in July by a Paris-based magazine .
 Savimbi denounced the documents as forgeries, but they were genuine . They were most likely leaked by MPLA supporters in the Portuguese military . The documents were probably leaked by supporters of the MPLA .
 New documents reveal Savimbi approached President Marien Ngouabi and warned of Zaire's plan to intervene militarily in Angola . Plan would start with Chipenda's followers attacking Neto's in Luanda, documents reveal .
 Savimbi’s balancing act was characteristic of his balancing act . Although we do not know if Mobutu actually entertained any such plans at that point, the message was characteristic .
 Ngouabi favored an MPLA-UNITA alliance . The idea was appealing to Joaquim Pinto de Andrade, the leader of the MPLA’s Active Revolt faction, who was close to Brazzaville .
 Savimbi’s backchannel communications might have reinforced the specter of a possible showdown between the MPLA and FNLA in Luanda . In the meantime, a possible clash between the FNLA and MPLA is unlikely .
 Neto’s return to Luanda and talk of a Zairean intervention led to a more aggressive MPLA strategy to build up its presence in the capital .
 They organized ‘popular power’ and ‘neighborhood’ committees in the suburbs of Luanda . They organized "popular power" committees in Luanda suburbs .
 In February, the MPLA launched a military operation to dislodge Chipenda’s faction from the capital . Chipenda's faction has been fighting for independence in the past .
 In that particular incident, FNLA patrols stopped trucks allegedly carrying MPLA soldiers and civilians on the road from Luanda to Caxito . Soldiers and civilians were allegedly carrying soldiers, civilians .
 Despite the rising violence, MPLA leaders believed that with the arrival of Soviet arms, they could avoid a full-blown civil war . Despite the rise of violence, the MPLA leader said he hoped to avoid a war .
 Iko Carreira and José Eduardo dos Santos shared that the timely arrival of Soviet weapons on March 18 had allowed the MPLA to counter the FNLA’s attempts to surround their barracks in Luanda . The MPLA and FNLA were fighting for independence against the FN
 The pair argued that a military confrontation with the FNLA was probably “inevitable,” but open civil war would not begin until the declaration of independence on November 11 . The pair said the conflict would not start until independence declaration is declared .
 Ina report from March 28, Uvarov argued that the Alvor Agreement did little to resolve disagreements among the competing nationalist organizations because of its very distinctive approaches to Angola's future .
 The FNLA was a proxy for the United States, which was trying to establish several areas as “buffers” against the spread of the MPLA’s “communist’ ideas and influence . U.S. tried to establish areas as "buffers
 The Portuguese stood no chance of having any economic influence in Angola if the FNLA came to power . The Portuguese, in general, supported the MPLA because they were not likely to have economic influence .
 The Portuguese military presence also contributed to peace in the country . It was unlikely that significant fighting between the MPLA and FNLA would occur before elections in October 1975 .
 These predictions of a relatively peaceful transition would soon change . These predictions were soon changed .
 A violent conflict between the supporters of the MPLA and FNLA once again erupted in Luanda . The violence occurred on the eve of Labor Day celebrations .
 On April 28, heavy mortar and machine-gun fire started at night in the city’s poverty-stricken areas . Heavy mortar and gun fire started on April 28 in the area . The attack was the first to hit the area in years .
 The following day, fighting spread into the European sector when MPLA forces launched an attack on the headquarters of the Angolan militia, which the FNLA had recently occupied . The MPLA launched the attack in the European part of the country .
 The fighting caused multiple casualties and appeals for blood donors were issued over the radio . The fighting was reported to have started at the start of the day .
 Tom Killoran reported to Kissinger that violence had been instigated by the MPLA . The MPLA wanted to start a “bloodbath” during the May Day parade, which would give them an excuse for a coup d’état, Kissinger said .
 The experience of violence in Luanda seemed to be a key turning point for the Soviets . The experience was a turning point in the Soviets' decision to invade Angola .
 All rallies were canceled due to the escalation of violence, an airport clerk said . The airport clerk informed them that all rallies had been canceled .
 They spent the night on the floor of their hotel, keeping away from the windows to avoid stray bullets . The hotel guests were able to sleep in their hotel after the shooting .
 The following morning, they spoke to Agostinho Neto, who informed them that armed action was the only way forward because of the FNLA’s recurrent provocations, they said .
 The Soviet delegation submitted a lengthy report, arguing that armed conflict was inevitable, especially after the departure of the Portuguese . Back in Moscow, the Soviet delegation said armed conflict would be inevitable . The Soviet government responded to the report with a lengthy response .
 On June 12, another load of arms for the MPLA docked at Pointe-Noire aboard the Soviet trawler Captain Anistratenko .
 Petr Manchkha argued in a closed session of the Soviet Solidarity Committee on June 5, 1975, events in Angola were part of a “serious international imperialist conspiracy” that involved “imperialist circles” striking out against the Soviet Union in Africa .
 The Soviet Union had invested “enormous material resources” in the MPLA, he said . These resources should not have been expended in vain, he added .
 Hailed as the ‘Summit of Hope,’ this represented a last-ditch attempt to avoid a civil war . The summit of hope was held in the wake of a possible civil war between the U.S. and Syria .
 All sides reiterated their support for the provisional government and the Alvor Agreement . But the peace did not last, and the peace was soon gone .
 A few weeks later, fighting in northern Angola resumed with new intensity, and the country descended into a full-blown civil war . Angola's civil war began in 1992, when fighting broke out in the north of the country .
 In the nearest future, it will receive larger quantities of weapons and means of transport . The U.S. military says it will continue to receive weapons and transport .
 This internal communiqué was a strong message of support for the MPLA and expressed a commitment to escalate assistance . The MPLA has been fighting for independence in the country since 1968 .
 Poland promised to provide 5 million zloty in equipment . Shortly afterward, Poland promised a further $5 million in equipment in Poland .
 In Brazzaville, ambassador Afanasenko ramped up pressure on the Congolese government to support the logistics of the Soviet arms deliveries .
 In January, he received confirmation from President Ngouabi that Congolese authorities would facilitate the unloading of weapons and matériel for the MPLA at Pointe-Noire .
 In an emotional exchange with Afanasenko on June 14, Ngouabi confirmed he had a difficult relationship with Neto . He also criticized the Congolese authorities for sheltering Joaquim Pinto de Andrade, the leader of the MPLA’s Active Revolt
 Moscow made it clear that the MPLA had to sort out relations with Brazzaville to ensure uninterrupted supplies . The MPLA has been fighting for months to keep supplies supplied .
 There is no direct evidence that the Soviets asked the Cubans to intervene at that point . Moscow and Havana both applied backchannel pressure on Brazzaville . However, there is not inconceivable that Moscow or Havana applied back channel pressure .
 It would take the Cubans’ intervention to convince Ngouabi to change his mind . However, they still refused to allow supplies to pass via Cabinda, and it would take them to change their mind .
 The Soviet assessment of outcomes in Angola changed dramatically between January and June 1975 . The assessment was made by the Soviet government .
 Moscow believed the delivery of Soviet arms would enable the MPLA to maintain an equilibrium with the FNLA . Moscow believed that relative peace was likely before the final withdrawal of Portuguese troops on Nov. 11 .
 The escalation of violence in Luanda in late April showed that the Portuguese army would not intervene to keep the peace . The Portuguese army did not intervene in the violence .
 Soviets dispatched at least two shiploads of weapons to Pointe-Noire before the end of June . MPLA gained dominance in Luanda after the fall of August .
 By June, the Soviets had come to believe that events in Angola were part of a major international conspiracy, backed by the United States, and increased their military support to prevent a ‘Zairean scenario” in Angola . The Soviets hoped for a negotiated solution .
 Washington intervened directly to support the FNLA via Zaire in July 1975 . However, it was actually not until July 1975 that Washington intervened . The FNLA was supported by the United States in 1975 .
 Washington did not pay much attention to Angola until early 1975 . From Civil War to Cold War Hot Spot, July-November 1975 Washington paid little attention to the country .
 Henry Kissinger was busy dealing with the crisis in South-East Asia as North Vietnamese troops overran Saigon in April . Kissinger retained a decisive role in the White House under Nixon's successor Gerald Ford .
 The United States did not extend any additional military support to the FNLA or Zaire . The U.S. did not provide additional military assistance to the Zaire or FNLA .
 Kissinger started to pay more attention to Angola in May when the Zambians and the Chinese lobbied Washington for greater involvement . Kissinger started paying more attention in May after Zambians, Chinese lobbied for more involvement in Angola .
 Zairean daily Elima accused the U.S. of involvement in a coup against Mobutu . United States ambassador Deane Hinton was ordered to leave the country .
 To Kissinger, Mobutu’s action showed that U.S. allies were losing faith following the Vietnam debacle . Kissinger said it showed that the United States was losing faith in the African nation .
 The National Security Council remained split about the wisdom of greater U.S. support for the FNLA . Some feared international criticism and doubted Roberto’s potential as a military leader .
 In August, Ford approved another $11 million, and he signed off on another $7 million in November . Ford has signed off another $15 million in the past year . Ford signed off $7 billion in November, $15 billion in August .
 CIA hastily compiled an Angola Task Force headed by John Stockwell . The task force was headed by Stockwell, a CIA official who oversaw the operation .
 Mobutu’s army had transferred “enough arms for two infantry battalions” as well as nine armored cars to the FNLA base at Ambriz, only seventy miles north of Luanda . As he later recalled, by early August, by August, Mobut
 The escalation of U.S. involvement in Angola paralleled South A frica’s . The escalation in Angola parallels that of the U.N. intervention in South Africa .
 South Africa was deeply concerned about the security of South West Africa . It could potentially be attacked by the guerrillas of the South West African People’s Organization from Angola .
 SADF seized control of the Calueque Dam and the Ruacana hydroelectric installations across the Angola-Namibia border, citing security concerns . Another step in the escalation of Pretoria’s involvement occurred in early August, when the SADf seized control .
 The FAPLA had managed to stop the FNLA’s offensive and “blockade” them in northern Angola . The FNLA had been fighting in the province of northern Angola since April .
 They defeated the FNLA’s detachments who had landed to the south of Luanda at Novo Redondo and Port Amboim .
 Neto says the USA had decreased their support for Roberto in favor of Savimbi . Neto also said that the USA was decreasing support for the Brazilian president . The USA had also decreased support for Brazil's president in favour of the Brazilian .
 In Moscow, Carreira and Dunem painted a fairly optimistic about the military situation . The Russian military says the situation is improving .
 MPLA managed to counter the FNLA advance on Luanda in July . They hoped to push FNLA back from the coastal areas and the northern provinces with Soviet assistance .
 The Soviets offered additional military assistance, while Warsaw agreed to provide uniforms, means of communication, and medicine . The Soviets also offered to provide medical supplies and uniforms .
 Fidel Castro might have been unwilling to jeopardize the chance of a rapprochement with the U.S. First, Fidel Castro was willing to put his country at risk of jeopardizing its chances of rapproaching with the United States .
 Cuba’s relations with the MPLA had been complicated since the 1960s, and Castro might have felt there was no need for intervention . Further, Cuba's relations with its neighbor, the Cuban president, may have felt it was unnecessary .
 In early August, the head of the Cuban Décima Direccién led a mission to Luanda for talks with Neto . Diaz Argiielles led the mission to Angola .
 The Congolese authorities finally granted permission to transport weapons and supplies via Cabinda after talks between Marien Ngouabi and Fidel Castro in mid-September . The talks were also held in late September .
 Newly released documents shed no further light on communications between Moscow and Havana at this point . The newly released documents do not shed any further light .
 There were no Cuban troops in Angola before November, only military instructors . However, as we will see, it is clear there was no Cuban presence before November .
 Despite the increase in support, the MPLA’s fortunes on the battlefield deteriorated throughout September . The MPLA's fortunes on September deteriorated throughout the month .
 Much of the fighting in northern Angola focused on Caxito, a small town located only forty-two miles north of Luanda . The town is located in a small, remote area of Angola, located in the north of the country .
 Boris Putilin recalled that the MPLA leadership was generally unhappy with the extent of Soviet assistance to the rebels . The MPLA leader was unhappy that the Soviet assistance was limited .
 On October 14, South Africa initiated a direct invasion of Angola from Pretoria-controlled South West Africa . Operation Savannah was codenamed Operation Savannah . The invasion was part of Operation Savannah, codenaming Operation Savannah.
 1,000 men, including Daniel Chipenda’s FNLA and so-called flechas, Angolan soldiers who had fought with the Portuguese during the anticolonial wars, fought in Angola .
 The group was initially led by a small group of white South African officers . The group is now led by police in South Africa .
 On October 28, Zulu captured Mogamedes, a major port in southern Angola . Zulu pushed northwards towards the key coastal towns of Benguela and Lobito in a race towards the capital .
 We still do not have a complete picture of the role the U.S. played in Pretoria’s decision to intervene . The United States played a significant role in the South African government's intervention in South Africa .
 Kissinger always denied any knowledge of the intervention, but many early commentators believed he pushed for it via backchannel communications with Pretoria . Kissinger has always denied knowledge of any involvement in it .
 On September 25, Moscow agreed to send additional arms, including five BM-21s “Grad,” to Luanda by November 11 . Luanda has been hit hard by a series of anti-Russian sanctions since 2002 .
 The Soviet decision to airlift the BM-21s directly to Brazzaville was made in response to the deterioration of the military situation in the country .
 On November 2, Soviet AN-22 “Antei’s” cargo planes landed in Brazzaville with weapons on board . The weapons were on board Soviet cargo planes .
 The Soviets also dispatched a group of weapons experts to train the FAPLA to operate the surface-to-air Strela-2 in the case of bombing raids on Luanda .
 The Soviets did not want to ramp up its intervention before three nationalist movements before November 11 . In fact, Moscow was still hoping for a last-minute accommodation among the .
 Ivory Coast has been ordered to stay in the capital of Brazzaville until November 1 . President Laurent Laurent Laurent Gnou arrived in November .
 As late as November 3, 1975, Nyerere urged Ambassador Slipchenko to try to persuade the MPLA to include rival nationalist movements in the new government . As late in the 1975s, the ambassador tried to persuade a rival nationalist movement to include in the government .
 Given such efforts at last-minute accommodation, it makes sense that the Soviets would use recognition as a tactic to put pressure on the MPLA .
 The FNLA had engaged in torture, rape, and even “acts of cannibalism” in Luanda, argued Teixeira . The Luanda government is not interested in a return to the past, argued the former president .
 It was also apparent that many African countries favored the MPLA, especially after Pretoria’s intervention . Many African countries, including South Africa, also favored the government . The MPLA was overthrown in 2003 .
 For example, Brazzaville pressed the Soviets not to push for accommodation . The French capital is now in a state of war with the Soviet Union .
 Neto recognized that the Soviet decision to unilaterally recognize the MPLA as the government of Angola on November 11 was an unmistakable sign of its commitment . Neto said that the decision to recognize Angola's government was a sign of the Soviet commitment .
 On November 2, Nazhestkin flew to Luanda with new instructions . On November 3, he flew to a besieged Luanda .
 He, alongside Oleg Ignatev and Igor Uvarov, then drove to Neto’s residence to deliver the message . The message was delivered by three other members of the team .
 "The Cubans and other friends are helping us, but it's very difficult without the Soviet Union," he says . The Cubans are helping him, but "the Soviet Union is not helping us," he adds .
 Nazhestkin: Neto expected the Soviets to work with the Cubans to step up military support . We do not know the exact wording of the message, but it is said to have been written by Neto .
 Nazhestkin met with the head of the Cuban mission in Luanda, Angola, the following day . The following day, he met with head of Cuban mission to Angola .
 The Cubans told Nazhestkin that they were waiting for a special message from Havana about assistance to the MPLA . They said a battalion of Cuban Special Forces had already been dispatched to Luanda to assist .
 South African Zulu force overran Mocgdmedes and was racing toward Benguela and Lobito, two major ports on the Atlantic coast . On October 28, the force was overran by the Zulu forces and was headed for Benguelas and other ports .
 On November 2, the FAPLA and around forty Cuban instructors ambushed the advancing South African column with heavy artillery fire at the town of Catengue on the way to Benguela . South African soldiers were ambushed by the Cuban instructors .
 After a grueling battle, FAPLA and the Cubans retreated from Benguela and Lobito . The Cubans are still at the center of the conflict in the region .
 Holden Roberto’s FNLA intensified attacks against Quifangondo on the outskirts of Luanda .
 Gleijeses argues that Fidel Castro decided to dispatch regular Cuban troops to Angola on November 4 . Operation Carlota was launched by Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader's spokesman says .
 Diaz Argiielles asked for reinforcements after Catengue . FAPLA and the Cuban instructors had already discussed the need for troops .
 The first battalion of elite Special Forces would fly directly to Luanda, and the artillery regiment would follow by boat . Special forces would fly into Luanda directly to the country .
 Newly available records of conversations between Fidel Castro and the Soviet ambassador to Cuba Nikita Tolubeev confirm Gleijeses’s timeline . Newly available information confirms the timeline .
 On November 3, Tolubeev informed Castro about the Soviet decision to provide unilateral recognition of the MPLA as the government of Angola on November 11 . On November 11, Angola was officially recognized by the Soviet Union as Angola's government .
 He also expressed concern that FAPLA is still weak and lacking military experience . He said he also expressed concerns that it still lacks experience .
 Angolan soldiers often abandoned their positions, leaving the Cubans alone on the battlefield . Asa result of the conflict, Angolan forces often abandoned positions, allowing Cubans to fight on their own .
 Castro referred to the battle over Catengue, where the Cubans had suffered their first casualties . The reference to Cabinda must have been a mistake in the document .
 On November 5, Castro informed Tolubeev about the decision to dispatch regular troops . Operation Carlota is the start of the operation, which began November 5 .
 South African troops had advanced almost ‘halfway’ between Namibia and Luanda and taken over many cities and ports . The South African forces are now in control of many Namibia-Luanda cities and port areas .
 Castro argued that unlike the Zaireans, the South African force was much more effective . Castro: Unlike the Zareareans, South African forces were more effective in the Congo .
 Castro told Tolubeev that he wanted to dispatch another 1,200 troops in November—December . Two days later, the Cubans had already departed for Angola the previous day . Castro said he wanted more troops sent to Angola .
 He suggested the Soviet Union should supply BM-21s and once again expressed the hope that there would be cooperation .
 Georgii Kornienko recalled that he and other Soviet leaders found out about Castro’s decision by chance when a Soviet ambassador requested landing rights in Conakry .
 Andropoy and Grechko drafted an urgent letter to Castro in an attempt to dissuade him, but it was too late . Castro's decision to move to Cuba was made too late, and he was assassinated in 1961 .
 Castro informed Tolubeev of his decision on November 5, a day after the first plane with Cuban Special Forces onboard had departed from Havana for Luanda . The decision was made by Castro a day before the plane left Havana for Angola .
 The Soviets undoubtedly preferred an ‘African solution’ to the Angolan conflict . The new records show that the Soviets preferred an African solution to the conflict .
 On November 8, the Soviet ambassador to Guinea-Bissau, Viacheslav Semenov, informed Luis Cabral that Moscow had decided to recognize the MPLA as the official government .
 Newly released documents resolve questions about the buildup of Cuban troops and Soviet-Cuban cooperation . The newly released documents thus resolve several questions .
 It seems the Soviets were in the driver's seat in the first six months of 1975 .
 Castro started pushing the Soviets to coordinate military assistance in August . Only in August did Castro start pushing for military assistance from the Soviet Union .
 There is no evidence that military cooperation took place before November, when Castro decided to dispatch regular troops without asking the Soviets . The Soviets and Cubans exchanged opinions and shared information throughout 1975 .
 Moscow extended diplomatic recognition to the MPLA on November 11 and increased military support . The decision was made after Moscow agreed to extend official diplomatic recognition . The MPLA has been fighting for independence since 1968 .
 Castro would likely have launched Operation Carlota either way, but the Soviet decision to recognize the MPLA might have been a contributing factor . Castro would have launched the operation either way .
 Cuban troops in Angola increased quickly after the declaration of independence in 1975 . The Cuban government declared independence in November 1975 . Cuban troops were stationed in Angola .
 The Soviet-Cuban Intervention in Angola and Its Consequences . First urgent task was the defense of Luanda in the run-up to the declaration of independence .
 Cuban ship La Plata transported six Soviet BM-21s from Pointe-Noire to Luanda . The Cuban ship was the ship's first ship to transport six Soviet-era BM-22s .
 With only a few days to go before official independence, FAPLA and the Cubans prepared to defend the city . Holden Roberto’s forces, stationed only few dozen kilometers north of Luanda, are stationed only a handful of kilometers from Luanda .
 Robertoto took charge of the team as they reached Luanda in one last push to reach Luanda . The Portuguese withdrawal from Angola is scheduled for the following day .
 As the new black-and-white Angolan flag was placed on the mast and raised, soldiers started firing rounds of ammunition into the night sky .
 Celebrations continued the fol25 Ambassador A fanasenko and lowing day with a military parade and speeches .
 Once the MPLA was officially the government of Angola, the Soviet-Cuban operation began in earnest . The MPLA is now officially the Angolan government .
 Cooperation between Soviet instructors and Cuban troops was very close, and relations were amicable . Cooperation between the instructors and the Cuban troops .
 On November 16, a group of Soviet instructors flew to Luanda to train in Angola . The instructors had increased in size due to reinforcements from Moscow .
 Soviet instructors set up mini learning centers at the Luanda airport to provide weapons training to FAPLA soldiers . The Soviet instructors provided weapons training at the airport .
 IL-62s started arriving almost every night at the end of December, with Cuban airhostesses and Cuban soldiers in full military gear . Grigorovich also recalled that IL- 62s arrived in Cuba every night from December .
 The story of how FAPLA and the Cubans managed to halt the advance of the South African troops is well known . The South African forces are still at war with South Africa .
 The Cubans managed to stop South Africa’s advance toward Port Amboim by blowing up the bridge over the Queve River . The bridge was blown up by the Cubans .
 Zulu turned eastwards to find an alternative route toward Luanda, but Cuban and FAPLA troops managed to hold them off around the town of Quibala . Then, Zulu tried to turn eastwards, finding an alternative way to Luanda .
 In the following weeks, the bulk of the Cuban troops (numbering 1,254 overall) arrived in Luanda . In the months following, the majority of the troops arrived .
 By the end of 1974, FAPLA and the Cubans managed to stop South Africa’s advance . South Africa's advance was stopped by FAP LA and the Cuban army .
 Washington initially responded to South Africa’s defeats by escalating support . U.S. responded to the South African defeats with escalating support.
 Kissinger believed the U.S. could still reverse the losses if they could match the Cuban effort and bring allies on board . Kissinger believed that the United States could reverse the loss of the Soviet Union if they were able to do so .
 U.S. Congress refused to approve any additional funding for a covert operation in Angola . Operation in Angola was planned for December 19, but was cut short by Congress .
 Kissinger approached the Shah of Iran, the Saudi Arabian government, and Egyptian president Anwar Sadat to provide additional funds for Zaire . Kissinger approached Sadat, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Saudi Arabia to provide more funds .
 The central problem was that there could be no substitute for South Africa, yet association with Pretoria became a significant problem, as news of direct SADF involvement hit the press . South Africa was not a substitute for the South African nation, but it was a major problem .
 The Soviets believed that Kissinger was using Angola as an excuse to roll détente back . Kissinger believed that Angola was using an excuse for rolling back, the Soviets believed .
 Détente had proceeded apace in the early 1970s, despite rivalry in the Middle East, Chile, and elsewhere . After all, détente was proceeding apace .
 Détente did not prevent the U.S. from consolidating its positions in Egypt and overthrowing a legitimate ‘55 Brezhnev . The United States felt similarly, as did the Soviet ambassador to the United States .
 The MPLA subscribed to gender equality and thus both men and women were often portrayed as fighters in the struggle for national liberation . Both male and female fighters were often depicted as fighters .
 Moscow signed a military protocol in which the Soviets pledged to transport 35 million rubles worth of weapons directly to the Cubans in Angola . Moscow signed the protocol in order to transport the weapons to Angola .
 Eleven years of anticolonial wars led to the rise of dominant armed movements . They claimed to represent the people of Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique .
 The MPLA also claimed to represent the nation but did not acquire the equivalent preponderance in Angola . Angola has not had the equivalent of the MPLA in the past .
 At its outset, the Angolan Civil War was a complex, regional African conflict with multiple stakeholders . At its start of the conflict, the conflict was a multi-sided, regional conflict .
 Documents recreate Soviet views on the decolonization of the Portuguese Empire . The new documents were published by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The Soviets took a somewhat “Portugal-centric” view of decolonization, relying on the PCP and left-wing members of the MFA to push for power transfers in the colonies .
 Moscow believed that strengthening the left wing within the provisional government would endow it with greater power and result in success for the liberation movements . As seen from Moscow, events in Portugal and the colonies were closely linked, and they believed that .
 Documents show Neto harnessed his unique relationship with the MFA and their “clandestine agreements” to convince the Soviets to resume military assistance .
 Neto also perpetuated a conspiratorial version of events in Angola, arguing that the FNLA was a puppet for Zaire and the U.S. and the United States . Neto said that the Angolan government is a puppet of Zaire .
 The Soviet decision to restart military assistance in January 1975 was meant to restore military parity between the MPLA and its rivals, putting it in a position of dominance, given MFA support . The MPLA was given military parity by the Soviet in 1975 .
 Soviet weapons that first arrived in Luanda in March of that year made it possible to maintain the balance of military force . The FNLA was able to keep the FNLA at bay .
 The strategy faltered when it became clear that the Portuguese army could not keep the peace in Angola . The Portuguese army was unable to keep peace in the country, leaving the country .
 The Labor Day violence was a critical turning point, convincing the Soviets that the Portuguese were incapable of preventing a civil war before independence . The labor Day violence convinced the Soviets of the Portuguese that the government could not prevent it .
 Moscow stepped up their commitment to the MPLA to avoid a ‘Zairean scenario” in Angola . CIA launched its operation to supply the FNLA via Zaire in July . Moscow thus stepped up . commitment to MPLA .
 The new documents resolve some key questions about Soviet relations with Cuba . They also resolve questions about the Soviet Union's relationship with the Cuban nation .
 Moscow fundamentally wanted an ‘African solution’ in Angola . Moscow wanted an 'African solution' in Angola, says Russian diplomat . It is clear that Moscow wanted a "African solution"
 The Soviets rested their hopes on Soviet-trained FAPLA members . They preferred that the MPLA’s African allies, like the PAIGC, intervene to help .
 They held off until November 3 to unilaterally recognize the MPLA government, perhaps leaving the door open for a last-minute negotiated solution . The government has been in power since 2003 .
 Castro decisively seized the initiative with the introduction of Cuban troops on November 4, 2009 . The Cuban president is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 With the support of Soviet weapons and Cuban troops, the FAPLA managed to hold onto Luanda and subsequently roll back the South African invasion . With the help of Cuban troops and Soviet weapons, the Soviet-backed government managed to keep Luanda .
 By 1976, the lines had been drawn and the stage was set for another round of violence . Jonas Savimbi’s death in 2002 marked the end of a period of violence that would last, intermittently, until 2002 .
 HE COLD WAR HAD a profound impact on the course, strategies, and outcomes of anticolonial movements in Portuguese Africa . Conclusion: He COLD War had a profound influence on course and strategies of anti-colonial movements .
 The global competition over the meaning of modernity was at the core of the projects pursued by African revolutionaries . African revolutionaries were at the heart of their projects .
 This was partly due to the perceived failure of ‘African socialism’ in countries such as Ghana or Guinea . The liberation movements experienced outbreaks of ethno-nationalism during their struggle for independence . In Ghana, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea and Ghana, the liberation movements had outbreaks of
 socialism served as a unifying, nation-building framework for society . In the context of societies that were often highly diverse and frequently divided, socialism was often unifying . socialism was a unifier, unifying and unifying framework of society .
 The MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC thus favored socialist-inspired modernization for fundamentally internal reasons . Ideological competition provided both the ideational framework and served as a key source of external legitimacy .
 The contacts forged during the years of armed struggle were important, too, too. "The contacts forged ... were also important," she said . "I'm not just a politician, but I'm a fighter," she added .
 African nationalist leaders traveled to the socialist countries in the 1950s . Increasing numbers of Africans came to the USSR mainly as students .
 The majority of rank-and-file men traveled to the Soviet Union, China, Cuba, and state socialist Eastern Europe for training .
 Africans’ experiences in socialist countries were not uniform, they were often impressed by what they saw . Africans were impressed by the things they saw in the socialist countries .
 China and Cuba provided inspiration due to the perceived dynamism of their revolutions . The Soviet Union represented a kind of advanced technological modernity embodied in its military technology .
 Only the Soviet Union could contribute the kind of arms required to change the outcomes of war . China, Cuba, and the Eastern European countries could provide weapons, but only Russia could .
 In the context of the Vietnam War, Soviet military technology often signified liberation from colonial rule . In the 1970s and '80s, Soviet technology was often seen as a symbol of liberation in Vietnam .
 The Cold War also shaped the diplomatic strategies pursued by African revolutionaries . African revolutionaries took advantage of the Cold War .
 The fundamental reality facing African nationalists was the refusal of the Portuguese to proceed toward self-government, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: African nationalists were faced with the Portuguese refusal to progress toward self government .
 By the early 1960s, it had become clear that whichever political force could engage in armed struggle against the Portuguese would acquire the legitimacy to represent ‘the nation” on both domestic and international levels . By the 1960s it was clear that whoever could engage armed struggle with the Portuguese
 From the start, the MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC all faced internal rivals that claimed leadership of the liberation movement . The MPLA was founded by the liberationist movement .
 The ability to harness international support and legitimacy became crucial to overcoming domestic competitors . The ability of harnessing international support was crucial to overcome domestic competition .
 In the context of the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the socialist countries became key to sustaining armed struggle . The USSR and socialist countries were key to sustain armed struggle, says historian John Avlon .
 This book has shown how African revolutionaries from the Portuguese colonies used diplomacy to initiate and increase Soviet support and deny similar assistance .
 The MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC all leveraged the Cold War, but their strategies differed . Their strategies differed, and their strategies were different .
 In Guinea-Bissau, Amilcar Cabral used personal diplomacy to forge close relations with his foreign patrons .
 In the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, Cabral managed to establish trust with his interlocutors, based on their shared view of colonialism and imperialism . Cabral: "In the Soviet [Cambral] managed to ... establish trust" Cabral says in his memoir,
 In the guerrilla campaign, Cabral followed a cautious military strategy that relied upon the receipt of advanced military technology from the Soviet Union to put pressure on the Portuguese .
 This book shows that the Cubans disputed this strategy much more persistently than previously known . It also shows that Soviets and Czechoslovak advisers were closely involved in such discussions . The book was published in October 2013 .
 Cabral managed to maintain his line of support from the Soviets and maintain his independence . In the end, Cabral was able to maintain the support of the Soviets .
 According to PAIGC estimates, total Soviet aid before independence in 1974 amounted to thirty million U.S dollars .
 Once the PAIGC received the Strela missile complex from the Soviet Union, the Portuguese started to lose their military advantage . The Portuguese lost their advantage when they received the Soviet-built missile complex .
 After Carnation Revolution there was little that the Portuguese could do but negotiate a speedy transfer of power to the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde .
 After Guinea-Bissau gained independence in 1974, the PAIGC government pursued a pragmatic foreign policy . The government encouraged diverse sources of assistance to sponsor a modest program of import-substitution .
 According to Soviet estimates, after 1974, the USSR became the most significant foreign aid donor to Guinea-Bissau . After 1974, it is estimated that the USSR was the most important foreign aid .
 The majority of the officer corps was trained in the USSR and equipped with Soviet weapons . Most of the officers were trained in Russia and were armed with Soviet arms .
 Cabral's vision of unity for Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde did not last . Cabral’s vision for unity in the two countries was short-lived . The two countries have been in the middle of a power vacuum for decades .
 On November 14, 1980, Joao Bernardo Vieira toppled Luis Cabral’s government . Vieira cited grievances over the dominance of Cape Verdeans at the highest level of government .
 The coup put an end to the formal union of Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau . It split the PAIGC into two national branches . The coup ended the union of the two countries .
 Joao Vieira’s government accepted a structural adjustment program from the IMF and greatly expanded the cultivation of cashews for export .
 In 1985, the Soviets lost the right to fish in Guinea-Bissau’s waters . The government complained about the unfair conditions governing its joint venture, the Estrela do Mar .
 Soviet military cooperation with Guinea-Bissau continued right up to the collapse of the USSR in 1991 . However, the Soviet-Gambambua military cooperation continued right until the end of the Soviet era .
 Cabral relied on personal connections, FRELIMO leadership leveraged the Sino-Soviet split . Cabral used personal connections to gain access to the Soviet Union .
 In East Africa and especially Tanzania, the “China factor” was crucial for the Soviets . Beijing remained influential, even throughout the Cultural Revolution .
 FRELIMO managed to secure Soviet support, first through personal contacts, and then by leveraging their relations with Beijing . Frelimo secured Soviet support by leveraging its relations with China .
 The strategic significance of Mozambique for the struggle in South Africa mattered, too, especially for the GRU and the Soviet military . The GRU was involved in the struggle against apartheid .
 Only after consolidation of leadership around Samora Machel and what they regarded as "progress" in military operations did Moscow increase assistance to FRELIMO and dispatch new weapons systems .
 In Mozambique, the Portuguese had little option but to transfer power to FRELIMO after a brief transition period . The Portuguese were forced to hand over power to the Frelimo party in Mozambica .
 Similar patterns emerged in Soviet relations with FRELIMO after independence . Similar patterns emerge in relations between the Soviet Union and Frelimo .
 Out of 1.184 million rubles in credits provided to Mozambique between 1975 and 1987, almost half accounted for military equipment . Almost half of the credits were for military hardware .
 Samora Machel signed the Nkomati Accord with South Africa on March 16, 1984 . It was one of the most controversial acts of Machel's entire career . Machel is a former South African president .
 By 1985, FRELIMO also abandoned “Marxism-Leninism’s” as its official ideology and proceeded toward market reforms . Frelimo also abandoned Marxist-Leninist ideology in 1985 .
 On October 19, 1986, Machel’s Tu-34 plane, operated by a Soviet pilot, crashed en route from Mbala, Zambia, to Maputo, killing the president . Machel died in the crash .
 The civil war in Mozambique continued intermittently until a peace agreement was signed in 1992 . The war ended in 1992 after a peace deal was signed by the government .
 The Soviet relationship with Agostinho Neto was similarly complex because he never established close relations with the International Department cadres or the Soviet military . Neto's relationship with the Soviet government was also complex because Neto did not have close ties to the military .
 The Soviets believed the MPLA under Neto was not representative of rank-and-file members and thus lacked the support required to expand military operations . The MPLA was not fully represented by rank and file members, the Soviets believed .
 Soviet bureaucracy and military elite was consistently critical of Neto’s military and political strategy . Those opposed to Neto often found a sympathetic ear among the Soviets . Neto's political and military strategy was often criticized by the Soviet bureaucracy .
 Neto leveraged his contacts with the PCP and the left wing of the MFA to obtain a commitment of military assistance from Moscow . Once again, Neto .
 As this book has shown, Soviet military assistance was decisive in the MPLA’s battle for the control of Luanda in 1975 . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 This book confirms that the Soviets preferred an ‘African solution’ to the Angolan problem . It also confirms that they preferred an African solution to the problem .
 The full extent of Soviet plans for Angola after independence would likely have been much more limited without Cuba’s involvement . Angola declared independence on November 11, but the Soviet Union had no immediate plans for the country .
 The most immediate was the rapid expansion of the Soviet commitment to Angola . The Soviet commitment was to Angola in the early 1950s .
 Pretoria launched a massive military invasion of southwestern Angola in 1983 . By 1983, Pretoria had invaded southwestern Angola .
 We do not know if the MPLA would have been able to stay in power without the support of Cuban troops and the influx of Soviet arms . The MPLA was able to remain in power with the help of Cuban forces .
 The Cuban defense at Cuito Cuanavale in 1987 pushed Pretoria to agree to peace talks . It was arguably the shift in the balance of power following the successful Cuban defense .
 The Soviet-Cuban involvement in Angola fundamentally shaped the Cold War endgame in southern Africa . The Cold War ended in Angola in the 1980s .
 ‘Successes’ in Angola and elsewhere in the Third World were events driven by regional and local factors . Many Soviet cadres interpreted these as signs of U.S. structural weakness .
 In December 1979, the Politburo authorized the deployment of Soviet troops to Afghanistan to install a government friendly to Moscow . Afghanistan was invaded by the Soviet Union in December 1979 . The country was invaded in order to install an Afghan government that Moscow wanted .
 Moscow was inevitably pulled into local power struggles with unpredictable results . These interventions were all meant to be temporary measures, but Moscow has been pulled into power struggles .
 This book has shown that the origins of Soviet interventions were deeply rooted in the 1960s . This book shows that this book has been proven to be a useful resource for the West .
 One outcome was the rise of a Soviet bureaucratic and military elite with a stake in African affairs . One outcome of the Soviet policy was the emergence of a powerful military and bureaucratic elite .
 The changes were a direct result of the expansion of the Soviet foreign policy bureaucracy under Nikita Khrushchev . These changes were the result of an expansion in the bureaucracy .
 The main thrust of Khrushchev’s policy in the Third World was to revive Soviet socialism based on an idealist notion of ‘Leninist principles,” which included a commitment to socialist internationalism . Khrushov's policy was based on idealist notions of �
 The expansion of the CC CPSU International Department led to the emergence of a new cast of mezhdunarodniki whose job was to expand Soviet engagement with Africa, Asia, and Latin America .
 The people who would come to ‘manage’ Soviet relations with Africa were a mixed bunch . The people in charge of relations with African nations were a mix of people .
 There were men like Ponomarev, Ulianovskii, and Potekhin, who still held memories of the Comintern and the debates surrounding African liberation .
 The most populous group was made up of men from a younger generation . The formative experiences were shaped by WWII and the optimism of the postwar years .
 The younger cohort initially believed that socialism would bring prosperity to developing countries . They initially thought that socialism brought prosperity to the developing world .
 Many of them would become dedicated supporters of the anticolonial struggles in the course of the 1960s, as they forged personal relationships with African revolutionaries .
 Since Africa was never among the Soviet leadership’s priorities, these men came to influence decisions at the top . Since Africa never was a priority for Soviet leadership, they influenced decisions at top .
 Petr Evsiukov grew to play an essential role as a liaison, but also as someone who could influence information flows, and ultimately decision-making at the top . One such man, and one of the key protagonists in this story, was Petr Evsukov .
 Men like Evsiukov would continue to sustain the Soviet commitment to Africa in a variety of roles . Men such a man would be able to continue to serve the Soviet Union in Africa .
 Another consequence of the 1960s was the militarization of the Soviet engagement with the African continent . The Soviet involvement in Africa was seen as a result of the Cold War .
 By the mid-1960s, it had become clear that Soviet-inspired development initiatives did not lead to rapid economic growth . By the 1960s, the Soviet Union had concluded that it had failed to achieve rapid economic gains .
 Soviet economic assistance proved costly and was often a source of conflict rather than cooperation with African partners . Soviet economic aid proved costly, often causing conflict and conflict in Africa .
 The Soviets concluded that training armies and supplying them with weapons would probably be a more effective way to gain influence and allies among these powerful groups . The Soviets decided to train armies and supply weapons instead .
 In addition, the military believed that soldiers and officers trained in the USSR would become friends of the Soviet Union . In addition to the benefits of the USSR, the U.S. hoped that soldiers would be friends .
 By gaining new friends and allies in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, the Soviet military hoped to gain access to port facilities and airfields, thus increasing their reach . By gaining access to ports, they hoped to increase their reach in the region .
 This book has also highlighted the role of the GRU which was instrumental in providing information on internal developments and coordinated the distribution of arms and advice to anticolonial movements .
 GRU chief Petr Ivashutin was clearly interested in the Third World for strategic, Cold War reasons . The GRU was also interested in Russia's involvement in the Middle East for strategic reasons .
 The collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Africa opened up new military intelligence and reconnaissance opportunities in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans .
 CIA files: GRU maintained signals intelligence posts in Angola and Mozambique after independence . CIA files show GRU maintains signals intelligence post in Mozambica and Angola .
 This system of benefits does not mean that the military was solely motivated by material gain, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the benefits are not just for material gain .
 By the early 1980s, a significant sector of the Soviet elite started to voice criticism about the prospects for revolutionary transformation in the Third World . The Soviet elite was critical of the prospects of revolutionary transformation .
 Criticism came from the International Department and the KGB . The KGB complained about corruption, economic mismanagement, and double-dealing with the West .
 There were also concerns about the economic and human costs of Soviet intervention, especially in Afghanistan . The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the 1960s was feared to have cost the Soviet state .
 These criticisms started to shift attitudes at the top, including policy on policy on AF rica . These criticisms have shifted attitudes in the U.S.
 When Mikhail Gorbachev first came to power in 1985, there was little indication of a major policy change . When Gorbama was in power, there were little indications of major policy changes .
 In fact, Gorbachev reaffirmed Soviet commitments toward Third World allies . In fact he reaffirmed his commitment to the Third World .
 In 1986, the head of the International Department was replaced by Anatolii Dobrynin, the long-serving Soviet ambassador to the U.S. Dobrynins was replaced in 1986 . He is now the longest-serving Russian diplomat to the United States .
 Andrei Urnov, who had previously worked in the Africa section of the International Department, becomes Dobrynin’s deputy . He replaces Rostislav Ulianovskii, who was previously in charge of the African section .
 The International Department was supposed to become a new “coordinating center” for Soviet policy . Urnoy: This indicated a strengthening of the International Department, which was meant to be a new center .
 In fact, changes at the top generally reflected Gorbachev’s broader reforms, says historian . In fact the changes in the 1990s were largely due to the reforms of the Soviet Union .
 As figures of Third World debt became public, there was increasing pressure to scale down overseas commitments . There is increasing pressure on the government to reduce overseas commitments.
 Not all mezhdunarodniki applauded the changes in Soviet policy in the Third World .
 In 1989, the United States proposed that the UN reduce the size of UNTAG’s military contingent, allegedly to cut costs . The U.S. proposed the reduction in UNTAG's military contingent in 1989 .
 South African forces started attacking SWAPO guerrillas who had crossed the border into Namibia in anticipation of a ceasefire . Urnoy: Such a compromise led to a tragedy in April 1989 when S.S. forces attacked guerillas .
 By 1989, South Africa’s government had started talks with the ANC, but Gorbachev and Shevardnadze sought ways to have a direct rapprochement with Pretoria . By 1989 the government had already begun talks with ANC .
 One of the most vocal critics of such an approach was Vasilii Solodovnikov who served as Ambassador to Zambia from 1976 to 1981 . He was the director of the Institute of African Studies before serving as Ambassador .
 After meeting with Nelson Mandela shortly after his release from prison in 1991, Solodovnikov recommended that the Soviet Union continue supporting the ANC . He said they were destined to play a leading role in post-apartheid South Africa .
 The debate about Soviet policy in Africa raged up to the dissolution of the Soviet Union . The debate was mainly academic circles and the press .
 A meeting held by the Soviet Solidarity Committee in June 1991 to discuss its future reflected sharp divisions between those who defended sustained engagement in Africa on an economic and political basis and others who argued for the “de-ideologization” of Soviet policy .
 We often take tactical proclamations of Western leaders as matters of strategic principle . We often think of the U.S. as a matter of principle, not strategic principle. We need to find a way to deal with the world's problems.
 Men like Solodovnikov, Evsiukov, and Urnov criticized Gorbachev's approach for several reasons, but at its core, their critique was a moral one .
 It was wrong to abandon ‘old friends’ to improve relations with the U.S. at all costs, says John McCain . McCain says it was wrong for abandoning "old friends" to improve ties with the United States . McCain: "It was wrong not to abandon "
 To them, disengagement from Africa meant losing hard-earned political capital and potential profits, which could become a source of income for the flagging Soviet economy .
 In the end, what united those who criticized disengagement from Africa was a fundamental understanding of the USSR as a global power and Africa as an important area for economic and political gains . The USSR was an important global power, and Africa was important for economic, political gains.
 They shared a worldview based on a Marxist reading of history . They also shared a particular worldview, an ideology based on Marxism .
 The sudden collapse of the Soviet Union rendered these disagreements obsolete . The collapse of Soviet Union has rendered these differences obsolete .
 Debate about Russia’s role in the world in general and in Africa more specif ically was never resolved .
 Russia has tried to “return to Africa,” often using military and security cooperation as the basis of constructing new partnerships . Under President Vladimir Putin, Russia has used military, security cooperation to build partnerships .
 Although the motivations behind Russia’s involvement are very different today, these cannot be understood without delving into the past . Russia's motivations behind its involvement in the Ukraine conflict can't be understood today, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Nguyen, Hanoi's War; Miller, African Volk; Harmer, Allende’s Chile; Friedman, Shadow Cold War; Litthi, Cold Wars .
 See Onslow, Cold War in Southern Africa; Sapire, Saunders, and Saunders, Southern African Liberation Struggles .
 For two very different perspectives, see Ellis, External Mission; Macmillan, The Lusaka Years . Ellis, external Mission, and external Mission are very different . Ellis: "The Luska Years"
 Peterson, Dubois, Fanon, Cabral; Lopes, Manji and Fletcher, Claim No Easy Victories . Rabaka, Africana Critical Theory; Saucier, A Luta Continua. Cabral .
 A number of Cold War historians have revised their interpretations of the Cold War conflict . The Cold War was a Cold War era in which the conflict took place .
 John Lewis Gaddis first focused on ‘national interest’ but later acknowledged the role of ideas in We Now Know . He later acknowledged that he had a role in the project .
 Radoslav Yordanov revives the juxtaposition of “revolutionary’s and “statist” lines in Soviet foreign policy . He argues that the "statist" or pragmatic line often prevailed, thus contradicting current historiographical trends .
 Some of the early works include Legum, After Angola; Klinghoffer, The Angolan War; Somerville, Angola; Kempton, Soviet Strategy toward Southern Africa . Some of these early works were Legum and Klinghoffers .
 A similar interpretation was pursued by Melvyn P Leffler in For the Soul of Mankind, 255. A similar idea was pursued in For The Soul of Man, 255 .
 Some of these records were initially made available only to a select number of scholars in the 1990s . Some of the records were only made available to a limited group of scholars only in the 90s .
 Since then, they have been reclassified, only to be reopened around 2015 after undergoing a special declassification process . They have been reopened only after undergoing declassification .
 Bowen, State against the Peasantry, Brinkman, Moorman, Intonations; Pearce, Political Identity and Conflict . Pearce, political identity and conflict .
 On the role of African Americans in the Comintern, see Adi, Pan-Africanism and Communism . See Adi for more on his work on Pan-Africaism .
 The main exception for Stalin was the status of Italian colonies, over which Stalin bickered with the Allies at the Yalta conference . Stalin's main exception was that he fought over the Italian colonies .
 Khrushchev’s Cold War, 57; Taubman, . 354. Quoted in Fursenko and . Naftali, 57, Khrush .
 The Belgian Congo became the “The Democratic Republic of the Congo ” upon independence in June 1960 . The Congo was the first country to become independent from Belgium .
 In 1971, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was renamed “Zaire,” a name it retained until 1997 . In 1997, the country was renamed "Zaire" before re-gaining its name from 1960 .
 Fora detailed bibliography of Aleksandr Shelepin, see Mlechin, Zheleznyi Shurik . For a detailed bibliography of Shelepins, see Sheleppin, Mlech and Shurk .
 For an in-depth study of the postwar generation, see First, Stalin’s Last Generation . For more information on Stalin's last generation, visit First .
 For a detailed study of forced labor in Sao Toméé, see Higgs, Chocolate Islands . For more information on forced labor, visit the Higgs website .
 For a detailed summary of the early years and the road to power, see Meneseses, Salazar, ch. ch. For a more detailed look at Salazar's early years, see the book, "Salazar Salazar"
 There is still a debate about whether politics or economics was fundamental to Salazar’s conception of the Portuguese Empire . Salazar's vision of the empire was that politics and economics were fundamental .
 For the two sides of the debate, see Clarence-Smith, Third Portuguese Empire, and Pitcher, Politics .
 Around 1,703 Cape Verdean immigrants appear in the 1950 census of Guinea-Bissau . Around 2,000 immigrants appeared in the census in 1950 .
 A number of historians still have found it useful to employ these terms, especially in reference to the complex cultural milieu of interwar Luanda .
 Bishop Ralph E Dodge made a statement in the United States Senate . Dodge's statement was published in Washington D.C. in the Senate hearings on African affairs .
 Other important members included Noémia de Sousa, Lucio Lara from Angola, Vasco Cabral from Guinea-Bissau, Francisco José Tenreiro from Sao Tomé, and Guilherme Espirito Santo .
 On the impact of events in Algeria on anticolonial movements, see Connelly, Connelly and Byrne . Byrne, Byrne and Connelly: The Mecca of Revolution .
 Galvao later confirmed in his memoirs that engineering a coup in Angola was part of his plan . He later confirmed that engineering the coup was a key part of the plan .
 On Czechoslovak motivations, see Richterova, Pesta, and Telepneva, “Banking on Military Assistance”; Muehlenbeck, Czechoslovakia in Africa, 2-17. On Czech-Czechoslovakia motivations: “
 In the USSR and Czechoslovakia, the KGB and StB contained under its umbrella domestic security and foreign intelligence branches . The KGB and the StB were known as the KGB-StB branches .
 In the context of this book, I refer to “KGB’s and “StB” when speaking about foreign intelligence and not internal security . In this context, I use ‘KGBs’ and ‘B’ when referring to foreign
 V Tereshkin to CC CPSU, May 30, 1961, Rossiiskii Gosudarsvennyi Arkhiv Noveishei Istorii (Russian State Archive for Contemporary History, hereafter RGANI), 5, op., 360, 72; D Dolid
 The Situation in Angola: Declaration of the Soviet Government . Pravda, May 27, 1961, published the declaration .
 Alter to Barak , June 21, 1961, Archiv Bezpeénostnich Slozek , 43197/000, 3-5.000, was published in 1961 . The author of the book, Alter To Barak, was assassinated in 1968 . Sloz
 Zubok refers to a document he refers to in the archive . The author could not locate the document that Zubok says he was referring to . Zubok is a member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Vaclav David to Antonin Novotny, July 20, 1961, NA, 1261/0/44, KSC/UV/ANIL inv.4,166 . Vaclav and Antonin were married at the time of the marriage .
 Cahen argues that the real number of people killed in those events fell between 9 and 36 . Cahen has argued that the number of those killed in the events fell from 9 to 36. Cahen: The real number was 9-36 .
 It was organized by migrant workers in British Nyasaland, later independent Malawi . Migrant workers organized the event . It was later organized by the British government .
 Ruaridh Nicoll, “The Great Escape that Changed Africa’s Future,” The Guaraian, March 8, 2015; Harper and Nottingham, Escape from Portugal.
 Klein to Prague, conversation between R. Klein and N Bazanov on January 22, 1964, conversation . Klein to Czechoslovakia, signed by the Foreign Ministry of Foreign Affairs, signed in 1964 .
 FNLA delegation visited Czechoslovak Solidarity Committee on April 14, 1964, in Prague, Prague, Berlin, April 22, 1964 . FNLA was a member of the Czechoslovakia Solidarity Council .
 The timing of the incident is still not entirely clear, but there are several indications it took place in March 1964 . There are still some indications the incident took place between March 1964 and April 1964 .
 Pravda: “For the unity of patriots. Za edinstvo patriotov” [Angola: For the . unity of . patriots], Pravde, March 17, 1964 .
 The document is Patolichev’s summary of the notes Provaznik passed to the Soviet embassy in Czechoslovakia .
 Schneidman, Engaging Africa, 46, and Roberts, “Assassination of Eduardo Mondlane,” 8. Roberts, 8. “The assassination of Mondlane” is the result of an assassination .
 Mondlane to the Soviet Government, March 11, 1965, AVPRF, £659, op., op., 1, 1,1, 1-2. Mondlane . Mondlane wrote to Soviet Government on behalf of Soviet Government .
 Westad focuses mainly on the 1970s . In his overview of Soviet relations with southern Africa, Westad looks at Soviet relations in southern Africa .
 Vaclav David to Antonin Novotny (CSSR general secretary), May 7, 1966, Narodni Archiv, KSC-UV-ANIL, 1261/0/44, inv. Vodlav David .
 Consultation between representatives of the solidarity committees of the European socialist countries on June 28 and 29, 1966, BA-SAPMO, DZ8/32 .
 CCP Politburo Resolution, June 1, 1965, NA, 1261/0/44, KSC/UV/ANIL, inv. inv. 1261-0-44 . CCP . Resolution: "We are committed to the Communist Party"
 On the aborted mission to Cape Verde, see Lopes, Aristides Pereira, 130. For more information on the mission, visit Lopes .
 RGANI, 89, inv., 8; Algiers to Prague, January 21, 1965, AMZV, TO-tajng, IV/6, sign.4/111 .
 February 18, 1967, PAAA-MfAA, M3/136, 1-8. Lessing to MfAA was February 24, 1967 . Lessing was the first time the U.S. government had acknowledged the existence of the agency's existence of Mf
 The author thanks George Roberts for providing access to this document . The author is happy to have access to the latest edition of this article .
 Uria Simango and Marcelino dos Santos were guests of the GDR’s Solidarity Committee from December 6-13, 1963, BA-SAPMO, DZ8/163 .
 Simango, Uria Timoteo is the name of a Mozambique woman . Simango is a popular name in Mozambican .
 November 26, 1966, PAAA-MfAA, A1166, 147. Seiferth to Ministerium fiir Auswartige Angelegenheiten , November 30, 1966 to Ministerial fiir .
 Rui Duarte Silva, “Chissano confirma colaboracao com o KGB” Silva, Expresso, April 8, 2016 . Silva: Chissano confirms collaboration with the KGB .
 Czechoslovak clandestine contacts were Dennis Phombeah, a close ally of Oscar Kambona . Dennis was one of the Czechoslovaks' clandestine contacts with Dennis . Dennis is the son of a former president of Czechoslovakia .
 Cestmir Podzemny to Vasek (deputy interior minister, CSSR), February 5, 1969, ABS, 11616/101, 7-15 . Podzmny was the deputy interior minister of the Soviet Union .
 See arguments made by Latip Maksudov, Georgii Kim, and Mirzo Tursun-Zade in Stenogram of SKSSAA Presidium session on August 10, 1971 .
 For overviews of Nordic countries’ support for African liberation movements, see Soiri and Peltola, Finland and National Liberation . Eriksen, Norway and Morgenstierne, Denmark also support for National Liberation movements .
 Lucio Lara and Joaquim Chissano were interviewed in Sellstrém, Liberation in Southern Africa, 19, 39 .
 Tornimbeni, “Nationalism and Internationalism”; Lopes, Aristides Pereira, 149. Lopes: Nationalism and internationalism is a form of internationalism .
 Ulianovskii to MO, January 7, 1974, RGANL 89, op., 104, 32, 32; Manchkha to Lusaka, . RGANIL, 89: 89: 29: 32: 32; 32: 34: 31: 32
 For a detailed account of the Wiriyamu massacre, see Dhada, Portuguese Massacre . For more details of the massacre in this article, visit Dhada .
 On the issue of Portuguese colonialism at the UN, see Santos, 4 Organizacao das Nagoes Unidas. See Santos .
 Slipchenko to MO, conversation with Julius Nyerere, February 7, 1973, was a conversation with the then-president of the Republic of Zimbabwe .
 There is some evidence to suggest the rumors were engineered by East German intelligence . There is also some evidence that East German spies engineered the rumors .
 Tiazhev to MO, January 6, 1972, December 31, 1971, RGANI, 5, op., 528, 1-2, 1971 . He wrote: "Tiazheev to MO"
 Reportazh iz Gvinei [Who killed Amilcar Cabral: A report from Guinea ]” Pravda, March 6, 1973, 4.05 .
 For Soviet coverage of the ceremony, see Oleg Ignatev, “Tak sozdavalos’ gosudarstvo,” Pravda, November 13, 1973, 4. 4.
 Amélia and Teresa Araujo interview; Na Nhakpba interview; Matta interview; Carvalho interview; Leite interview . Amélle Araújo interview: Améla, Teresa Araojo, Na Nakpba, 
 Slipchenko to MO, conversation with Samora Machel on September 11, 1974, RGANL 5, op., 784. Slipchenko and Machel met in 1974 . Machel: Slipchenko, Machel and Slipchenko met in Missouri .
 Document is a record of a conversation between Neto and Slipchenko on September 30, 1974 . Neto refers to the talks with Manchkha and Urnoy in July, during which he refers to them .
 This document is a record of conversation with Angolan students José Neluba de Carlmo and Sebastian Correira . It is a transcript of conversation between students from Angolan Angola .
 It is not clear if any Soviet representatives actually took part in the failed MPLA Congress . It is unclear if any of the Soviet Union representatives actually attended .
 Interview with the first secretary of the Soviet embassy in Brazzaville, comrade Putilin, on September 11, 1974 .
 The author could not locate the document detailing meetings with Iko Carreira and Dunem in the Russian archives . The author was unable to find the document .
 Dzasokhov to CC CPSU, October 18, 1974, Report on O Ignatev’s trip to Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique, RGANI, 5, op., 897, 201. Dz
 Holden Roberto had mustered about 20,000 men, Agostinho Neto had 10,000, and Jonas Savimbi had 8,000 . According to Portuguese army estimates, by February, by . February, the Portuguese army had had 20,500 men, according to estimates
 The author could not locate the record of Dzasokhov’s trip to Luanda in February 1975 . The author was unable to find the record .
 In an internal report about his trip to Luanda, Oleg Ignatev mentioned that the documents were genuine and that the Soviets could request photocopies from “friends” in the Portuguese military if necessary .
 The author could not obtain a copy of Evsiukoy’s unpublished memoirs or locate the record of the meeting in the archives .
 The author did not have access to Evsiukov’s unpublished memoir on Angola or the documents to which Shubin refers .
 AAN, PZPR, LXXVI1.541. Pomocy dla Ruchow Narodowo-wyzwolenczych w Afryce [Assistance to the National-Liberation Movements in Africa],” .
 South West Africa was originally a German colony . It was placed under a South African mandate by the League of Nations . The country was originally placed under the mandate of South Africa .
 The UN terminated the mandate in 1966, but Pretoria refused to relinquish control . Pretoria was forced to take over control of the country in 1966 .
 The author could not locate the records of Carreira’s meeting with the Soviets in late August in the Russian archives . The author was unable to find the records .
 The author could not locate documents with these discussions in the archives of this article .
 The date of the conversation between the two ambassadors has been the subject of some controversy .
 Newly released documents show the meeting took place on December 4 . The newly released documents say the meeting was held in December .
 Jorge Risquet was a member of the French tennis team in the 1970s and 1980s . He was the first French tennis player to win a Nobel Peace Prize in 1968 .
 It is still not possible to determine how much weaponry was passed to the Cubans and FAPLA in Angola during this period .
 The PAIGC received $35,000 in 1962, $50,00 in 1963, $70,000 and $100,000 for 1970s . The organization was founded in 1961 .
 Semenoy to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, record of conversation with Vasco Cabral on September 11, 1976, is published in the AVPRF, 661, op., 3, 2, 143 . Cabral was a member of the Cabral family .
 According to Soviet estimates, by 1979, the Soviet Union had provided $57. million in foreign assistance to Guinea-Bissau . $35. million was provided gratis .
 Portugal accounted for 60 percent of all exports from Guinea-Bissau and 40 percent of imports . According to Soviet estimates, by 1977, Portugal was responsible for 60% of exports . Portugal was also responsible for 40% of all imports from Guinea Bissau .
 I would like to thank Elizabeth Banks for drawing my attention to these figures . Elizabeth Banks is the author of this article .
 According to CIA estimates, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe provided $122 million in economic assistance to Mozambique between 1975 and 1982 . The OECD countries gave $1.102 million / over $1 .102 million in aid to the country between 1975-1982 .
 Shubin staunchly denied Soviet involvement, citing the change of leadership in Moscow as evidence there was no reason for Moscow to plot Machel’s murder . The change in leadership in Russia was cited as evidence as evidence .
 According to CIA estimates, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe provided $52 million in economic assistance to Angola . The OECD countries gave $413 million to Angola between 1975 and 1982 . The CIA estimates that the aid to Angola was $52million .
 Speech given at the First Tricontinental Conference of the Peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, Havana, January 1966 . Speech .
 The KGB and the Bulgarian State Security Service were involved in the Cold War . The KGB was involved in Bulgaria's anti-KGB operations in the 1960s and '90s .
 Hearings before the Subcommittee on African Affairs on U.S. Involvement in Civil War in Angola were held . Hearings were held before the subcommittee on African affairs on United States involvement in the war .
 Civilians, Mobility, and Legitimacy in South-East Angola during the MPLA’s War for Independence .
 Algeria’s Fight for Independence and the Origins of the Post-Cold War Era . Algeria‘s fight for independence and the origins of the post-cold war era . Algeria's fight for Independence was the first of its kind .
 An Assessment of Professional Expertise in the Making of Soviet Foreign Policy . The Soviet Union in the making of Soviet foreign policy. The Making of Foreign Policy.
 The Struggle for Southern Africa, 1976-1991, is published by Nelson Mandela, a former South African journalist . Mandela was Mandela's first African leader in South Africa . Mandela died in 1991 at the hands of Mandela Mandela .
 Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial Nationalism . Self-determination and the international origins of anticolonial nationalism. Self-determined and the origins of Anticentric Nationalism.
 Handbook of the Communist Security Apparatus in East Central Europe, 1944-1989. Handbook of Communist Security . Apparato in East . Central Europe . Handbook of . the Communist security Apparata in East. Central Europe.
 Robert W. Pringle, Robert W Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Intelligence, 2nd ed. The book is published by Robert Pringle .
 The Portuguese Policy of Decolonization and Détente in Angola and Mozambique . Journal of Cold War Studies 21, no. : 3-51 .
 The Secret Struggle » for the Global South —Espionage, Military Assistance and State Security in the Cold War — was published in International History Review 43, no. : 1-11 .
 African Americans and the Soviet Indictment of United States Racism, 1928-1937 . African Americans . African American and the Soviets were accused of racial discrimination in the United States .
 Interaction and Exchange between the USSR and Latin America during the Cold War . Interaction between the Soviet Union and Latin American during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Interviews from Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe, the Frontline and Sweden . Interviews also include interviews from Namibia and Zimbabwe .
 Kamba Simango and the Protestant Community in Manica and Sofala, 1892-1945 . Simango was a leader of the Protestant community in the Manica-Sofala Province of Manica . He died at the age of 92 .