 Kennedy shifted at least some of the blame for the fiasco to the nation's press . In the process, Kennedy shifted the blame to the press .
 John F Kennedy enjoyed a unique relationship with the press during his presidency . Kennedy was a president of the White House during the Cold War and the Bay of Pigs War . He was a strong advocate for free speech .
 Based on his own experience as a reporter, he both understood the mechanics of news reporting and respected the potential influence of the press on public opinion .
 In this essay, we analyze Kennedy's speech, ""The President and the Press,"" which he delivered before the American Newspaper Publishers Association on April 27, 1961 . Kennedy delivered the speech to the American Newspapers Association .
 Kennedy crafted a presidential speech that attempted to explain and justify the invasion . He blamed the press for its failure, and pressured the news media to voluntarily censor itself on national security issues .
 We argue that Kennedy's speech was widely considered a failure because few bought into his ""crisis"" narrative . The press refused to accept his attempt to scapegoat and censor them, we argue . We argue .
 Analysis lends insight into how presidents may attempt to rhetorically exacerbate crisis situations to manage press coverage and cultivate public consent . The analysis lends insight to how presidents might try to exacerbate crises to manage the press coverage .
 The second section contextualizes ""The President and the Press"" by providing some historical background on the Cold War era, including the controversy surrounding the Bay of Pigs invasion . The third section provides an overview of the history of the U.S. President .
 The third section analyzes the text of the speech itself, illuminating how Kennedy employed presidential crisis rhetoric and Cold War arguments to shift blame for the Bay of Pigs debacle to the press .
 The final section of this essay considers the legacy and lessons of Kennedy's speech in light of later instances of presidential crisis rhetoric and governmental attempts to limit free speech . The essay concludes that the lessons of JFK's speech should be taken into account .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts . He was born to Rose and Joseph Kennedy in 1917 .
 Rose Fitzgerald was the daughter of John Francis ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald . Fitzgerald was a popular Democratic mayor of Boston . Rose was married to John Francis Fitzgerald, the son of a popular Boston mayor .
 Kennedy served honorably as a World War II naval officer from 1941 to 1945 . Kennedy graduated from Harvard in 1940 and served as a naval officer .
 Among his military decorations, Kennedy earned the Purple Heart and the Navy and Marine Corps Medal . He led his crew to safety when their patrol torpedo boat was rammed by a Japanese destroyer . Kennedy was killed in the attack .
 The year following his discharge from the Navy marked JFK's entry into politics . JFK's first year in politics marked the beginning of his political career .
 In 1946, Kennedy became a Democratic congressman from Massachusetts . Six years later, he won a seat in the United States Senate . Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1964 .
 Shortly after his senate victory, Kennedy married Jacqueline Bouvier, also from an affluent and influential family . Shortly after he became president, Kennedy was married to another wealthy woman .
 Kennedy earned national attention in 1956 when he was nominated for Vice President . Kennedy was nominated to be Vice President for President in 1956 .
 Kennedy was the Democratic nominee for president in 1964 . He lost that nomination, but became the Democratic presidential nominee four years later . Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1968 .
 Nixon debates were the first televised presidential debates in U.S. history . Nixon was president of the United States in 1972 .
 Kennedy ended up defeating Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the twentieth century to become the youngest person, as well as the first Roman Catholic, ever elected to the U.S. presidency .
 The challenges presented by the Cold War and international politics informed many of President Kennedy's executive initiatives . Kennedy's initiatives include the creation of the White House, the National Guard, and the defense secretary .
 By 1961, the Soviet Union was ahead in the space race, having launched a satellite and orbited a man around Earth . It was the first time a man has orbited Earth in space .
 Kennedy expanded the United States space program and vowed to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade . Kennedy was inspired by Russia's successes .
 Kennedy signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban treaty on October 7, 1963 . The treaty was considered a first step in ending the Cold War and the atomic arms race .
 The treaty greatly restricted nuclear testing and committed its signatories to work toward complete disarmament . Also signed by the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, the treaty was also signed in 1953 .
 Kennedy's most trying moment came in October 1962, when U.S. intelligence discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 At its most basic level, the Cold War was a struggle between democracy and capitalism in the West versus communism in the East . The Truman Doctrine was the Truman Doctrine .
 The United States, a country committed to democracy, and the Soviet Union, represented the two major players in this struggle . The U.S. represented democracy and communism in the struggle for freedom .
 Many trace the genesis of the Cold War to the end of World War II, when the U.S. dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 .
 The atomic bomb heightened distrust between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It led to an escalating nuclear arms race . Although they had been allies during the war, the atomic bomb increased distrust .
 Truman articulated what became known as the Truman Doctrine, pledging the United States to the ""containment"" of communism . Shortly after World War II ended, President Harry S Truman articulated the Truman doctrine .
 The goal was to stop the spread of communism into neighboring free nations . The goal of stopping communism in neighboring countries is to stop it spreading .
 More often than not, this commitment meant sending financial and military assistance to nations like Greece and Turkey, which were threatened by communist insurgencies .
 Some scholars point to the economic collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1980s as the end of the Cold War . Some scholars say the collapse of Soviet Russia in 1980s was the end to Cold War.
 In 1959, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency began planning an invasion of Cuba after Fidel Castro overthrew the American‐backed dictator, Fulgencio Batista .
 The following year, the CIA, operating under the secret authorization of President Dwight D Eisenhower, began training anti-Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of the island nation . President Eisenhower authorized the operation .
 CIA informed Kennedy of their plan to unleash their trained forces at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The Bay is located on the south shore of Cuba . Shortly after Kennedy took office in 1961, the CIA informed the new president .
 Kennedy was forced to do damage control, as he was widely criticized for the ""fiasco"" and for misleading the American public in the days leading up to the invasion . Kennedy was criticized for his actions in the wake of the invasion of Iraq .
 For many Americans and press professionals, the most troubling aspect of the Bay of Pigs situation was that the president had lied to them regarding U.S. policy toward Cuba . The president lied about Cuba's policy toward the island nation .
 Kennedy miscalculated the rhetorical situation and delivered a presidential crisis speech in which he blamed the press for the Bay of Pigs debacle . However, as we argue in our analysis, we argue that Kennedy's speech was a mistake . We also argue that JFK's speech should have been a speech
 Kennedy faulted the press for leaking information about the Bay of Pigs operation just days before its execution . Kennedy said the press leaked the information just before the operation was carried out .
 The first report to uncover the president's plans was slated for publication in the New Republic .
 Kennedy instructed Schlesinger to have the story killed, and he succeeded in his mission . Kennedy instructed him to kill the story, and Schlesingers succeeded .
 The Times’ publisher also downplayed Szulc's story by eliminating a four‐column banner headline and running it instead as a more routine single column story on the front page .
 Kennedy reportedly complained in private that "Castro doesn't need agents over here" Kennedy reportedly said that he was unhappy with the situation in Cuba .
 Kennedy took to the podium at the White House to address the press conference . Kennedy said the press has long been distrustful of the president and the press .
 Studying the contrast between the ASNE and the subsequent ANPA speech is important because it highlights two different ways in which Kennedy responded to the same exigency .
 President Obama's April 27 speech stirred up controversy about the Bay of Pigs mission again by implicating the press in the mission's failure . Yet he still implicates the press as a factor in the failure .
 The president might have viewed his ANPA speech as an opportunity to build upon his ASNE speech, fostering more trust and goodwill between the president and the press .
 The situation called for an after dinner or ceremonial address . It was a black tie dinner held in a grand ballroom of a hotel . The event was a ceremonial address for the president .
 Kennedy instead delivered an accusatory speech, shifting blame for the failed invasion onto the press . He called for the press to censor itself in the face of national security threats . Kennedy instead shifted blame onto the media .
 Kennedy's speech to the ANPA, we contend, exploited the tragedy by portraying it as a crisis and demanding more control over the nation's free press . We contend, we say, that JFK's speech exploited the crisis and demanded more control .
 Kennedy's rhetorical miscalculation led to one of his most notable rhetorical failures . Kennedy's rhetoric of crisis backfired because of his rhetoric, it backfired .
 JFK's speech exhibited several key qualities of presidential crisis rhetoric . Kennedy's speech was a presidential speech of crisis rhetoric, not a speech that would have been made public .
 The strategy backfired and only damaged the president's relationship with the press, says CNN's John Sutter . But the strategy only damaged his relationship with press, he says .
 Since Windt's original discussion of presidential crisis rhetoric, rhetorical scholars have written a lot about this complex type of oratory .
 Bonnie Dow argues for a broader understanding of crisis rhetoric . Dow explains how some exigencies trigger policy speeches, while others result in more ceremonial or ""epideictic"" rhetorical responses . Dow argues that crisis rhetoric is more important to politicians .
 Dow argues that not all crises are rhetorical constructions . Dow also demonstrates how epideictic strategies may be especially fitting in situations where the audience perceives that a crisis already exists . Dow argues how crisis rhetoric can be used to create a crisis, but not to create it .
 "There is no definitive description of crisis rhetoric as a genre. And we realize that there are no definitive descriptions of crises rhetoric . And we're not sure if crisis rhetoric is a genre, but it's not a genre .
 We find Windt's framework particularly useful in detailing how Kennedy's rhetoric aimed to provoke and amplify a crisis in order to exercise more control over the press and to silence debate . Yet, we find it particularly useful to detail how Kennedy wanted to exercise control of the press .
 Kennedy used rhetorical patterns characteristic of Cold War rhetoric to frame the melodrama of his speech . In ""The President and the Press,"" Kennedy used these patterns to frame his Cold War speech .
 A defining characteristic of Cold War rhetoric, really, is its use of god and devil terms . "God and devil" is a key part of the Cold War, and all war rhetoric .
 Kennedy relied on the dualisms central to Cold War rhetoric to construct a melodrama of good versus evil that he hoped might pressure press professionals to censor themselves . As we illustrate in our analysis, Kennedy used these dualisms to construct an image of good vs. evil . We are happy
 Analysis examines how John F Kennedy's speech followed a script of ""crisis"" and ""good versus evil" to legitimate his call for more press restraint . The speech was followed by the script of "The President and the Press"
 The president's rhetoric selected particular facts to mark the crisis in a way that absolved Kennedy of responsibility and shifted blame for the fiasco onto the press . That responsibility meant not leaking government national security secrets to the public .
 Kennedy declared the ""New Facts"" of the situation by explaining what his speech would not be about . Kennedy explained what he would not talk about in his speech . Kennedy declared that the situation was not about .
 The events of recent weeks may have helped to illuminate that challenge for some . But the dimensions of its threat have loomed large on the horizon for many years .
 There is no escaping either the gravity or the totality of its challenge to our survival and to our security . Whatever our hopes may be for the future, for reducing this threat or living with it, we must live with it .
 Kennedy's audiences understood that the ""events of recent weeks"" referred to the Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy's audience understood that that phrase was used to refer to the invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy's misstatements to the press regarding the incident and the role the press allegedly played in compromising the mission . Those events also included Kennedy's claims that the press played a role in the mission's success .
 Kennedy combined selective "New Facts" with Cold War narrative about the communist threat . The Bay of Pigs debacle was the result of a Cold War story .
 Kennedy suggested he merely wished to discuss the relationship and shared responsibilities of the president and the press rather than forge an adversarial relationship between them . Kennedy: "I just want to talk about the shared responsibilities"
 Kennedy's opening remarks appeared to position himself on the side of his journalistic audience, but those assurances rang hollow . He proceeded to cast suspicion on the motives and even the loyalties of the press in the rest of the speech . Kennedy's first remarks were intended to reassure his audience of
 Some newspapers chose to report on the administration's ""covert plans"" for an invasion of Cuba . Some newspapers in effect provided aid to the enemy .
 Kennedy made the condemnation of the press clearest when he stated that, details of this nation's covert preparations to counter the enemy's covert operations have been available to every newspaper reader, friend and foe alike .
 With this statement, Kennedy seemed to suggest that had the press not leaked ""this nation's covert preparations,"" perhaps the Bay of Pigs invasion would have succeeded .
 These were not the words of a president accepting responsibility for his role in a crisis, as Kennedy had done in his earlier ASNE speech . Essentially, these were . Essentially . these were not . the words . of these words . As Kennedy had said in his ASNE address, these
 Kennedy's statement of facts served to define the situation as a crisis, to absolve Kennedy from blame, and to instead shift blame for the Bay of Pigs debacle to the press . Taken together, Kennedy's statements of facts .
 Given the make-up of his audience, this proved a rhetorical blunder, and that blunder was only exacerbated by Kennedy's melodramatic Cold War narrative . Kennedy's audience was more interested in the Cold War than he was in the first place .
 Kennedy's address is the proliferation of a Cold War melodrama pitting good versus evil . A Cold War Melodrama is a key part of Kennedy's speech .
 Kennedy's melodramatic framing divided the world into two opposing camps and raised the stakes for those in his audience . Kennedy's "world divided into two camps" was a form of war .
 He suggested that journalistic restraint was necessary if the free world was to prevail in the fight against communism . In the process, he suggested that journalists should be restrained .
 The dualistic juxtaposition of good versus evil ran through Kennedy's address and amplified communism as a constant threat to democracy . Kennedy's speech emphasized the duality between good and evil .
 Kennedy raised questions about the role of the press in the battle between good versus evil . Kennedy: "The press is a vital part of the fight against evil in the world"
 He would eventually invite his audience to prove their commitment to anticommunism by practicing journalistic restraint . He would then invite them to show they had no restraint .
 Marx terminated his relationship with The Tribune and devoted his talents full time to the cause that would bequeath to the world the seeds of Leninism, Stalinism, revolution and the cold war . Marx looked around for other means of livelihood and fame .
 Kennedy implicated the co-author of The Communist Manifesto, Friedrich Engels, as well . The ""cause"" that informed the evils of ""Leninism, Stalinism, revolution, and the cold war"" was, of course, Marxism, and Marxism .
 The capitalist newspaper somehow inspired Marx and Engels to found the communist movement . The journalists and editors laughed and applauded at this ironic story of how .
 Kennedy's implication that the press might somehow have aided the spread of communism was hard to miss . Although intended as a humorous anecdote, Kennedy's joke was hard-to-miss .
 Kennedy deployed the language of secrecy and deception in describing the nature of the communist threat . In addition to implicating the press in his Cold War melodrama, Kennedy also implicates the press .
 Kennedy never directly identified the Soviet Union or Cuba as enemies of the U.S. The Soviet Union and Cuba were never enemies to the United States . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The free world was in a new kind of undeclared ""war"" with these forces of secrecy and deception . At stake in that war was America's democratic way of American life .
 Today no war has been declared, and however fierce the struggle may be, it may never be declared in the traditional fashion . As Kennedy explained, today no war is declared .
 No war has been declared, no borders have been crossed by marching troops, no missiles have been fired . And yet no war has yet been declared . No borders have yet been crossed .
 This melodramatic framing helped insulate Kennedy's speech against various counterarguments . Kennedy's "crisis rhetoric" is common in crisis rhetoric, but it's common in America .
 Kennedy's narrative of an undeclared war with a secretive and deceptive communist enemy cast a wide net of suspicion that defied refutation or counterevidence . Kennedy's tale of the war with the secretive communist enemy casts a wide-net of suspicion .
 Kennedy's melodramatic Cold War narrative was, of course, quite common in his day . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," says Kennedy .
 President Eisenhower tried to shift blame for the Bay of Pigs onto the American press . By emphasizing the secrecy and deception of the communist threat, however, he described a situation of particular relevance to his attempt .
 President Obama called on the press to censor itself in the interest of national security . He said the press should be censured for aiding the enemy in the war .
 He portrayed that self‐censorship not merely as a practical necessity but as a moral responsibility . He portrayed self-censorship as a . necessity . And he portrayed that . as a morality responsibility .
 Kennedy finally asked his audience of professional journalists for their support . He portrayed press restraint in wartime as a moral and patriotic duty .
 Kennedy's crisis rhetoric placed significant pressure on his audience of journalistic professionals to defer to his will . Kennedy claimed to trust newspaper editors and publishers to use good judgment about what to print .
 Windt reminds us that presidential crisis rhetoric often functions to close down debate . Windt: "Crisis rhetoric often closes down debate" Windt says that crisis rhetoric is often used to close debate .
 He explained: "In such speeches the policy is not proposed but declared. It is declared," he said .
 Kennedy's Cold War rhetoric functioned to constrain press from further criticism of Cold War policies . Yet viewed through the lens of crisis rhetoric, it functioned as a function of presidential crisis rhetoric .
 Presenting his audience with the appearance of choice in the matter, he implied that he trusted them to make the right choices . Presenting himself with the . appearance of . choice in . the matter in the . matter .
 Kennedy implied that during a wartime crisis they ought to err on the side of patriotic restraint . At the same time, however, he said that during the war, they should err on side of patriotism .
 Kennedy framed journalistic 'self‐restraint' as a time-honored tradition among patriotic press professionals . Kennedy: "Self-restraint" is a time‐honoured tradition .
 President Kennedy distances himself from the sort of censorship practiced by Woodrow Wilson and the Committee on Public Information during World War I . Kennedy: "I have no intention of establishing a new Office of War Information"
 I am not suggesting any new forms of censorship or new types of security classifications . I'm not proposing any new kinds of censorship, I'm just suggesting new ways of surveillance .
 This part of Kennedy's speech drew the most applause from his audience . Kennedy: "This is not the first time I've been in the U.S. history that I have been in a state of mind"
 If the press refused to police itself, the government might be justified in censoring the news . The government might not be happy with the press's refusal to report the news, he says .
 Referring to his audience as ""citizens who serve in the newspaper business,"" Kennedy stripped his audience of special status and admonished those who would fail to uphold the duties of good citizenship .
 Good citizenship required all to sacrifice their individual rights to the common good, especially to protect the nation's security . Good citizenship, of course, required all, to sacrifice individual rights .
 In the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster, Kennedy's call for journalists to ""reexamine their own responsibilities"" implied a past failure, specifically their release of information about the planned invasion .
 Kennedy's first term as president ended tragically on November 22, 1963, when he was assassinated in Dallas, Texas . The legacy of "The President and the Press" will continue through the years .
 Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as the 36th president less than two hours after Kennedy was shot and killed . Vice President Lyndon Johnson took office less than 2 hours after JFK's death .
 Despite his relatively short time in office, Kennedy is remembered as an eloquent, politically savvy, and effective public speaker . Kennedy is known for his eloquent and politically savvy public speaking .
 Rhetorical scholars often rank his ""First Inaugural Address"" and ""Houston Ministerial Association Address"" as two of the greatest speeches in American history .
 It is our contention that Kennedy's speech on April 27, 1961, should be considered one of his most important speeches . It is not ""rank in eloquence or perhaps in wisdom with his very greatest speeches""69"
 As an object lesson in the use of crisis rhetoric to stifle free speech and debate, it speaks volumes not only about Kennedy, but about both the power and the limits of the modern rhetorical presidency .
 Crisis rhetoric places significant pressure on its audience to succumb to the will of the president . Crisis rhetoric is significant pressure for the president to make his decision .
 In this case, Kennedy tried to use the ethos of the presidency to silence debate . Kennedy's attempt to silence the debate was an attempt to shut down the debate .
 This rhetoric of crisis may have worked to insulate the speech from counterargument . It may have turned journalistic self‐restraint into a test of moral responsibility and patriotism . This rhetoric may well have worked .
 There is plenty of evidence for those who prefer the explanation that the ASNE and ANPA speeches were simply distractions, deflections—even deceptions . And yet there is evidence that they were just distractions and deflections .
 Kennedy's attempt to deflect responsibility for the Bay of Pigs stood to jeopardize his good standing with the media and the U.S. people . Kennedy's attempts to deflect blame for the attack risked jeopardizing his standing with media .
 The administration has been characterized more with a desire for political propaganda than for a free flow of non-security information . In the field of information policies this administration is characterized as more than a desire to political propaganda .
 At the time this speech was delivered, however, it was not yet so clear how Cuba fit into the president's melodramatic drama .
 The larger legacy of Kennedy's ""The President and the Press"" is its relevance to ongoing debates over the First Amendment . Kennedy's larger legacy is his legacy of his book, The President and Press .
 As Craig R Smith has argued, the First Amendment is especially vulnerable during times of national crises . First Amendment especially vulnerable in times of crises, he says .
 Kennedy's attempt to use crisis rhetoric to limit First Amendment rights may have failed . We must remain on guard against attempts to exploit, heighten, or prolong national security crises that threaten our civil liberties .
 Later presidents would be more successful in arguing for restrictions on free speech during national crises . President George W. Bush would argue for restrictions during crises .
 Others have been more successful at shutting down debate, insulating themselves against counterargument, and shaming the voices of dissent . Invoking the same sort of melodramatic narratives of good versus evil, others have been successful at shut down debate .
 Douglass Kellner has warned that dualistic discourses of good and evil invariably undermine democratic deliberation . The author of this article has published a series of articles underlined that such discourses undermine democracy .
 As scholars and citizens, we should always cast a critical eye whenever faced with a script of presidential crisis rhetoric . We should cast an eye on the script of crisis rhetoric, as well as the words of the president .
 The authors wish to thank Shawn J Parry‐Giles, J Michael Hogan, and the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful feedback on this unit .
 Thanks also to Sharon Kelly, reference technician at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, for all her assistance .
 Castro later ransomed the captives to the United States for food and medicine . Castro later freed the captives and returned them to the U.S. Castro later sent them back to Cuba for food, medicine .
 President 'almost always' served as an outliner who suggested guidelines which an assistant used in writing the first draft of the book .
 Second, he 'almost always' acted as an editor and collaborator who tuned up thoughts, revised arguments, deleted words, sentences, and paragraphs, and inserted others . Third, he "almost always" acted as a collaborator, revised thoughts and revised arguments .
 James L Golden, ""John F Kennedy and the 'Ghosts,'"" Quarterly Journal of Speech 52 : 351. James L. Golden, "John F. Kennedy and The Ghosts"
 Lois J Einhorn, "The Ghosts Talk: Personal Interviews with Three Former Speechwriters,"" Communication Quarterly 36 : 94‐108, for an interview that includes another Kennedy speech writer, Dr. Dr. Martin Kennedy . Dr. Kennedy was a speech writer for the Kennedy administration
 Denise M Bostdorff, The Presidency and the Rhetoric of Foreign Crisis , vii‐vii; and Richard A Cherwitz and Kenneth S Zagacki, ""Consummatory Versus Justificatory Crisis Rhetor,"" Western Journal of Speech Communication 50
 Cold War Rhetoric: Strategy, Metaphor, and Ideology, ed. Conceptually and Critically,"" in Cold War ."""In Cold War."""Rhetoric" is a Cold War manifesto . Conceptually, Critically"
 Martin J Medhurst, Robert L Ivie, Philip Wander, and Robert L Scott , 13, are the authors of the book . The book is published by Robert Scott .
 "The Amalgamation of 9/11, Iraq, and Moral Values,"" American Behavioral Scientist 49 : 41. "Moral Values" is a study of the effects of 9-11 and Iraq .
 David Altheide, Creating Fear: News and the Construction of Crisis, 175‐197, and Barry Glassner, The Culture of Fear: Why Americans are Afraid of the Wrong Things, 1‐20 .
 Presidential Rhetoric in the 'War on Terror,'"" Presidential Studies Quarterly 37 : 622‐645. Presidential Studies .