 The October 1962 crisis, always a popular subject, has become even more so within the last year . New information has emerged and provoked reexaminations of what was perhaps the world's most perilous nuclear confrontation .
 Garthoff, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, was at least marginally involved in the crisis as a staff-level advisor in the State Department . He was a staff adviser at the time .
 The book is partially his personal memoir, interwoven with references to memoranda he wrote during the crisis . The book includes a collection of memoranda written by the author .
 These declassified memoranda appear in an appendix, and while supplementing the historical record, they were not central to American decision-making at the time . The declassified documents do not represent a breakthrough in our understanding of this complex episode .
 Garthoff's account is most useful for its coverage of Soviet sources and perceptions of what they label the ""Caribbean Crisis,"" and of its aftermath .
 U.S. did not formally pledge itself against future invasion of Cuba . President Kennedy's security demands were never met, he says . He says .
 Not until 1970, when the Soviets again broached the issue, did Washington make such a commitment . It was not until 1970 that the U.S. made a commitment to the project .
 SAC commander General Thomas Power issued the orders placing his forces on full-alert ""in the clear"" rather than in code in order to ""rub the Soviets' noses" in our overwhelming nuclear superiority . The orders were made without the knowledge of Kennedy or his advisors .
 Philip Nash is a candidate for the MALD degree at The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy . Nash is currently studying at the Fletcher School, Fletcher . Nash will be a candidate at the law and diplomacy school .
 See ""Robertson Stands by his Statement on Cuban Missiles,"" Boston Globe , 16 February 1988, 13, and ""New Sources Cited for Missile Charge,"" 17 February 1988 .
 United States forces were placed on ""DefCon 2,"" the highest alert ever . The U.S. was placed on DefCon 2, the highest ever . United States troops placed on 'DefCon'
 CIA decided his signal was false and did not pass it on to the ExComm . Fortunately, the CIA decided not to pass on the false signal .
 The downing of an American U-2 spy plane at the height of the crisis may have been the work of Cuban forces . Cuban forces had seized control of a surface-to-air missile site from Soviets .
 President Kennedy was willing to sustain serious political costs and publicly trade U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles' removal rather than eliminate them . President Kennedy, contrary to existing accounts, was willing .
 Kennedy was prepared to arrange for the UN Secretary-General to propose such a deal if Khrushchev were to reject the American ultimatum of late October 27 . Kennedy had knowledge only of Secretary of State Dean Rusk and a go-between .
 Some of these developments could have led to nuclear war despite the fact that the Americans, with their vast nuclear superiority, did not want nuclear war any more than the Soviets did . The Americans didn't want to go to war with the Soviets more than they did with the USSR .
 GarthofF concludes with the notion oř ""crisis prevention,"" something that interests Soviet observers much more than American. Deemphasizing crisis management, GarthoffF concludes .
 The greatest weakness oF GarthofF 's book is that he introduces new Facts and certain issues without analyzing them . The book's greatest weakness is that it introduces new facts and issues without analysis .
 Kennedy's safety-valve plan to swap Turkish for Cuban missiles is included but not discussed . Kennedy's proposal to swap Cuban missiles for Turkish missiles is also included in the report .
 We may infer that Garthoff, by stressing uncontrolled and potentially dangerous incidents, believes that nuclear war was more likely in 1962 than we have supposed . In 1962, the threat of nuclear war in 1962 was less likely than we thought .
 Daniel Ellsberg, who worked for the Defense Department at the time, was the source of this information . Ellsenberg was a former Air Force veteran who leaked classified classified documents .
 In fairness Garthoff has achieved most of what he set out to do adding to the existing body of memoir material . Reflections are not particularly reflective .
 Others will still be better off reading Robert F Kennedy's Thirteen Days, with all its shortcomings, in conjunction with more recent articles .