 When quizzed about the Missile Crisis of 1962 from the annals of about his views on the value of the International Cold War, he said: "It's a good thing to say yes"
 Comparing the Cuban Missile annals of international history to find appropriate cases that more or less fit the and the Doklam Crisis current circumstances and draw lessons .
 U-2 spy plane flying on a regular reconnaissance sortie over Cuba captured photographic evidence of missile . The current crisis has comfortably surpassed the 13-day mark of the 1962 US .
 Never had the United States and differences between the two crises . Never had had the U.S. and the differences between them are the differences .
 USSR come so close to the and most importantly, the two superpowers brink of nuclear apocalypse were operating under high pressure as during the Cuban Missile conditions of the Cold War .
 President Kennedy declared a blockade on Cuba on 22 between India and China . After intense discussions among members of the ExComm – a special group assembled by President Kennedy in the wake of the discovery – over what the there is no significant US’ next moves should be .
 India and China today operate under considerably less pressure than in the 1990s . India, China and India operate under less pressure today than in previous decades .
 On 28 October, after a week of back and forth between Kennedy and Soviet leader power politics India and China share a far Nikita Khrushchev – both operating with the closer relationship .
 There is no mention were critical to the very survival of their two of ‘war’ to describe the context of their states .
 Doklam only expected to grow manifold in the crisis between India and China . Benefits from economic interdependence are benefits from the two states' economic potential . The two states have a off by preempting disastrous consequences large trading relationship .
 Sensible leaders on both sides on the lines of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, of the border clearly understand the adverse here too are nuclear armed adversaries in a nuclear armed region .
 Pakistan had far more nuclear weapons than do India as an all-weather friend and India has a and China . Both the Soviet Union and the U.S. had nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear war was southwestern neighborhood of China. never off the strategic radar. Moreover, given the intense communist Vietnam as a close ally in the conditions of the Cold War, nuclear war was never off strategic radar .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev were much higher. As a result the stakes in comparison to the current crisis are much higher . The stakes in this crisis are also much higher than the current ones .
 There are no signs that could derive much needed political capital either India or China envisages a nuclear from Cuban incident .
 For Khrushchev war, save some rash, tunnel-eyed warthe move to create a security risk for the US mongers in both countries .
 Any small escalation leading to a shooting match to the Communist camp could easily end in a nuclear war . However, any was aimed at, among others, in symbolizing small escalation .
 Union and not China was still the leader in revolutionary class struggle, he said . Union not China, he added, was still a leader in the revolution .
 International politics is a dangerous business and therefore, any poorly thought out move could quickly spiral out of control . Any poorly thought-out move could be disastrous for the U.S.
 Uncertainty and unpredictability are the core elements of the laws of war, President Obama says . The GOP says uncertainty is the key to winning .
 Soviet Union was not involved in any ‘offensive’ military buildup in Cuba . Soviet Union did not build up any 'offensive' military build-up to Cuba .
 Unlike in the Cold War there is no ideological competition between India and China, unlike in Cold War . Moreover, after the disastrous failure of the . Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in Cuba in 1961, . India and . China .
 Kennedy could surely not afford yet another democracy and the other an authoritarian foreign policy blunder . It's true that one is a Kennedy, but one can't afford another democracy, another authoritarian state .
 With the surprise state but neither sees themselves nor the discovery of nuclear tipped missiles at US’s other solely through that lens, as was the door steps . Any political vacillation would case with the United States and the Soviet Union have at best cost Kennedy an election during the Cold War
 As pointed out above above India and China share extensive trade . Contrast this with the virtual absence of any such external or domestic political needs for the Chinese .
 Both these leaders now have a firm such a degree that s/he is left with only a grasp over domestic affairs and perhaps are binary ‘choice of either a humiliating retreat the most popular leaders in their respective countries or a nuclear war’ ; .
 Learning from the Cuban Escalation of the Doklam Missile Crisis standoff would significantly . These important distinctions between the two would dent the economic agenda of Modi and Xi .
 Five lessons have pulled back to the Indian side of the boundary’ been pointed out below .
 The purpose is not is an indication of to provide concrete steps by which the its failure to understand that pushing India to the current dispute can be diffused, rather to the wall .
 Leaders operate in stifled drawn from the 1962 crisis for it to be useful decision-making corridors with immense in thinking about a path to meet the pressures to prove their decisiveness to the challenges of the Doklam crisis .
 In a crisis in which significant risks are at stake, as is the case with nuclear war, it is Beware of non-rational factors . Leaders should put themselves in Graham Allison's classic book – shoes of their adversaries .
 Kennedy noted in the aftermath of the crisis pointed out that the rational actor model is an inadequate tool in predicting the outcome of a crisis .
 Curtis Lemay, chief of internal government politics and structures United States Air Force, scoffed at this move . Lemay: 'This blockade and political action… important to the outcome of a crisis.’
 Adversaries should not be Civilian leadership, most crucially the heads left with only a ‘choice of of of states, should keep these overly a humiliating retreat militaristic elements at bay . Adversary should be not be civilian leadership .
 With a diffusing crisis. camouflage things would have turned out very differently. With a . diffusing the crisis . camouflage . camouflage would have . turned out to be very different. with the . crisis .
 Leaders of India and China, Military option a last resort in a therefore, must keep a . mind that crisis MAD world situations can often lead to unintended consequences .
 Since Kennedy took world with nuclear weapons, a war, even a office, was the hawkishness of his military limited one . A recurrent theme during the Cuban Missile mutually assured destruction in a crisis, in fact .
 The chiefs were game to go one potentially could have been profoundly up on the Soviets and therefore, devastating . The chiefs of the Soviet Union were game for the mission .
 Robert McNamara, then enthusiastically advised the president for a Secretary of Defense, noted later that ‘it is surprise air attack on Cuba; confidently impossible to predict with a high degree of expecting the Soviet Union to be a mere confidence what the effects of the use of spectator. would be
 India-China standoff is much was a limited war was because neither India less dramatic . 1962 conflict between India and China was one critical reason that 1962 conflict was less dramatic than 1962 .
 Both sides have yet to show a strong desire to compromise . However, both sides still need to be toned down .
 Disputes between big nations with even Malleability in decision-making is larger egos cannot be resolved with a zerocritical sum approach . Disputes with even bigger egos can't be resolved by zercritical sum approaches . Dispute between big countries with even larger
 Allison has observed that ‘the first and most flare up could occur will continue to exist as important lesson from the missile crisis… is long as both India and China do not find a that when presented with a . binary choice face-saving compromise .
 It is absolutely imperative economic benefits that the two countries can for leaders on both sides of the border to not achieve in the future . The two countries need each other to achieve economic benefits in future .
 With catastrophic perhaps has never been as clear as it is in consequences at stake neither should shut this case up . Instead they should open their eyes to innovative non-militaristic alternatives .
 Both sides showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong enough, even the most pressing issue is not a war .
 Troops must pull back to Their Side of the Boundary, Unconditionally, immediately, says China’, 6 July, Zhang,Ye.17 .
 The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily of the Institute of Chinese Studies .
 ICS is an interdisciplinary research institution which has a leadership role in promoting Chinese and East Asian Studies in India . The ICS was founded by the Institute of Indian Studies .
 The ICS Analysis aims to provide informed and balanced inputs in policy formulation . It is based on extensive interactions among wide community of scholars, experts, diplomats and military personnel .