 The CIA placed before President Kennedy the first confirmed pictures of Soviet nuclear missile emplacements in Cuba on 16 October, 1962 . What became known as the Missile Crisis or October Crisis began .
 The news of the discovery was not made known to the public until six days later . Kennedy made his dramatic televised address to the United States population and announced a naval blockade of the Caribbean .
 While the U.S. saw the emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba as aggression, the Soviets and Cubans viewed their actions as defensive .
 There followed 13 notorious days of worldwide terror at the prospect of a nuclear war between the superpowers .
 In Cuba, the population prepared for a military invasion, as the leaderships in Washington and Moscow struggled to find a diplomatic way to resolve their differences .
 FURTHER DETAILS of COSTS, TIMETABLE, ACCOMMODATION etc. will be posted in due course . FURTH DETAILES OF COST, TIMES, TIMETS, etc.
 New evidence continues to come from the archives of the former Soviet Union . New evidence shows that we were much closer to nuclear war than has been believed so far .
 In my presentation, I will focus on a number of newly discovered documents that support that interpretation of the crisis . I will present a presentation of the documents in which they were found to support that view .
 Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy compares the actions of the American president to those of Hitler . The letter shows how emotionally charged relations between the two leaders had become .
 The letter was already on its way to the U.S. embassy when Khrushchev changed his mind and recalled it . The letter had already been sent to the United States embassy .
 U.S. Strategic Air Command had gone on high alert, shifting from Defcon 3 to Defcon 2 . Decision to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba was influenced by reports of high alert . Decision was also influenced by the reports that the United States was on alert .
 The shift of readiness, which frightened Khrushchev, was barely mentioned in the discussions among members of JFK’s ExCom . Ironically, that shift of combat readiness was barely discussed in the discussion .
 KGB reports coming from the Ukrainian archives show how the Soviets smuggled four times as many officers and soldiers into Cuba as the Americans believed to be there . This despite careful surveillance by U.S. pilots .
 The memoirs of Soviet participants in the crisis show that at its height, Soviet commanders on the island had the authority and opportunity to use tactical nuclear weapons in self-defense . At the height of the crisis, commanders had the power and authority to use such weapons .
 Only sheer luck prevented the firing of a Soviet nuclear-armed torpedo at American ships in the Caribbean . The Americans knew nothing about the existence of those weapons, and only sheer luck stopped the firing .
 This new evidence allows us to reevaluate the severity of the risks presented by the insistence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on invading Cuba and Kennedy’s own belief that the best way to deal with the Soviet ballistic missiles was to “wipe them out” with an air
 He was HMG Ambassador to Mosicow from 1988 . He was the Foreign Policy Adviser to the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Rt. Hon. David Cameron .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, each side found it hard to work out what the other was up to . Mutual failures of intelligence and understanding were blamed for the crisis .
 Technical methods of gathering intelligence are improving, but the information they produced could be misleading or plain wrong . Technical methods were improving, though the information was misleading, according to the report .
 Neither side had a well-placed agent inside the other’s top decision-making apparatus – indeed it is hard to see how such an agent could have been found and operated . Neither side was able to find out how to do so without a well placed agent .
 John Kennedy mitigated the crisis because he never lost sight of how the evolving crisis looked to Nikita Khrushchev . John Kennedy was able to deal with the crisis in his own way, says historian John Avlon .
 He knew that his own side would get restive if he showed too much understanding of his opponent . But he also knew that he would not be able to show too much respect for his own team .
 This presentation offers an assessment of the cogent arguments, and new details, that Sherwin provided which focused on just how lucky mankind was to survive the 1962 superpower conflict in Cuba . To honor his final work, this presentation offers a presentation .
 The lessons both countries drew from the crisis actually made the possibility of future conflict more likely because they ignored the role of empathy . The lessons made the situation worse likely because of empathy, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Neither leader chose to empathize with Fidel Castro, or was unwilling to do so . Neither did they empathize, or were unwilling to, with Castro .
 U.S. lack of empathy continues to shape contemporary US-Cuban relations, says Cuban diplomat . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been strained for years .
 The ‘Missile’ Crisis as seen from Cuba, and with Håkan Karlsson of The Missile Crisis from a Cuban Perspective . Karlsson: The missile crisis from the Cuban Perspective. The Missile crisis from a Cuba perspective.
 As an 18-year-old, Tomás Tomás served in the Cuban military during the Crisis . Tomás was 18-years-old when he joined the military in Cuba .
 For Cubans, the crisis was a lesson that confirmed and strengthened their conceptions of how to defend the country . In Defence of Principles for Cubans: The crisis confirms and strengthens their conceptions .
 Cuba defended, with dignity and courage, its self-determination and sovereignty, in face of the actions of the two superpowers . At the same time, it proved to the world the ideological strength of the principles upheld by the Cuban Revolution .
 Cuba firmly confronts the United States policy of arrogance and force . Cuba firmly confronted the U.S. policy of "arrogant and force" Cuba .
 Cuba discussed the disagreements that emerged with the Soviet Union in the midst of the crisis, due to the unilateral manner in which the USSR negotiated to end the conflict . And, basing its stance on justice and reason, Cuba bashed the USSR's unilateral way of ending the conflict with Cuba
 Cuba’s policy was distinguished by having flexibility to make negotiations possible, without making any concessions of principle, despite the U.S. efforts to exclude Cuba from the process . In those “brilliant yet sad” days, as Ernesto Che Guevara
 The project is a cooperation between Swedish archaeologists, Cuban archaeologists, historians and anthropologists . It is a collaboration between Swedish and Cuban archaeologists .
 The film focuses on material that remains in the old Soviet nuclear missile bases . It focuses on the reuse of the material from the bases in the fields and towns surrounding the sites .
 The aim is to contribute with more human and complementary dimensions to the crisis and its “dominant narrative” The October Crisis aims to reach new forms of knowledge about the crisis .
 The project shows that it is possible to complement the dominant narrative of the crisis with material and immaterial remains . The project is a project that complements the dominant narratives of the project .