 Hint Kennedy and Khrushchev Kennedy and Andropov Kennedy and Brezhnev Kennedy . Hint . Kennedy and Nixon . Kennedy . Andropova Kennedy and Kennedy . Nixon and Nixon. Kennedy .
 Hint Air strikes followed by invasion A first strike Using the CIA to overthrow Castro Castro was a first strike using the CIA . Next step would be to attack the USSR .
 Hint: A naval blockade of Cuba and a blockade of the USSR . Set up more missiles in Western Europe . He did nothing . Hint A naval block of Cuba .
 Hint Khrushchev's rise to power Castro's revolution and failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Hint Nixon-Castro-Khrushchev meeting. Hint the failure of the failed Bay-of-the-Pig invasion .
 Took missiles out of West Berlin . Promised not to invade Cuba and took down some of its missiles in Turkey . Took down missiles in West Berlin and promised not to assassinate Castro . Promized not to kill Castro .
 Hint Trying to subvert the Bolshevik revolution Trying to assassinate Castro trying to assassinate various Soviet leaders Trying to invade East Berlin trying to invade Berlin . Hint . Trying to overthrow the Bolshevik Revolution Trying to kill Castro Trying to assassinate various . Soviet leaders .
 Hint comprehensive ban of nuclear weapons proliferation the ABM treaty . A direct phone line from the White House to the Kremlin from the Kremlin SALT NEXT> 10.
 Good thing Kennedy was tough enough not to get pushed around by the military . Kennedy was a tough guy .
 If the U.S. had attacked Cuba, we might not be sitting here at our computers now . If the United States had attacked, Cuba might not have been sitting here today .
 He could not have sat by and done nothing, nor could he be overly aggressive . Probably the best option, he could not sit by and do nothing .
 This was just the right move to ""tighten the rope"", and to call the Soviet's bluff . This was a move to 'tighten' the rope' and to 'call the Soviet bluff'
 Soviet ships could have gone around the blockade . Tactically, it was useless, since Soviet ships were able to go around the blockage .
 The U.S. can be blamed just as much as the Soviets and the Cubans, according to CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Castro wanted to meet with U.S. officials when he first came to power in January 1959 . He wanted to ally himself with the West, and wanted to be allies with the United States .
 Castro met with Nixon in April 1959, and it did not go well . Nixon despised Castro for his socialist tendencies . Nixon met with Castro in 1959, but it went well .
 Nixon essentially told Castro he was not interested in any kind of alliance with him . Nixon said he would not be interested in an alliance with Castro . Castro was Castro's first president .
 The Soviets withdrew their missiles on the understanding that the USA would not invade Cuba and would remove their missiles from Turkey . The U.S. did not want to invade Cuba, but would remove them from Turkey if it was not invaded .
 The United States delegate to the UN embarrassed the Soviets in front of every member nation . The U.S. delegate embarrassed the Soviet Union in the way he did .
 The Soviets denied putting missiles on Cuba, up until Stevenson pulled the evidence from his briefcase . Stevenson pulled out the evidence in a briefcase, which led to the discovery of missiles .
 Promised not to invade Cuba and took down some of its missiles in Turkey . Promised to take down missiles in Cuba and take down missile bases in Turkey.
 Since the USSR didn't suffer any tactical loss, the Soviets stood where they originally were, and the United States gave up 2 things . The U.S. gave up two things to the Soviet Union .
 The Turkey missiles were already scheduled for removal, but Kennedy used it as a bargaining chip . Please note that the Turkey missiles had already been scheduled to be removed .
 U.S. offered Turkey in exchange for Cuba . It wasn't technically part of the deal, but it put the United States in a favorable position . Turkey is now a key ally in the Cuban diocese .
 Cuba's economy has been suffering, but amazingly, Castro remained in power till 2008 . With a trade embargo, Cuba's economic growth has been a major problem .
 There is still a lot of resentment towards Castro for accepting the Soviet missiles . Castro is seen to have accepted the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Castro's actions were irresponsible and created a dangerous situation . This resentment is totally appropriate, considering Castro's irresponsible and dangerous actions .
 One of the biggest problems during the CMC was the inability for the two powers to communicate . The two powers failed to communicate during the two CMCs .
 "This created confusion and misinterpretation between the two countries," says President Obama . This created confusion between the U.S. and South Korea .
 At the time, the United States thought no Soviet SAM could fly that high . The U.S. thought no such a high-tech SAM could be launched .
 This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor bloomsby before going online . Author maranello550
 Any errors found in this article are routinely corrected through our feedback system . We rate the errors made by mistake .