 In 1962, the United States discovered that Russia was secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba . The U.S. discovered the discovery at the height of the Cold War in 1962 .
 President John F Kennedy convenes a team of counselors to help determine how to respond to the tragedy . President Kennedy convened a team to help decide how to deal with the situation .
 The challenge is how to force Russia to withdraw missiles without triggering a nuclear war . Russia's missiles could be used to carry out nuclear attacks on the U.S.
 Days shows President Kennedy's leadership in resisting demands for airstrikes and aggression that would have triggered the nuclear holocaust . Days shows the president resisted demands for strikes and aggression . Kennedy: "Days of Days" is a reminder of his leadership in the fight against nuclear war .
 The 13 days capture the tensions caused by the crisis and provide examples of how foreign policy was conducted in the second half of the 20th century . Kevin Costner, Bruce Greenwood, Stephen Culp, Dylan Baker, Kevin Conway, Bill Smitrovich .
 You can understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in high office, says President Obama . You can also understand how important diplomacy is in the world, says Obama .
 Students will gain insight into U.S. history and this period in the Cuban missile crisis . Students will learn about United States history and the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The Useful Background section of this study guide provides the information you need to make these fixes . Use the useful Background section to make the fixes .
 If kids want more information about this dangerous period in Cold War history, read the helpful background information in this guide .
 The 13 days are the story of nuclear Armageddon and humanity's closest brush . The 13-day story is the tale of the 13 days before the nuclear holocaust .
 The film captures the tensions caused by the crisis . The film provides an example of how foreign policy was conducted in the second half of the 20th century .
 The film shows how wise leadership saved the world from nuclear war during crises . It also shows how errors and errors of judgment led to crises .
 The film is an excellent platform for discussions on the Cuban missile crisis, nuclear weapons policy during the Cold War, and current foreign policy issues . The film will be a great platform for discussion of current foreign policies .
 The film, outlined in this learning guide, serves as a motivation and supplement to the Cold War unit . And the film is outlined in the learning guide .
 Even policymakers did not recognize how close the situation really was to disaster in 1962 . Just as the world was horrified in October 1962, even policymakers didn't realize how close .
 Kennedy thought the chances of a nuclear war were a third, but the administration didn't know much . Kennedy thought it was a third of the chances .
 Soviet personnel were thought to have just 2 to 3,000 personnel . For example, missiles were not working and soviet had just 2-3,000 people .
 Airstrikes were planned on the 30th before the installation of a nuclear warhead . Therefore, the airstrikes were planned for the month of April 30th .
 In 1991-92, Soviet authorities revealed that 42 missiles had been installed and were fully operating . The missiles were installed and fully operating in the Soviet Union .
 In addition, the 9 SRBM was ready to be used against the Americans in case of invasion . In addition to the SRBM were also ready to use against the U.S. in the event of an invasion .
 The Soviet Union had tactical nuclear weapons that local commanders could use to repel attacks . Local commanders were authorized to use the weapons to protect against attacks .
 McNamara told reporters in 1992, "This is horrible. This is horrible," McNamara said . McNamara was shaken after he found out about the incident .
 This meant that a United States invasion took place . The majority of the time they thought a nuclear war would begin was thought to be over . This means that a U.S. invasion of the Soviet Union took place.
 The crisis began and ended in October 1962, but the story began much earlier . The crisis started and ended October 31, 1962 .
 In the immediate aftermath of World War II, relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated . The cooperation that allowed the Allies to overthrow Nazi Germany led to the defeat of Nazi Germany .
 Britain and the U.S. launched containment policies to try to block the expansion of the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan into Iran and limit the Soviet Union . In response to the move, the British and the United States tried to block it .
 As the Cold War began, Americans were alarmed by the spread of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and East Asia . Americans were worried about the spread in East Asia and Eastern Europe .
 The Soviet Union was worried about the unity of the U.S. and powerful Western European nations after the war . It was also worried that the United States and Western Europe would not be united after WWII .
 The communist bloc and capitalist democracy fell from crisis to crisis . The Soviet Union was founded in 1968 . The Cold War was the Cold War of Cold War II .
 Soviet blockade of Berlin, Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace . Chinese shelling of Taiwan's Kemoy Island and pines . confrontations over Suez Canal between Soviet allies Egypt and Western allies .
 The ATM could not reach the United States . But it was able to reach Western Europe .
 There was defense against long-range bombers, but no defense against ICBMs or ICMMs . The U.S. has not been able to defend against ICM or ICBM missiles .
 In 1962, the U.S. government knew its nuclear capabilities were much stronger than the Soviet Union, but found it unacceptable to lose a major city with casualties approaching 100,000 . The United States knew its capabilities were stronger than Russia, but decided not to lose major city .
 U.S. did not allow the destruction of Europe, writes CNN.com senior editor Peter Bergen . He says it was through treaty obligations and real issues, Washington did not .
 The Soviet Union felt the inferiority sense of the nuclear deterrent sharply . However, the Soviet Union did not agree with the idea of using it .
 The effort to install missiles in Cuba was an effort by Russia to quickly and cheaply improve its nuclear capabilities . The effort was part of an effort to quickly improve its capabilities .
 Refueling and maintained missile transport aircraft and missile-ready tents . Refueled and maintained missiles transport aircraft, missiles and tents .
 The U.S. increased military spending under Kennedy and increased its nuclear weapons lead over Russia, while refusing to deny it a nuclear first strike . The United States increased its lead in the nuclear weapons race with Russia .
 Despite the fall of the Bay of Pigs, the U.S. continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and assassinate dictator Fidel Castro . The United States continued to try and destabilize the country .
 The Soviet leadership was not aware of how afraid the U.S. was of Russia's nuclear deterrent . The United States was afraid of the Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal .
 Nikita Khrushchev launched a plan to secretly place medium-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . The plan was meant to prevent the U.S. from invading Cuba again .
 These missiles would be able to reach almost all of the continental United States . The missiles would have a range of missiles that could reach the continental U.S.
 The CIA found out about the suspicious activity from sources on the island . The U.S. sent a U-2 spy plane to investigate .
 The U-2 returned with a photo of the missile launch site under construction . President Kennedy convened an adviser before announcing the discovery to the world .
 Some recommended diplomacy, while others pressed for military options such as airstrikes and the invasion of Cuba . Some suggested diplomacy, others suggested the invasion .
 President Kennedy adopted a mid-range approach to prevent the U.S. Navy from isolating the island of Cuba and preventing additional missiles and assault weapons from reaching the island . The United States used world opinion to launch a diplomatic attack to try to pressure the Soviet Union to remove the missiles
 Soviet ships tested the blockade, but ultimately chose not to challenge quarantine . The blockade was imposed by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 The United States has allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine for part of it . The U.S. has allowed food and food through quarantine through quarantine .
 A Soviet ground-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, resulting in the pilot's death . Acting without Moscow's approval, the plane was shot down over Cuba . The pilot was killed in Cuba .
 The U.S. promised to remove 15 outdated Jupiter missiles from Turkey in the future . The agreement also includes the removal of 15 outdated missiles from the country .
 President Kennedy had ordered the removal of these missiles a few months ago, but due to opposition between the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles remained in place .
 After the Cuban missile crisis, the superpowers moved to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation . The superpowers agreed to reduce risk of a nuclear confrontation in order to avoid nuclear war .
 Difficulties in communication encountered during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone communications between the leaders to avoid misunderstandings .
 Future U.S. presidents and Soviet leaders conducted strategic arms restriction talks in the 1960s and 1970s . The talks limited the number of nuclear warheads ready to strike the other side .
 The 1969 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty stried to limit the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries . The 1969 N.P.N.A. Treaty was signed by the U.S. and the West .
 The U.S. and Russia are not likely to come again to the same level of threat that characterized the 13 days of October 1962 . The United States and Russia will not likely come back together again, experts say .
 The additional background below will help you understand the concerns of the participants and their statements, as described in the film .
 Nazi Germany violated the restrictions on military power set out in the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I . In an aim to expand, Germany demanded that a part of czech territory called Sudetenland be ceded to Czechoslovakia .
 At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, leaders of western countries -France and Britain -agreed to fall apart in Czechoslovakia to protect Hitler .
 Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed Sudetenland, it would not seek additional territory . Hitler promised to not seek more territory if it absorbed Sudenland .
 British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain said he brought peace in our time . Neville Chamberlain was the prime minister of the Great War . Chamberlain was assassinated in 1941 .
 The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading to the invasion of Poland . The conference convinced him to invade Poland . Germany invaded Poland in 1945 .
 President Roosevelt declared war on Germany after his mistakes with Czechoslovakia, Britain, France and France .
 Their father, Joseph P Kennedy, was one of the few billionaires to support Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election . The Kennedy family is a billionaire businessman who supported FDR .
 Ambassador Kennedy backed the Munich compromise . In a dedicated cable and public speech to the State Department, he backed the compromise .
 Joseph P Kennedy insisted on a compromise between Hitler and isolationist foreign policy . From the days of Munich until long after the U.S. declared war on Germany, he insisted on the compromise .
 As a young man, President Kennedy wrote best-selling books criticizing comfort . Kennedy: "I'm not comfortable with comfort. I'm comfortable with my life," he says .
 John Kennedy supported reconciliation under the burden of his father's position . Nevertheless, until the missile crisis was over, he supported reconciliation . John Kennedy: "I'm not going to blame my father for the crisis"
 On December 7, 1941, the Japanese Navy launched an infiltration attack on a U.S. Naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii . The Japanese Navy attacked the base in 1941 .
 Japan had not declared war on U.S. President Roosevelt on December 7, labeling it a day to live falsely . Japan did not declare war on United States President Roosevelt .
 First, the lesson that adversaries might launch sneak attacks was absorbed by U.S. intelligence agencies . U.2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that found the missiles were also responsible for finding the missiles .
 The fear of losing the moral high altitude by launching a sneak attack on a missile base serves as a restraint for policymakers . Second, through Excom's deliberations, the fear of a strike is also a restraint, the author says .
 President Kennedy hid issues that would easily win immunity from military service . President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat and hid issues .
 Kennedy rescued one seriously injured sailor by taking his men to a small island a few miles away and holding a strap in the reserve of life between his teeth as he swam to shore . Kennedy rescued the man by taking one of the injured to a nearby island .
 Kennedy was awarded the Navy-Marine Corps Medal for his leadership and courage . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 Russia suffered more from war than any other country in terms of casualties and property destruction . Russia suffered the most from war in history, with more casualties than anyone else .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, men making decisions in Moscow and the U.S. knew first-hand the terrible effects of a massive war .
 Fidel Castro had only experience of a relatively painless civil war . Fidel Castro was only president of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Castro's willingness to trigger a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors in the crisis . Castro was seen to be a destabilizing factor in the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 After World War II, the Allies divided the German capital, Berlin, into four occupied territories . Berlin was divided into four German territories after the war .
 Shortly after the war, western countries integrated their zone into a new state called West Germany .
 Russia established a communist state in their zone called East Germany . East Germany was known as East Germany during the Cold War . Russia established East Germany in the 1950s .
 The Russian sector of Berlin has d'e000 to be the capital of East Germany . The Russian part of Berlin is thought to have been East Germany's capital .
 The western sector of Berlin has 100,000 residents, despite being deep within the territory of East Germany . The western part of Berlin is also home to 100,500 residents .
 West Berlin's status and prosperity has increasingly stirn up Russians and East Germans . West Berlin is increasingly popular with East Germans and Russians . The status of West Berlin has increasingly stirred up East Germans in recent years .
 Western countries have installed effective airlifts to bring supplies to cities . Western countries, led by the U.S., have installed air lifts to bring food and medicine to the cities .
 Western democracies have made it clear that war will happen if the Soviet Union interferes with the airlift . Western nations have made clear that the Soviet U.S. will not allow it to take part in airlifts .
 Russia broke the blockade when they were convinced that the West would not back down . In the end, the Russians with the help of the West refused to back down. Russia's blockade was the result of the blockade .
 West Berlin became a symbol of the United States' determination to resist soviet expansion . West Berlin was a symbol for the U.S. of the West .
 It was the basis of the Western policy of containment that stried to thwart the expansion of Russian influence and communist ideology . Therefore, it was . The Western policy was to thwart . the . expansion of . Russian influence .
 West Berlin has become a glittering oasis of wealth that stands in contrast to the Drabs of East Germany and the relatively poor life . West Berlin is one of the world's most wealthy cities .
 West Germany also became an economic powerhouse, making its eastern rivals smaller . West Germany became a major economic hub in the 1980s and 1990s . East Germany's eastern rivals were smaller than West Germany .
 Many East Germans fled to West Berlin on their way to West Germany in search of a better life in the West . East Berlin was a major hub for East Berlin during the 1960s and '90s .
 The situation has become unbearable for the Russian and East German governments . For the Russians and East Germans, the situation has been unbearable . The situation is now unbearable for both countries .
 Khrushchev committed his personal prestige and Soviet prestige to action against Western interests in Berlin . The decision was made to take action against the Western interests .
 As Khrushchev colorfully puts it, Berlin was the Soviet throat bone . Cable United States Ambassador to Russia Lluwellyn Tommy Thompson to Kennedy, 1961 .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromiko told President Kennedy during the crisis that Russia would take steps to end its Western presence in Berlin after the U.S. election in November .
 Kennedy Tape: Inside the White House during the Cuban missile crisis . May and Zelikow, below Kennedy Tape, discuss the Cuban crisis .
 In August 1961, russians and East Germans sealed off West Berlin and began building the Berlin Wall . The wall was built to stop the spill from Berlin to West Germany . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to prevent the spill .
 Its defenders were surrounded on all fours by an excellent number of East German and Russian and East German troops . The East German capital was surrounded by Russian and Russian troops .
 Communists and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization acknowledged this fact . The Communists and North American Treaty Organization acknowledge it .
 Allies of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will not tolerate the loss of West Berlin . West Berlin is a key part of NATO's North Atlantic Alliance .
 If the U.S. allows the Russians to accept West Berlin, its Western European partners especially England and France will feel betrayed . NATO alliance will feel severely weakened if it is not destroyed, says Julian Zelizer .
 U.S. policy declared by President Kennedy was to defend West Berlin with a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union if necessary . The West was unable to defend the city using conventional forces .
 For the United States, maintaining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance was more important than removing missiles from Cuba . For the U.S., maintaining the alliance was military more important .
 The U.S. public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere . But if they had allowed missiles to be secretly introduced to the island, they would not have had credit for its allies or enemies .
 In April 1961, with the approval of President Kennedy, the CIA carried out an invasion of Cuba with Cuban exiles as its first landing force . President Kennedy approved of the invasion with the permission of President of Cuba .
 President Kennedy relied on the advice of an experienced man in government who told him that the invasion would succeed . President Kennedy relies on advice from an experienced government adviser .
 The invasion was an un mitigating disaster for the U.S. government and President Kennedy, says President Kennedy . "The invasion was un mitigating ... for the United States government and . President Kennedy," he says .
 President Kennedy told the cia director and aide to resign after a decent interval . Responsible officials, cia. director and . aide , were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign .
 Operation Mongoose was developed to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro . The CIA developed the operation after the Invasion of the Bay of Pigs . The operation was used to assassinate Castro Castro .
 Robert Kennedy pushed the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and personal action against Castro . Robert Kennedy, at the president's direction, was very tenacious in overseeing these activities personally .
 This was a massive operation with 6000 acts of destructive activity carried out in Cuba . The operation was a 'massive operation' with 6,000 acts of destruction carried out .
 He now knew he needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative action and seek advice from various sources inside and outside government before making important decisions, he said .
 The summer of 1961, when the Soviet Union posed its first threat to West Berlin, was the summer of the year . He used this process to prepare for the invasion of West Berlin .
 Excom deliberations shown in the film were a means by which President Kennedy got advice during the Cuban missile crisis . President Kennedy received advice from the Excom during the crisis .
 Excomm was an unusual institution because it included representatives outside the government, in this case former Secretary of State Dean Aceson . Excomm included representatives from outside government, such as former Secretary-of-State .
 The committee includes government officials from agencies not involved in important military decisions . The committee is usually comprised of government officials .
 U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Adry Stevenson and former two-time Democratic presidential candidate advocated reconciliation for the Russians . As shown in the film, the film shows Stevenson and Stevenson .
 President Kennedy said it prevented Stevenson from being expelled from Excom and removed as ambassador to the United Nations, as advised by Bobby Kennedy . Stevenson was forced to leave Excom as a result of the decision .
 Stevenson proved invaluable to the U.S. by dramatically showing that Russia was lying to the world about missiles . In the end, Stevenson showed that the United States was lying .
 His speech was the single most significant victory in the propaganda war that was a key part of Cuba's missile crisis . The Cuban president's speech was one of the most significant victories in his propaganda war .
 President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers to help make crisis decisions . President Khrushchev had few advisers. President Kennedy's reach out to President Kennedy .
 He saw the members of the Precisionum as political adversaries who would have provided the most experienced and logical pool of advisers . The Precisionum would have been a political adversaries .
 Khrushchev came up with policies and expanded the crisis to gain more leverage over the U.S. See the discussion below for more information about the crisis .
 Khrushchev acted in a civilized way and withdrew the missile from Cuba . In the end, faced with the possibility that his ploy in Cuba could lead to a nuclear war, he acted civilized way .
 "When we say we're not going to , they go ahead and do it, and we do nothing, and I think we're going to have a higher risk," he says . "We do nothing," he adds. "We don't know what to do."
 I agree, it makes no difference. they have enough to blow us up right now anyway and I think it's just a problem. I agree . I agree to agree . they have already blown us up anyway, it's not a problem .
 If they do not have enough ICBMs today, they will have them in a year's time . pg.6.6: "If they do . not have . enough IC BMs today . today , they will . have . them in one year, they would have them
 If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure to bear on the United States and damage our prestige, says President Obama . "If we do . do nothing," he says, "They have a . missile base . They have all the ... pressure on the
 Attacking Cuba, missiles and Cuba in any way gives us a clear line to take berlin so that we can do it in Hungary under Egypt's Anglo-war . Attacking Cuban missiles and Cuban missiles is a way to take Berlin, says Egypt's president .
 We think we have this fixation about Cuba anyway, anyway we would be seen as a trigger-happy American who lost Berlin. We think it would be a tragedy if we lost Berlin, they say . We think they have this obsession with Cuba anyway .
 "People will believe that we let Berlin go because we didn't have the courage to endure the situation in Cuba," he says . And people will believe it's because of the lack of courage, he adds .
 President Obama says the U.S. took preemptive actions in Cuba were "risking their interests and their security and reunification" "We risked their interests," he says. "Everything else"
 Third, if we do nothing, they will have these missiles, and they will be able to say that whenever we try to do something about Cuba, they'll launch these missiles . The U.S. will have to deal with Cuba, President Obama says .
 "I think it's dangerous, but rather satisfying, from their point of view," he says . "It's dangerous and satisfying," he adds. "I'm not sure what I think it will do."
 Berlin is Berlin and there is no doubt about it. If you take a view, really, the basic thing for them is Berlin . Berlin is the capital of Germany .
 Berlin is what Khrushchev personally promised himself . Berlin was what he promised himself. Berlin is now Berlin .
 "If we go into rapid airstrikes and take them out, we will neutralize the possibility of danger to the United States," he says . "The Cubans themselves have the means to exercise some authority in this hemisphere," he adds .
 Retaliation from the Soviet Union is always in their just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point . On the other hand, I think it will greatly increase my chances of winning .
 This leave me with the only option, it is to launch a nuclear weapon this is a hell of an alternative and all this kind of thing going on and start a nuclear exchange, while if we start the blockade we're talking about, they could start a blockade and say we started it
 The sense that the blockade of Berlin was initiated by our blockade will happen in Europe, he says . So once again, they will say that the sense of the blockade . will happen again, he adds . "Once again, the sense that [the blockade] was initiated ... will happen
 Our problem is not just Cuba, but Berlin, says President Obama . "We recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe," he says . Berlin is important to Europe, says Obama .
 "On the other hand, we went to do something. Otherwise, our answer is very simple," he says . "Otherwise, on the otherhand, we would have been very happy," he adds .
 Khrushchev knew it was very important, and this was a fact he did not understand when he gave the order to put missiles in Cuba . There was also an additional fact that Khrushvic knew it .
 The U.S. population did not want to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba . The United States wanted to prevent a hostile nuclear missile attack .
 If necessary, the U.S. will go to war to get rid of missiles, author says . Therefore, it is impossible for Washington to allow missiles to remain, he says .
 Khrushchev's key mistake in his crisis plan was that he did not gauge the reaction of ordinary U.S. citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin made an understandable error in making a decision to take action . Putin has been accused of using his country's anti-gay laws to protect himself .
 Khrushchev forgot about the continental United States, and U.S. experts didn't tell him . United States experts said it has been invaded since 1812 .
 By 1962, with the advent of nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles, the insulation may have been irrational, but it was still very real . The insulation may be irrational but it's still real .
 Khrushchev never dreamed that the American public would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba . The U.S. never dreamed of the American reaction to the missiles .
 In the words of Sergei Khrushchev, the reaction of U.S. citizens was Father's miscalculation..) and, moreover, communication in 1962 was not what it is today . Communication in 1962 has not changed since then-Krushchev's words .
 Khrushchev only had full control of Russian military units in Cuba . As a result of the Cuban coup, he only had control of military units .
 The main example was when an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba on October 27 . The U.2 plane was downed over Cuba in 2008 .
 This occurred when the Russian commander violated the order and acted on his own initiative . The Russian commander was ordered to leave the base in Russia .
 Castro had good reason for this belief . Given its history, including a massive military buildup in Florida and attempts at invasions in The Bay of Pigs and Mongoose .
 Russia's ICRBM in Cuba could deal a major blow to his hateful enemies to the North . He may not have fully recognized the huge advantages the U.S. had in the ICBM .
 Castro thought the Soviet Union would have the best chance of winning if it struck first with their nuclear weapons . Castro thought that if the invasion triggered a nuclear war, the Soviet U.S. would have best chance .
 Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated, but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for his friends in the communist bloc . Castro knew he was going to sacrifice Cuba for the sake of his communist bloc friends .
 When Castro suggested to Khrushchev that Russia would start a nuclear war before the invasion, he was moved . Castro suggested that the invasion would be a pre-emptive nuclear war . Khruschev was moved when Castro suggested the invasion was imminent .
 Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missile, he was just waiting for the right time . The missile had already been removed from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev determined that Russia must dismantle the missile immediately . After knowing Castro's position, he ordered the missile be dismantled immediately .
 Castro told Robert McNamara that he advocated the first Soviet nuclear strike knowing it would lead to a U.S. nuclear attack on Cuba in 1962 . Castro told McNamara at a conference on the Cuban missile crisis .
 A formal commitment that if the missiles were to withdraw, the U.S. would not invade Cuba and would not help others . Khrushchev said president Kennedy was happy to resign .
 Khrushchev claimed he had achieved an important objective, even though he had removed the missile . It gave him a way to claim that he . had achieved the . objective of removing the missile from the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy accused of forcing Russia to remove missiles without triggering a nuclear war . President Kennedy is accused of making the move without risking nuclear war with Russia .
 The disclosure of once secret documents changed our understanding of Kennedy's victory, but the crisis is still seen as a major success for him and for U.S. foreign policy .
 The removal of the missiles appeared to have been achieved without U.S. making any real concessions to Russia . In the first aftermath of the crisis and the years that followed, the removal appeared to be achieved without the United States making real concessions .
 Operation Mongoose was not the official U.S. policy of invading Cuba . The scope of the operation was not known and the scope of it was not publicly known . It was not an official policy of invasion Cuba .
 The pledge of aggression was merely an amendment to existing policies . Therefore, it was merely a new addition to existing policy, he said . He said .
 As details of the crisis became public, it became clear that the pledge of non-aggression was a real concession . Over the years, it has become clear that it was a genuine concession .
 Kennedy brothers were actively working to change the Cuban government and assassinate Castro . The Kennedy brothers worked to assassinate Castro and change the government of Cuba .
 They were replaced by submarines patrolling the Mediterranean, armed with nuclear missiles, a much more effective deterrent . Submarine patrols the Mediterranean are now an effective deterrent.
 Kennedy's role in detaining U.S. troops hoping for airstrikes and an invasion of Cuba was revealed . But as more information came out, more information was revealed about Kennedy's involvement .
 As shown in the film, President Kennedy chose action that would not always lead to war, while preparing for war if he was not prepared for war . Kennedy chose an action not always always leading to war .
 He always maneuvered and stirred up pressure on the Soviet Union in steps that left the Soviet room with time to decide what to do rationally . He always moved up pressure in steps to leave the Soviets room to decide .
 President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis through his willingness to formally agree not to invade Cuba . President Kennedy agreed to a formal agreement on not invading Cuba in 1961 .
 The Russians secretly carried out a massive military buildup in Cuba, deploying 40,000 Red Army troops, and 42 nuclear missiles . It shows the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach in the 1990s, when it was revealed that the Russians had secretly built up a military buildup .
 President Kennedy avoided war by detaining those who wanted to launch airstrikes and invasions and launching a U.S. response in naval quarantine, he says . President Kennedy also avoided war .
 The main example of Kennedy's detention occurred on October 27, when a Russian land-landing missile shot down a U.S. U-2 spy plane, killing the pilot .
 He treats the incident as a deliberate escalation ordered by the Kremlin orCommander of the Soviet Union .
 One choice moved the world much closer to nuclear war, while the other kept alive hopes of a peaceful solution . One choice moves the world closer to the brink of nuclear war .
 Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on the Under-2s was unauthorized . Kennedy chose not to believe the attack was unauthorized and said it was an act of vandalism .
 If he had been wrong, we would have come close to war if we had ordered the U.S. Air Force to take out sam batteries fired in U-2s, he says .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, showed very poor leadership for causing the crisis, says historian . "Krushchev's leadership was very poor," he says .
 He put his country and the whole world at great risk of a nuclear holocaust . He put himself at risk of putting the world at risk, he says . He says .
 Khrushchev showed fore-lookingness and political courage . He retreated and removed the missiles without keeping his promise of aggression . But by retreating and removing the missiles he showed courage .
 The consensus among historians is that most of the blame is with Khrushchev and the Soviet Union . Both sides contributed to the crisis, but both sides contribute to it .
 Khrushchev seems to have had several goals when he ordered an ICBM to be installed in Cuba . He ordered the installation of the ICBM in Cuba in the 1960s .
 President Vladimir Putin wanted to increase Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia's own missile fleet . Putin said he wanted Russia to increase its own nuclear capabilities .
 At the time of the crisis, Russia had fewer than 40 ICBMs, while the U.S. had about 170 . The United States has about 170 ICBM missiles, Russia has fewer .
 The Soviet Union could save billions of rubles if it could install an ICBM in Cuba instead of waiting for the U.S. to build a similar one .
 President Kennedy did not believe that U.S. superiority in ICBMs meant that the United States could safely go nuclear with Russia . President Kennedy didn't believe that United States superiority in . ICBM superiority meant the U.K. could go nuclear, he said .
 Even with a significant U.S. advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs owned by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had 40 of its ICBM missiles .
 The victims of such exchanges, in the tens of millions, were unacceptable to U.S. leaders . The victims were in the hundreds of millions of people .
 President Kennedy realized that United States dominance was temporary and that Russia would soon increase its ICBM fleet . President Kennedy also realized that U.S. dominance was only temporary .
 Russia achieved nuclear parity a year or two early by placing missiles in Cuba . It didn't matter much to him that Russia achieved parity a few years early . Russia didn't want to be seen as a threat to the United States .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the U.S. in the service of Russia's new imperialism and communist solidarity, he says .
 Even before the crisis, with the history of the Gulf of Pigs invasion and the ongoing Mongoose Operation, the Russians and Cubans United States intentions were behind the crisis .
 After the crisis, Khrushchev insisted that defending Cuba's sovereignty was the only goal of putting missiles in Cuba . After the war, the Soviet Union insisted on defending Cuba .
 Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aides indicating that it was important for him to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities and reduce U.S. superiority . He is said to have said that it is important for Russia to improve its nuclear capabilities .
 Castro's reason for accepting missiles was based on solidarity with other communist countries, rather than protecting Cuba from U.S. attacks . Castro: "I'm not going to be afraid of the United States attacks"
 The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hamper many of Castro's other goals, such as exporting revolutions to other Latin American countries . Castro's Cuba has been hit hard by the threat of Russian missile attacks .
 Khrushchev, for example, may have sent 40,000 Red Army troops with the task of defending the island .
 Everyone knew that an attack on the large number of Red Army troops would have sparked a greater war . The attack would have led to greater war, but the attack was unlikely to have sparked war .
 If they were trapped on the island, they would be the only defensive in nature . After all, if they were forced to live in a defensive bunker, they wouldn't be there .
 The only reason for the massive Soviet military buildup on the island was to protect missiles, not Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the only reason was to build up the Cuban military is to protect missile defense .
 Khrushchev wanted to change the status quo in West Berlin and damage the NATO alliance by using missiles to force the United States to withdraw from Berlin, taking missiles out of Cuba, and trading west Berlin so as not to react .
 If they had passed, the Europeans would have indicated that they would not rely on the United States to take care of their interests and would undermine the NATO alliance . The U.S. has been criticized for its stance on Syria .
 Khrushchev signed a plan to put missiles in Cuba, but it was final . At the time, he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union, and the entire precisionum signed it .
 Secretly putting aggressive nuclear weapons outside the Soviet Union, 90 miles from the continental United States, was a clandestestin military attack that siosted to change the nuclear balance of terrorism .
 The U.S. contributed to the Cuban missile crisis through a number of policies . Operation Mongoose helped set the stage for the crisis . The invasion of Cuba in the Gulf of Pigs helped set up the situation .
 The United States had an 18-to-1 advantage over the Soviet Union in ICBMs . The U.S. had a 18 to 1 advantage over Soviet Union .
 The United States would not rule out a nuclear first strike as a military option . But because of the numerical advantage of the Red and Chinese militaries, the U.S. has not ruled out a first strike .
 U.S. policymakers, with substantial legitimacy, felt that its nuclear shield was all about keeping Peace in Europe . United States policymakers felt it was necessary to keep peace in Europe.
 The cost of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese army in Asia would have put a heavy strain on western economies . Western economies would have been strained by the costs of maintaining large armies .
 If Russia had not been convinced that the U.S. would conduct a nuclear war to protect Berlin, the western outposts in Berlin would surely have fallen . Perhaps the entire North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance would have failed, he says .
 Russia was justifiably nervous about the U.S. refusal to deny it a first nuclear strike . But Russia was also nervous over the refusal of the United States to deny a first strike .
 On balance, responsibility for events that jeopardize the future of the world falls more on the Soviet side than on the U.S. to Khrushchev more than Kennedy . Kennedy: "On balance" responsibility for the events in which the world was at risk, falls to the Soviet
 Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace . We think this played a role in Khrushiev's decision in backing down .
 The world was very fortunate that the U.S. had not had another escalating incident that would have elected a president who would resist those demanding invasions and airstrikes that would've led to the war .
 "For this generation of Americans, it recreates many of the realities of the most dangerous moment in human history," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is a vivid recall of the conflict in which nuclear war was really possible . The book is a lasting truth about the nuclear age . It is the first time a nuclear war has ever been possible .
 It invites viewers to the room as president and fights against a once-difficult issue that his advisers do not offer a good option . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the issue .
 The language of many important conversations is quickly removed from participant transcripts and reports . We are happy to clarify that the language used in these conversations has been removed from these transcripts .
 The film has some important false impressions for viewers . That being said, the film leave some important films with little to say .
 According to the film, the Kennedy administration needed to risk nuclear war to replicate the existing balance of nuclear power . The Kennedy administration risked nuclear war for the sake of maintaining the balance of power .
 At the time of the crisis, Russia was well behind the U.S. in its nuclear capabilities . The 40 operational ICBMs located in Russia would have caused unacceptable casualties in the United States and Russian IMBMs .
 This was President Kennedy's position, as shown by his statement quoted above . This was shown by President Kennedy in a statement from his office .
 President Kennedy said the U.S. would never accept nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy believed that Russia had no plans to put missiles in the country .
 The credibility of the Kennedy administration, along with its friends and its enemies, was tied to the liberation of Cuba from Russian missiles . Thus, the credibility of Kennedy administration is tied to Cuba's liberation .
 The installation of missiles in Cuba was the opening gambit of Russia's long planned move against West Berlin . The installation was the first step in a long-planned move against the West .
 An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse to overrun West Berlin, author says . The attack would be an excuse for the Russians to attack Berlin, he says .
 Europeans will take these events as evidence that the U.S. valued taking missiles out of Cuba more than preserving Berlin . Europeans will see this as proof that the United States valued taking out missiles from Cuba .
 Tensions in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance were serious and probably fatal . Tensions were serious, probably fatal, say experts . The tensions in the alliance are serious and could be fatal .
 The secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union deployed the nuclear weapons in Cuba in the 1980s .
 President Kennedy and his administration should refer to the goals of removing the missile from the U.S. They were secondary to the actual damage it would do to the United States, they say .
 "It's important, but we have to answer the question of whether it's worth risking a nuclear war," he says . "We have to ask the question: Whether it is worth risking nuclear war?"
 Russia had to be forced to remove missiles on what seemed to be a victory for U.S. foreign policy . To achieve Washington's policy goals, Russia must remove the missiles .
 The crisis was not allowed to escalate into World War III if Russia refused to remove the missiles and the U.S. invaded Cuba . At the same time, the crisis would not escalate into a World War I if the United States invaded Cuba and Russia refused .
 In 13 very tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisers achieved these goals . In 13 tense days, the president and his team achieved the goals of the day .
 The superpowers then introduced new procedures to ease the crisis and acted more cautiously . Superpowers then introduce new procedures and acted cautiously .
 After the Cuban missile crisis, wars were held in places such as Vietnam, Angola and Afghanistan . Both superpowers made sudden surprises and radical moves that endangered the opponent's population and leadership .
 The film does not show the role played by U.S. foreign policy in helping create the atmosphere in which the crisis took place . The film shows the role of the United States foreign policy .
 Even after the fall of the Bay of Pigs, the U.S. tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro . The United States tried to kill Castro in Cuba even after his regime fell .
 The Russians and Cubans legitimately feared cuba's territorial integrity . Given the historical trend of the United States invading Latin American countries and the ongoing Mongoose operation, the U.S. might have legitimately feared Cubans .
 The continued U.S. nuclear weapons buildup has led to a missile gap in support of the United States completion of its 15 Jupiter missile installations in Turkey in 1962 . The gap was created by the completion of the 15 Jupiter missiles installations in 1962 in Turkey .
 This infuriated the Russians and, as President Kennedy repeatedly stated, the missiles were already outdated and, if anything, added little to the power of the U.S. military, so they were totally unnecessary . The missiles are already outdated, and they were already unnecessary .
 U.S. policymakers understood that Russia's nuclear capabilities could result in unastoodly high casualties . United States policymakers clearly understood that such a move would result in casualties . Russia's nuke capabilities could lead to casualties, experts say .
 There was certainly disagreement and mistrust between President Kennedy and Air Force Chief of Staff Lemay . Lemay was the Air Force chief of Staff and President Kennedy .
 General Rumey thought a nuclear war with the Soviet Union was inevitable and wanted it to happen before the U.S. lost its 18-to-1 advantage in nuclear-sending devices .
 Statement, 119, for 13 days attributed to one of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. See also statement, 119 . See also .
 Between Secretary McNamara and the Chief of The Navy Staff. There was also a meeting of the Secretary of the Navy and Secretary of The Staff.
 We are not knew of any evidence to show the military's concerted efforts to drive the U.S. to war . We are aware of no evidence of such efforts .
 Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had the confidence of President Kennedy before, during and after the crisis . State Department officials who served during that time say he was trusted by President Kennedy .
 The subplot, in which O'Donnell contacts a United States pilot, bypasses the chain of command and asks his boss to make false statements, is just fiction . O’Donnell contacted a U.S. pilot and asked his boss for information, but the subplot is
 The film acknowledges the importance of the Organization of American States' vote in favor of quarantine . The film also acknowledges the significance of the OAS vote .
 The vote also had a significant psychological and practical effect on the Russians, he says . Russia acted in accordance with the 20 allies that legally protect their status, he adds .
 The film sheds light on the importance of the rapid support of U.S. allies and African countries . African countries would have played a key role if Russia had served as an air route to Cuba .
 Guinea and Senegal agreed not to allow flights to refuel planes . The only available landing strips for refueling were two countries, Guinea and Senya .
 O'Donnell's role was exaggerated, and the role of other advisers with very important inputs for President Kennedy was minimized, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The second, tougher letter, really, was prompted by Kennedy's trade proposal . Kennedy's proposal was a response to the president's proposal to a proposed trade deal .
 Khrushchev offered to remove missile only for U.S. assurances that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy asked for assurances that the United States would also trade missiles in Turkey . The missile was removed from Cuba in 1962 .
 President Kennedy's detention prevented a nuclear war . At that time, an American U-2 pilot was killed, and it was only an American pilot . President Kennedy was held in 1962 .
 We are fortunate that no other incident that would have caused the general war did not happen . We are lucky that no . other . incident that . would have . caused the . general war . did not . happen .
 McNamara and MacCone agree that the strategic position of the U.S. has been greatly strengthened by the consequences of the crisis that has now been able to run the table to the Russians .
 Given the United States experience in Vietnam, the conversation shows the dialected nature of the historical struggle . Given the U.S. experience in the Vietnam, Vietnam, it shows the struggle .
 President Kennedy asked everyone in the security counsel to read Barbara Tukman's Guns of August . The book was published by Tukmann in 1960s .
 Tukman was related to the conversation between two men who were German chancellors at different times of the war . According to McNamara of the Fog of War, the conversation was about a German chanceller .
 One asked how the war came to be, and the other said he wanted to know . "I want to know. How did the war come to be?" asked the two men . "How did it come to war?" asked one of them .
 "If anyone writes after this, they will understand that we have made every effort to find peace," he says . "They will be able to give our adversaries room to move," he adds .
 Khrushchev did not see the missile crisis through the eyes of U.S. leaders or the public . The crisis was centered around the Soviet Union's refusal to accept a Soviet Union-sanctioned missile strike .
 The presence of nuclear missiles 90 miles off the U.S. coast was generally unbearable in the United States because of its history of isolation and protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans .
 An ICBM launched from Russia would only take a few minutes to reach the United States . This may have been unreasonable, but that was the case. This may be unreasonable .
 The U.S. maintains nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union . It was also a hypocritical view given the fact that the United States maintains nuclear missile sites in Turkey .
 A key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down is that the U.S. population was aroused and forced the government to go to war to get rid of the missiles . The United States was aroused by the United States population .
 Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history, and U.S. experts couldn't tell him about this . He didn't even know about the history of the United States and the Soviet Union .
 The person making the final decision should be the President of the United States and benefit from the best possible information and many recommendations and opinions from inside and outside government .
 President Kennedy learned this lesson from the obstacles of the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy, says . President Kennedy "learned this lesson"
 President Kennedy called for Llewellyn Thompson, who had just served as the U.S. ambassador to Moscow . Thompson had just been serving as the United States ambassador to Russia .
 Thompson offered President Kennedy important advice on Khrushchev's response and his thinking . Thompson's advice: "Krushchev was right to ask President Kennedy what he thought of the situation"
 Ambassador Thompson directly contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas and persuaded him to change his mind . At times, Ambassador Thompson contradicted Kennedy's ideas .
 Based on our experience with the Cuban missile crisis, we can derive some general principles . But based on our . experience with our experience, we . can . derive some . general principles, the author says .
 As mentioned above, try to see the situation through the eyes of the adversary . Try to see your opponent's perspective on the situation .
 Policymakers must understand that while trying to get the best information possible, there is a lot he doesn't know . Policymakers need to understand that there are a lot of things to learn about .
 "All diplomatic and peaceful paths should be tested before a commitment to war exists," says David Cameron . "Peaceful paths should not be tested," he says .
 A step-by-step approach that always preserves your face to the other person is best . A step by step approach is best. Always preserve your face when dealing with a relationship .
 Be flexible in compromising in compromising on small things, but don't be comforted by giving important points . Be flexible, but be flexible, and don't give important points. Be flexible and not comforted .
 President Kennedy explained the process of crisis management . He said that one must be firm, get the best information possible, and act with care .
 Cuba's missile crisis lasted 13 days in October 1962, but the story began much earlier . During the crisis, he said, "There is always a son of Cuba" Cuban President Ayres Castro says .
 At the end of World War II, relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated . The cooperation allowed the Allies to overthrow Nazi Germany . Relations between the two countries deteriorated in 1945 .
 The U.S. tried to block the expansion of the Azerbaijan-Soviet Republic into Iran, launch a policy of containment . Russia supported Greece's communist revolutionaries . The United States also tried to limit the growth of the Soviet Union .
 Democracy in communist bloc and capitalism has fallen from crisis to crisis . Democracy in the communist bloc has fallen to crisis. Democracy in communism and capitalism is in crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Soviet blockade of Berlin, Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace . Chinese shelling of taiwan's islands Kemoy and Pine . confrontations over Suez Canal between Soviet allies Egypt and Israel, France and Britain .
 ATMs on Russian soil could not reach the U.S. outside of Alaska, but they were able to reach Western Europe . ATMs in Russia could not be used in the United States outside Alaska . ATRs on Russian land could not have been used in Russia, but were able
 In April 1961, with the approval of President Kennedy, the CIA carried out a planned invasion of Cuba during the Eisenhower administration to stop the spread of communism . President Kennedy approved of the planned invasion to stop communism in Cuba .
 Using Cuban exiles as the first landing troops, the target was the Gulf of Pigs on the Cuban coast . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Allen Dulles was told by President Kennedy that he would step down after a decent interval . Dulles stepped down as director of the CIA in 1961 .
 After the Gulf of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed a mongoose operation to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro . The operation was meant to assassinate Castro and destabilize Castro .
 This isOperation with 6000 acts of destructive activity carried out in Cuba . This is the latest in a series of destructive activities carried out by the Cuban government in Cuba.
 In 1962, the U.S. government knew its nuclear capabilities were much stronger than the Soviet Union, but found it unacceptable to lose a major city with casualties approaching 100,000 . The U.K. knew its capabilities were stronger than Russia, but wanted to avoid a repeat of
 The Soviet Union, for their part, sharply felt an inferiority sense of their nuclear deterrent . The USSR felt inferiority to the U.S. and felt it was inferior to its own nuclear deterrent.
 The Soviet leadership did not realize how afraid the U.S. was of Russia's nuclear powers . But the United States was afraid of the Soviet leadership .
 Nikita Khrushchev launched a plan to secretly install medium-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . The plan was meant to prevent the U.S. from invading Cuba .
 The CIA found out about the suspicious activity from sources on the island . The U.S. dispatched U-2 spy planes to investigate .
 Others pressed for military options such as airstrikes and the invasion of Cuba . I'd recommend a few others, including airstrikes .
 President Kennedy adopted an intermediate approach to establishing quarantine that would prevent the U.S. Navy from reaching the island with additional missiles and assault weapons . President Kennedy took the approach .
 The United States has used global opinion in public relations and diplomatic strikes to pressure the Soviet Union to remove the missiles . Meanwhile, the U.S. has tried to use global public opinion to pressure Russia to remove missiles .
 A Soviet ground-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating tensions between Cold War fighters . Acting without Moscow's approval, the plane was shot down by a Soviet missile battery .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Cuban missiles in secret negotiations . The missiles were eventually dismantled by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 President Kennedy promised that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . President Kennedy said that the United States would never invade Cuba. President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Future presidents and Soviet leaders agreed to the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty in the 1960s and 1970s . The treaty limits the number of nuclear warheads ready to strike the other side .
 The U.S. and Russia will never come to the brink of nuclear Armageddon again . The United States and Russia won't have nuclear war again, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Looking back at the crisis from decades of safe distance, it's easy to see the contrast between the decision-making styles of both President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev . Looking back to the crisis, it was easy to . see the . contrast between Kennedy and Khrushcheva
 President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers to help with decision-making, but Chairman Khrushchev had few advisers . President Kennedy sought to reach out to President Nixon to help him make decisions .
 In the crisis, U.S. policymakers rushed to prepare an invasion of the island, not knowing that missiles were already in operation . The island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army personnel armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
 The weapons were used by the United States military, he says . He also knew that if there had been a war, the weapons would be used .
 Khrushchev withdrew the missile when his ploy in Cuba faced the possibility of leading to a nuclear war and was given an out by the United States . Nevertheless, the missile was withdrawn from Cuba . The U.S. gave the Soviet Union an out .
 Khrushchev did not understand when he issued the order to place missiles in Cuba in the first place . The U.S. population did not want to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles, he says .
 By 1962, with the advent of nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles, the insulation was irrational, but still retained by many Americans . The insulation was still being held by some Americans, even though it was irrational .
 Khrushchev's decision is the fact that communications in 1962 was not what it is now . Another important element of the decision was the fact the communications in the 1960s were not what they are now .
 Castro had good reason for this belief, he says . Given the massive military buildup in Florida and the Bay of Pigs, he believed it would be an invasion .
 He may not have fully recognized the huge advantages the United States had in the ICBM, but he knew that Russia's ICRBM in Cuba could hit his enemies hard to the North .
 Castro: If the invasion causes war, the Soviet Union had the best chance of winning if it struck first with their nuclear weapons . Castro: "If the invasion caused war, it would be better to strike first with nuclear weapons"
 Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated, but was happy to sacrifice the island and its people for communists around the world . Castro knew he was going to burn the island in Cuba, but knew it would be destroyed .
 Castro's letter to Khrushchev was moved when he suggested that the Russians start a nuclear war before the invasion . Castro suggested that Russia start a war before it invaded the Soviet Union invaded .
 President Kennedy's willingness to offer a formal commitment that the U.S. would not invade Cuba and would not help others if the missiles were to withdraw . Khrushchev was willing to pull back because of a commitment to the United States not invading Cuba .
 President Kennedy always chose not to lead to war if he did not go to war . As shown in the film, President Kennedy never led to war in the U.S.
 He could treat the incident as a deliberate escalation ordered by the Kremlin or as unauthorized action by an excessive Soviet commander . The incident could be seen as an example of an excessive military action .
 President Kennedy knew that one choice had made the world much closer to nuclear war, while the other remained hopeful . President Kennedy remained hopeful that a peaceful solution was possible .
 President Kennedy chose to believe that an attack on the U-2 was unauthorized . President Kennedy did not believe that the attack was unauthorized. President Kennedy believed the attack had been unauthorized .
 President Kennedy believed that the U-2 incident was ordered by the Russian government . Khrushchev has scant leadership for causing the crisis, says Kennedy . President Kennedy's belief that the incident was caused by the Soviet government .
 Most Western historians believe that the most significant responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviet Union . Both sides contributed to the crisis, but both sides contributed significantly .
 He wanted to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Soviet scientists and engineers to upgrade Russia's own missile fleet . He wanted Russia to improve its own nuclear capabilities .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the U.S. from the United States, he says . "In the service of Russian new imperialism and communist solidarity," he says. "Krushchev was trying to protect Cuban people from invasion"
 Even before the crisis, with the history of the Gulf of Pigs invasion and the ongoing Mongoose Operation, russians and Cubans had reason to fear U.S. intentions .
 The United States and the Kennedy administration contributed to the Cuban missile crisis crisis through a number of policies . The U.S. and the Cuban government were involved in the crisis .
 Attempts to invade Cuba in the Gulf of Pigs, followed by Operation Mongoose, helped set stage for the crisis . The invasion of Cuba and the assassination of Fidel Castro in Cuba helped set up the crisis in Cuba .
 U.S. policymakers felt that its nuclear shield was all about keeping peace in Europe . U.N. policymakers wanted to keep peace between Europe and the world .
 U.S. to Khrushchev more than Kennedy . Responsibility for events that place the future of the world in balancefall far more to the Soviet side than the United States .
 This imbalance of blame most likely played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down, which was his saving grace . It was likely that this was the result of Khrushchevitch's back down .
 The world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the U.S. had enough wisdom and personal strength to resist invasion and airstrikes . The United States chose not to have another escalating incident that would force President Kennedy's hand .
 During the crisis, he warned that there would be people taking action to push the country towards nuclear Armageddon, either through stupidity or because of their own agenda . He warned that people would be pushing the country to nuclear Armageddon .
 Students should be aware that each side has what they get and must lose in any conflict . Students should also be aware of each other's potential to be involved .
 The best conclusion to a deadly stand-off is an honorable exit that preserves the face as both parties return from inexplicable positions . The best way to end the standoff is to end it with an honorable end that preserves face .
 In democracies, many believe that the repository of wisdom is ultimately in the people . In democracies such as democracies, people are ultimately responsible for their wisdom . But in democracies, wisdom should be ultimately in people, not politicians .
 In 1962, the U.S. thought installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have brought about an unbearable change in the balance of power . The American people thought that installing intermediate range ballistic missiles would have been unbearable . But in 1962, they thought that such a change would have
 The Soviet Union already had 40 nuclear-armed ICBMs stationed on Russian soil . The USSR had 40 nukes stationed on its soil .
 These missiles were able to destroy all major U.S. population centers that kill an estimated 100,000 people . These missiles destroyed all major United States population centers . The missiles are able to kill all major population centers in the United States . They also kill around 100,500 people .
 The U.S. had more ICBMs than Russia, but the two superpowers were deadlocked . So while the United States had more than Russia did, it was deadlocked in the world .
 American people were wrong to regard the installation of missiles in Cuba as a major shift in the balance of power . The addition of ATMs to Cuba could not really change that fact, and the U.S. was wrong .
 President Kennedy probably wouldn't convince them of this, but it was probably impossible for President Kennedy to convince them . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 President Kennedy's solution was to try to force Russia to dismantle the missiles through diplomacy and naval quarantine . President Kennedy tried to use diplomacy and quarantine to force the removal of the missiles .
 President Kennedy created a solution to punish Russia for reckless gambling . There were other considerations, such as the need to look strong on the international stage .
 A key episode of the film 13 Days is a confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop . The film is based on the confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet ship in which they clashed .
 The Navy Admiral claims his ship correctly followed the traditional rules of engagement . He says the Navy Admiral believes his ship did what he needed .
 Defence Secretary Robert McNamara insisted rules had changed given the importance of the crisis . McNamara insists the rules have changed due to the potential misunderstandings and mistakes .
 Under the United States Constitution, it is a decision made by civilian leaders . The commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president of the Four Presidents of the U.S. Under the Constitution, the decision is made by civilians .
 Some might suggest that President Kennedy affirmed his aggressive behavior toward a small and weak enemy . President Kennedy supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful .
 In the film, O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the hostile second letter is the result of the feeling he and his brother, the president, sent to Khrushchev . The letter was written in response to a proposal to exchange NATO missiles in Turkey for Russian missiles
 President Kennedy suggested that he might be willing to add Turkish missiles to the deal . Khrushchev's letter was a direct result of Kennedy's suggestion that he may add Turkish missile missiles .
 Khrushchev was trying to take advantage of the situation and change his initial offer, he says . Khrushchevitch tried to use the situation to change his offer .
 In the last film, McNamara's character and McCorn's character have a conversation in which they mention running the table to the Russians in several places, including Asia . The last film is set in New York City .
 It was not like Munich in the sense that we knew it was going to be replaced by a submarine-based missile . "It's not a surprise that the U.S. has been replaced with a sub-marine missile," he says of the missile .
 Germany gained possession of the Czech fortress with the only natural barrier between Germany and the rest of Czechoslovakia . At the Munich Conference, the German Army was given a large amount of territory and it gained possession .
 The situation in 1962 was like Munich in that the Soviet Union wanted missiles from Turkey . The Soviet Union might have demanded more if they achieved their goals through intimidation and aggressive action .
 President Kennedy worried that a surprise preemptive strike against Cuba would be the moral equivalent of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor . President Kennedy said a surprise strike would be a moral equivalent to Japan's Pearl Harbor attack . Kennedy: A surprise attack on Cuba would have been a moral mistake .
 Japan felt that U.S. economic sanctions were hampering Asia's growing war . Japan felt the U.K. was hampering the growing war against China .
 The Castro government secretly allowed hostile foreign powers to mount nuclear weapons aimed at the U.S. In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the Castro government had secretly allowed foreign powers . The Cuban government was overthrown by the United States .
 There were other reasons to avoid a preemptive strike against Cuba . However, forcing Russia to forcibly remove nuclear missiles with less force than a strike or invasion did not prove impossible .
 The preemptive strike invasion was extremely dangerous because the U.S. was not sure it had destroyed all its nuclear weapons . It would require only one nuke strike against the United States to launch a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 And the invasion will not succeed, or it may be much harder than we expected, he says . It may be harder than expected for the U.S. to invade .
 Cuba had 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons . Unknownst to President Kennedy and the U.S. government, the Cuban government knew about the weapons .
 President Kennedy convened a large group of military leaders and diplomatic experts in a team known as Excomm . Excomm was a team of military, diplomatic experts known as the Excomm.
 In large groups, the president is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas . A good answer should include some of the following concepts . The president should be exposed to an array of opinions, ideas and opinions .
 Groups of people working on the problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that one person did not consider no matter how intelligent they were . Groups can come up up with ideas that are often not considered by one person .
 Large groups, if properly managed, will support the establishment of a political agreement and a united front against Russia . Large groups will support a political deal and a unified front against the Russia, writes Peter Bergen .
 A large group tries to make a decision by compromise, which is very dangerous, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's very dangerous," says Sutter. "A large group of people try to make decisions by compromise"
 Ultimately, there should be one decision maker who weighs every argument and makes decisions . Ultimately, the decision maker should be a decision maker weighing every argument .
 United Nations Ambassador Adry Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to Russia . In addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba, the U.N. agreed not to attack Cuba .
 Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another, until the war arises as a result of miscalculation, or when the aggressor simply goes too much . Munich's war was one of the most unpredictable moments in history .
 Wisdom is to know the difference between concessions and legitimate compromises, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 History determined that while the additional concessions may have been reconciliation, the pledge not to invade Cuba was a legitimate compromise . History decided that while . history determined that . while . additional concessions were . reconciliation .
 There was no U.S. policy of invading Cuba, and Kennedy wanted to dispose of or assassinate Castro . But the United States could say it had given up nothing by agreeing not to invade Cuba . The United States agreed to not invade Cuba, but Kennedy wanted the assassination of Castro .
 The threat of nuclear war between the two countries protected peace during the Cold War . Paradoxically, the threat of a nuclear war protected peace .
 Bobby Kennedy was referring to a situation that all of the president's key advisers said . When the invasion of the Bay of Pigs succeeds, Bobby Kennedy said . Bobby Kennedy referred to the situation when the invasion succeeded .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, the military predicted success in Cuba, not knowing that the United States military would counter 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . The U.S. military did not know that the Red Army would have tactical nukes .
 A fullfledged U.S. invasion would have been very different from Punny Bay's efforts on pigs . A full-fledged United States invasion would not have been possible .
 U.S. could use blockade because it was previously mapped as a war game, says McNamara . United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara observes that the United States could use the blockade because of the map .
 The stress of the current crisis was developed at a leisure time that did not deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously . The advantage of using previously planned scenarios is that they were developed at the time of crisis .
 The United States never signed a peace treaty that removed the nuclear first strike option from the table . The U.S. never signed an agreement to remove the option from nuclear first strikes .
 The first strike with nuclear weapons was not necessarily a surprise strike . It was the first strike in the history of nuclear weapons . The U.S. has never had a nuclear strike .
 There is no morally defensive reason to respond if your country is attacked in such an attack . Nor is there a moral reason to defend your country from such a terrorist attack? We ask .
 In any case, the majority of those killed would have been completely innocent . The majority of the people killed would be innocent .
 Only good reason to prepare for a first or retaliatory nuclear attack is to convince the other side that if it hits you, it will be destroyed in turn . The only good reason for preparing for a nuclear strike is that it will destroy itself .
 The Soviet Union claimed that the missiles they were installing in Cuba were defensive weapons to protect the Cuban island . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 It did not stop the construction of missile launch sites or the arming of existing missiles with nuclear warheads . It did nothing to stop the building of missile sites or arming existing missiles .
 This put the United States in a position to quickly cut off oil and other important imports to Cuba in case of war . The U.S. is now in position to cut off important imports from Cuba in a case of a war .
 U.S. military preparations for the quarantine and invasion of Cuba convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles . U.K. military . assurances that they would be removed if the missiles were not taken down by the United States .
 Critics of President Kennedy's plan pointed out that without tough policies, the United States would look weak . Excomm's critics of the plan said it would be tough for the U.S.
 Pacifists argue that building large armies and using threats will result in war through miscalculations . Pacifistists say that building armies will lead to miscalculation in war .
 The self-proclaimed realists who make up the majority believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you . reconciliation will result in further aggression, as Munich has shown, says Real Madrid .
 President Kennedy was told that airstrikes would probably not destroy all missiles . President Kennedy told the president that airstrikes probably would not destroy missiles .
 As the film accurately shows, the only person killed in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, who was shot down over Cuba by a U-2 pilot .
 The Soviet leader of the missile battery that shot down the U-2 said he acted on his own . He said politicians later decided to sort it out and acted without authority from Moscow . In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader said politicians decided later to sort out .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff is a ground-to-air missile that shot down a U.M.M-2 spy plane . It was launched by the U.S. Air Force in 2007 .
 Memorable scenes from the film include a demonstration by United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adry Stevenson showing the Soviet Union installing missiles in Cuba .
 U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell claimed a case of war with Iraq at the U.N. in 2003 . In 2003, Colin Powell said Iraq war would be a case for war with the United States at the United Nations .
 Many have pointed out the similarities and differences between these two events . Many of the similarities have been pointed out in the past .
 Stevenson presented irrefutable evidence and galvanized global public opinion . Stevenson presented the evidence to a global audience of support for his work . Stevenson's work galvanized public opinion in the United States .
 Much of the information Powell put out turned out to be exaggerated, misleading or wrong . Much of that information was exaggerated or misleading .
 A Report by the Republican-controlled Senate Intelligence Committee was issued on July 9, 2004 . The report was issued by the GOP-controlled Intelligence Committee .
 We know that Iraq did not have a program to make weapons of mass destruction or weapons, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Stevenson's speech helped prevent war and increased U.S. prestige . Stevenson: "I'm not going to fight for my country, but I'm going to defend my country" Stevenson was assassinated in 1941 .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, U.S. intelligence agencies helped make the case that missiles actually existed . The Cuban crisis was the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 This information was essential to bringing about the weight of opinion in the world on the part of the U.S. The United States. This information, however, was essential, to bring about the . weight of the . world .
 The next time the U.S. or the West asks the world or the United Nations to act on intelligence, there will be strong questions about whether its intelligence is accurate .
 It requires more evidence and increases the risk of sources being compromised, says CNN.com . It requires a lot of evidence, it says .
 The United States and its allies in Western democracies must work even more to obtain consent and cooperation in the international crisis . This means that for years, perhaps decades, the U.S. must work more and give up more information, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A key point in the film 13 Days is a naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop . The film is based on the confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet ship in which they clashed .
 Civilians not only have a valuable perspective, but are ultimately responsible . Civilians are responsible for their actions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States Constitution requires this by making the president commander-in-chief of the armed forces . The president is president of the nation's armed forces, the Constitution requires that .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro said his island needed nuclear weapons to protect itself from aggression by the U.S. Castro also said that his island needs nuclear weapons .
 The consensus of the world community expressed in some treaties is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases and their development should be controlled . The consensus is that such weapons should be kept under control .
 The country that controls the weapons does not want to relinquish control of the weapons . It is not clear if the country will relinquish its control of weapons .
 The film take facts and some freedom, for example, the role of adviser Kevin O'Donnell may be exaggerated, and civilian/military conflict is exaggerated . The film takes facts and freedom, but some of them are exaggerated .
 The film's focus is so limited that it's not enough to provide a balanced view of the crisis . The film is not enough of the film to provide an accurate portrayal of the situation in Syria .
 Subplots that go around the military chain of command and force pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they have been subjected to an air-to-air fire are fictitious .
 If the essence of the situation is conveyed, a film dealing with historical issues will be beneficial . If the film is conveyed the film's essence will be conveyed, it will be helpful .
 You need to make the correct information available to the public and compare it to historical records . The correct information should be made public and compared to the historical records, experts say .
 President Kennedy's leadership during the Cuban missile crisis . President Kennedy was president of the U.S. during the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis . Kennedy's legacy will be remembered for his leadership in Cuba .
 The general consensus is that President Kennedy demonstrated excellent leadership skills in this crisis . This leadership was important in avoiding nuclear war . President Kennedy was President of the United States during the Cold War .
 Look why the Cuban missile crisis was considered such a success for President Kennedy . President Kennedy was president of the U.S. during the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 John F Kennedy was a cold warrior who used force when he felt it was in America's interest . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Vietnam War . He used force to protect his country from the Taliban .
 His policies before the Cuban missile crisis can be criticized as overly aggressive and dangerous . His policies can also be criticized for being overly aggressive .
 President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially nuclear war . President Kennedy knew the horrors, especially of nuclear war, when he died .
 He is one of those in history who has led the world back from the brink of nuclear war . He has been one of the world's most successful leaders .
 A good answer to this question touches on the problems described in the notes from the author before this question . "A good answer touches upon the problems . I'm not sure how much of this is true," says the author .
 Discussion questions on ethical issues facilitate the use of this film to teach ethical principles and critical viewing . Discussion questions will be used to discuss ethical principles .
 We will argue that President Kennedy acted in a responsible way during the crisis by making choices that minimized the possibility of war during the preparation of the war . We will also argue that he made a responsible decision to minimize the risk of war .
 Khrushchev can make a strong argument that he acted irresponsibly, except for his decision to back down and end the crisis . He can also argue that he backed down and ended the crisis with his back down .
 It was irresponsible that he risked nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba, he says . He says it was irresponsible to delay resolution of the crisis by a day or two to try to force another concession from the United States .
 U.S. and President Kennedy set the stage to try to destabilize the Castro regime and assassinate Castro . Meanwhile, the United States tried to try and destabilize Castro regime .
 Nikita Khrushchev's personal and political biography; Fidel Castro's biography . Adry Stevenson's role in the crisis in the Soviet-era Soviet Union was key to success .
 Brother Kennedy's cooperation in resolving the crisis . The role and power differences between the Soviet union and the U.S. supreme leader .
 The state of Cuba is Cuba's state of relations today; Excom, Excom and U-2 incident are discussed . The end of the Cold War is the end of U.S. relations with Cuba . Excom: Excom; U.2 incident; end of Cold
 Viewers who have experienced considerable crises, such as September 11, may appreciate the film . Write a review of the film that discusses the tension and seriousness of the situation .
 Write a checklist proposal for the steps and decisions that must be made before the U.S. engages in war . Write a list of the steps to avoid war .
 Consider the key factors for those facing the Cuban missile crisis and for the modern interconnected world . Consider a key factor for those faced with the crisis . Consider the importance of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Teachers are encouraged to review certain criteria to ensure that all standards are met over time . Teachers should review the criteria and review the results of their work .
 Fog of War is a documentary about an interview with Robert McNamara . It was directed by Errol Morris, who interviewed McNamara about the war .
 John A Touras, Assistant Professor of Political Science, La Grange College, Georgia, to Alexander Frieden for the help and proofreading and commenting on the early drafts of this study guide .
 John A Touras, assistant professor of political science, La Grange College, Georgia, to Alexander Frieden for help and proofreading and commenting on the early drafts of this study guide .