 Soviet sphere of influence (e.g. NATO, Marshall Plan, Truman Doctrine, domino theory, McCarthyism) Soviet influence in the United States . NATO and Truman Doctrine were key allies in the Cold War .
 The operation, although planned during the Eisenhower administration, was a great embarrassment for the new President, John F Kennedy . The operation was planned during Eisenhower administration .
 Berlin Airlift, 1948-1949 American and British response to the Soviet blockade of the western sectors of Berlin . American and UK response to blockade of western parts of Berlin.
 All land routes from the west into Berlin were blocked by the Soviet Union in 1948 . The Deutschmark was introduced into the 3 western-occupied zones of Germany .
 The subsequent airlift of supplies into Berlin by the Americans and British proved successful . The blockade was lifted in May 1949 and the Berlin Airlift was successful .
 Berlin Wall was built by the East Germans in August 1961 . Wall surrounded the City of West Berlin, thus making escape to West Germany by East German citizens much more difficult .
 The wall became the symbol of the Cold War, and its removal, beginning on November 9, 1989 symbolically signalled the end of Cold War . The removal of the wall symbolically symbolically signaled the end to the cold war .
 Its primary function is obtaining and analyzing information about foreign governments, corporations, and persons, and reporting .
 The third function of the CIA is as the hidden hand of the U.S. government, by engaging in covert operations at the direction of the President . The CIA is also known as the 'hidden hand' of the United States government .
 This last function has caused most controversy for the CIA . It raises questions about the legality, morality, effectiveness, and intelligence of such operations .
 Despite serious tensions that occasionally resulted in proxy wars, the U.S. and USSR never engaged in war . The United States and the Soviet Union never engaged to war .
 COMECON was a kind of Eastern Bloc equivalent to the European Economic Community . The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance was an economic organization of communist states . The organization was more inclusive than the European Community .
 The military counterpart to History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 2 the Comecon was the Warsaw Pact, though Comecon's membership was significantly wider . The Warsaw Pact was a much larger organization than the Soviet Union .
 Cominform Communist Information Bureau established in 1947 with the purpose of coordinating communist party activities in both Eastern and Western Europe . It was established to coordinate communist party activity in both eastern and western Europe .
 Khrushchev dissolved the Bureau in 1956 as part of his peaceful co-existence policy . The Bureau was dissolved in 1956 by the Soviet Union .
 Truman Doctrine of 1947 was created to contain spread of communism throughout the world . US foreign policy from the Truman Doctrine was created in 1947 to contain the spread of communistism .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles on condition that the U.S. promised never to invade Cuba . After considerable negotiating, Khrushvic agreed to pull missiles . The missiles were withdrawn in return for a U.N. promise never to attack Cuba .
 Kennedy's handling of this most serious crisis of the Cold War greatly enhanced his prestige as a statesman . Khrushchev declared an amnesty for some serving prison sentences for criminal offences, announced price cuts and relaxed the restrictions on private agricultural plots .
 De-Stalinization also spelled an end to the role of large-scale forced labour in the economy . The Soviet Union ended the use of large scale forced labour as a weapon of war .
 The move by the British, French and Americans angered the Soviets and led to the Berlin Blockade of 194849 . This move by Britain, France and the U.S. angered the Soviet Union .
 Latin Americans disapprove of the role that the US government and U.S. corporations have played in using economic, diplomatic, and military power to open up foreign markets . The term is also used historically by Latin Americans to show their disapproval of the use of US military power .
 Eisenhower Doctrine, given in a message to Congress on January 5, 1957, was the foreign policy of U.S. President Dwight D Eisenhower . The Eisenhower Doctrine was the policy of the Cold War .
 The doctrine stated that the U.S. would use armed forces upon request in response to imminent or actual aggression to the United States . The doctrine was created in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Countries that took stances opposed to Communism would be given aid in various forms . Furthermore, countries that took anti-Communist stances would also receive aid from Russia .
 The military action provisions of the Doctrine were applied in the Lebanon Crisis the following year, when America intervened in response to a request by that country's president .
 The Doctrine was made in response to the possibility of a generalized war, threatened as a result of the Soviet Union's attempt to use the Suez War as a pretext to enter Egypt . In the global political context, the Doctrine was .
 Egypt's Nasser was rapidly building a power base and using it to play the Soviets and Americans against each other, taking a position of ""positive neutrality"" and accepting aid from the Soviets . Eisenhower felt that a strong position needed to better the situation in the region .
 United Nations amphibious forces made a successful landing in 1950 in order to outflank North Korean forces that invaded South Korea . U.N. forces made the landing in South Korea to help them to get out of the country .
 Iron Curtain Term used to describe the dividing line between Soviet controlled Eastern Europe and the West .
 A military coup in Latin America would often install a ruling junta, so the term acquired the specific English meaning of military junta . The term was coined by Latin American military coupes in the 1970s .
 Military dictatorship is a form of government wherein the political power resides with the military . Military dictatorship means the power of the military is held in the hands of the government .
 Organization for European Economic Cooperation was set up in 1948 . Organization set up to administer a recovery plan for western European nations .
 Total aid package between 1948 and 1952 amounted to USD 17 billion . The total aid package from 1948 to 1952 was $17 billion .
 Massive Retaliation Keystone of U.S. Cold War foreign policy . Based on assumption that any nuclear attack from the Soviet Union would be countered with an equal or greater nuclear weapon response .
 McCarthyism was a period of intense anti-Communist suspicion in the U.S. that lasted roughly from the late 1940s to the late 1950s . McCarthyism is a term used to refer to a period in the United States that was roughly between the 1940s and 1950s
 The term is named for United States Senator Joseph McCarthy, a Republican of Wisconsin . McCarthy was a member of the Republican Party in Wisconsin .
 During this time many thousands of Americans were accused of being Communists or communist sympathizers . Thousands of Americans became the subject of aggressive investigations and questioning .
 History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List . 4 targets of such suspicions were government employees, those in the entertainment industry, educators and union activists .
 Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive or questionable evidence . The level of threat posed by a person's real or supposed leftist associations or beliefs was often greatly exaggerated . Suspicion was often given credence despite inconclusive evidence .
 Many people suffered loss of employment, destruction of their careers, and even imprisonment . Many people were forced to leave their jobs and careers .
 Most punishments came about through trial verdicts later overturned, laws that would be declared unconstitutional, dismissals for reasons later declared illegal or actionable, or extra-legal procedures that would come into general disrepute .
 The United States planned to stay neutral in wars between European powers and its colonies . The U.S. planned to remain neutral in Europe's wars between Europe and the United States .
 If these latter types of wars were to occur in the Americas, the U.S. would view such action as hostile . However, if such a war broke out, such action would be considered hostile .
 In 1952 Turkey and Greece joined the alliance, followed by West Germany in 1955 and Spain in 1982 . West Germany and West Germany joined the NATO alliance in 1955 .
 It consisted of 19 members in 2001, including former members of Warsaw Pact Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic . The group was formed in 2001 .
 They represent nearly 2/3 of the United Nations's members and comprise 55% of the world population . They are the most powerful members of the U.N. and the most influential in the world .
 Its primary purpose was to provide a system of early detection of a Soviet bomber or rocket attack . It was designed to detect Soviet bombers or rockets .
 Organization for European Economic Cooperation . Created in 1948 to administer and coordinate the use of aid provided by the Marshall Plan to rebuild war-torn Western Europe .
 Willi Brandt Peaceful Coexistence Term was used by Khruschev in 1956 to describe how he thought the Soviet Union and the West could co-exist in a peaceful manner .
 Chinese communists did not agree with Khrushchev’s approach and consequently this policy helped bring about Soviet-Sino split . This policy led to the Soviet-Chinese split .
 The last of the conferences of war-time leaders, attended by Stalin, Truman and Churchill . Churchill was replaced by newly elected Prime Minister Atlee . The conference was attended by Truman, Churchill and Stalin .
 First unmanned satellite in space, launched by Soviet Union in 1957 . Sputnik was the first satellite to orbit Earth in space .
 Soviet initiative prompted the Americans to attempt to catch up and pass the Soviet Union in the space race . The U.S. space race began in the 1960s .
 Twelve years later, the United States proved its success by landing on the moon . The United States landed the moon 12 years later .
 Test Ban Treaty was signed by the US, the USSR and Britain in 1963 . It was originally agreed not to test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere . The treaty was originally signed by US, UK and USSR .
 Elements of Titoism are characterized by policies and practices based on the principle that in each country, the means of attaining ultimate communist goals must be dictated by the conditions of that particular country, rather than by a pattern set in another country .
 The decision to provide military and economic aid was prompted by the threat of the spread of communism into Greece . The aid formed the cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy for the next forty years .
 The demarcation line was agreed upon by the Soviet Union and United States when they withdrew their forces from the Korean Peninsula in 1947 . The Thirty-eighth Parallel is the line between the two sides .
 In 1953 this line again became the demarcation line between the two countries . In 1953 it was again used to mark the border between North Korea and Russia .
 Trizonia joined together for economic purposes of French, British and American zones of occupied Germany in 1948 . Trizania was a French-British-British zone in occupied Germany during World War II .
 This configuration led to the establishment of the state of West Germany in 1949 . West Germany became the first state of the German Republic in 1949 after the war .
 An American U2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960 . U2 Incident 1940: Spy plane shot over Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev demanded an apology from President Eisenhower and when he did not receive one he decided to leave the Paris Summit Conference between the two leaders . The two leaders were at the Paris summit Conference .
 History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List . 6 United Nations An organization established after the Second World War to provide collective security .
 Warsaw Pact Established as a military alliance in 1955 by Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Rumania, and Soviet Union . Warsaw Pact was formed in 1955 .
 Albania withdrew from the pact in 1968 and the organization formally dissolved in 1991 . Albania withdraws from the organization in 1968 . The organization was formally dissolved by 1991 .
 The only joint military action of the pact was the 1968 intervention in Czechoslovakia .
 This situation lasted until 1990, when the two states were reunited as the German Federal Republic . The two states are now Germany's most populous .
 The Yalu River forms the border between North Korea and China . The river is the river that is the main source of North Korea's border .
 It became famous during the Korean War because of the Chinese decision to enter the war . The Chinese decided to do so as UN forces approached and entered the conflict .
 Leader of West Germany during the integration of NATO and the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 . Leader of the country during the ―economic miracle‖ .
 Chiefly responsible for the creation of harmonious relations with Germany’s old enemy, France . Also responsible for creating harmonious ties with France .
 Batista, Fulgencia Cuban president, established himself in power after a coup in 1952 . Batista was a dictator who ruled Cuba from 1952 .
 He ruled as a dictator until he lost support in late 1958 due to the revolution led by Fidel Castro . He ruled until he was overthrown by the revolution in 1958 .
 As Foreign Minister and Chancellor, he worked towards better relations with East Germany and the other Soviet bloc countries . He also worked to improve relations with the West .
 His ―ost-politik‖ resulted in treaties with the Soviet Union, Poland, and East Germany that recognized the post-1945 borders . He also negotiated post-war borders with the Soviets and Poland .
 He led a successful guerrilla campaign against the Batista regime from 1956 to 1959 . He led the guerrilla campaign from 1956- 1959 .
 The subsequent boycott by the U.S. government encouraged Castro to form very strong ties with Soviet Union . The subsequent boycotts by the United States encouraged Castro's form of friendship with the USSR .
 Dulles, John Foster was Secretary of State 1953-59 responsible for the creation of SEATO, the strengthening of NATO and the Eisenhower Doctrine in the Middle East .
 His domestic policy aims of civil rights and social reform were mainly not achieved during his short presidency . His short presidency was mainly focused on civil rights, social reform .
 He developed a strategy of island hopping which eventually resulted in the U.S. Air Force being able to bomb Japan .
 He was made commander-in-chief of UN forces in Korea in 1950, but was relieved of his duties . He publicly objected to Truman’s orders regarding not attacking China so was relieved .
 His death from falling out a window may have been a suicide or may be organized by communist agents . He may have fallen out of a window or may have killed himself .
 Imre Nagy, Imre was a Hungarian politician, appointed Prime Minister of Hungary on two occasions . Nagy is a former Hungarian politician who was elected Prime Minister twice .
 Nagy's second term ended when his non-Soviet-backed government was brought down by Soviet invasion in the failed Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . Nagy was executed on charges of treason two years later, two years after his death .
 He became the communist leader of Yugoslavia in 1945 but pursued a policy independent from the Soviet Union . He led Yugoslavia independent from Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The Truman doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the formation of NATO, and the decision to send troops to Korea in 1950 are some of the highlights of his time in office . The decision to use the atomic bomb, the Truman doctrine and the creation of NATO is one of the most significant moments