 Over the past few years we have learned a good deal about the Cuban missile crisis . We have also learned a lot about what happened to the Cuban missiles .
 Soviet sources, even in this era of glasnost, have not provided us with much hard evidence . Soviet sources have provided little hard evidence, even though it has not been provided by Soviet sources .
 Bemd Greiner’s interview with Sergo Mikoyan is true, says Greiner . This is true even of Greiner's interview . Greiner: "Sergo is not the same thing as Sergo" Greiner says .
 When Mikoyan said something that I already believed, I thought to myself, “Yes, that’s true," he said .
 When he said something I did not agree with, it was easy to dismiss the remark out of hand . But when he did, he said that Khrushchev’s fall had nothing to do with the missile crisis, he did . He said that when he disagreed with him,
 He was essentially expressing his own opinion, and there was no way of knowing how much information he was based on .
 The most important passages were those in which he provided us with some new factual detail . "Most important passages" were those of which he gave us some new facts," he said .
 The m m m general observations simply reflected his own personal point of view, and as such did not carry much evidentiary weight . But the m m . m m's general observations merely reflected his . own personal view, as such as those of his personal .
 Even with all the new evidence, there is much that we do not understand about the missile crisis . Even with new evidence of the crisis, there are still questions about what happened .
 Evidence has had the effect of raising many new questions and opening up some old ones . Indeed, this evidence has raised new questions, and opened up old ones, experts say . Evidence raises new questions about the role of the world's most powerful politician .
 Soviet terms for a resolution of the crisis-the adding of a demand on 27 October for withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for a withdrawal of their own missiles from Cuba .
 CIA Director John McCone made the comment in a meeting of ExComm on 27 October . CIA Director McCone said in the meeting that the U.S. government will not be able to rely on the intelligence community for support .
 The conventional interpretation of the missile crisis has changed dramatically over the past decade . It has been a decade since the U.S. launched a missile strike against North Korea .
 The Kennedy administration's handling of the crisis demonstrated that there was a kind of art of crisis management . Kennedy's ability to calibrate the level of tension and thus to strikejust the right balance between firmness and flexibility- had been argued that the Kennedy administration had demonstrated that .
 By 1987 it had become clear that the standard inteq'etation had changed . But by 1987 it was clear that it had changed.
 The argument now was that crises between nuclear powers are inherently unmanageable . Crisis between nuclear power powers is inherently unmanagedable, the author says .
 The missile crisis, it was claimed, was a good deal more dangerous than people had realized . There were so many things that did go wrong, and so many more things that could have gone wrong, that could very easily have gotten out of hand .
 Key officials of the Kennedy administration gathered to look back and reflect on the crisis . This was certainly the view of certain key officials of Kennedy administration .
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara argued repeatedly that no one can with any confidencepredict how events in a nuclear crisis would unfold .
 It was therefore ""not possible,"""to manage a crisis in the nuclear age,"" in the sense of being able to exercise strong control over how the confrontation works itself Out .
 The same sorts of arguments were made by other commentators on the crisis-by Raymond Garthoff and Seymour Hersh. for example .
 I am grateful to Meg Vaillancourt of WGBH for giving me a copy of the videotape the station made of some of those sessions .
 Even Dicier Than We Knew,"" Newswee&,26 October 1987,34, listed a number of ""close c d s "" that he rays might have ""tipped the balance toward war during Ihe missile crisir."" -our Hersh.
 This new interpretation did not take shape as people tried to come to terms with the new evidence on the crisis that became available over the past decade . The new interpretation of the crisis has not taken shape since it emerged in 2007, says Simon Tisdall .
 President Kennedy was more willing to compromise on the issue of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey than had previously been thought to have been the case . Kennedy was willing to make compromises, according to sources close to the Kennedy administration .
 This was only the most important of many new findings that pointed-or should have pointed-to the basic conclusion that the risks were not as great as people had thought . This was, however, only the best of the new findings, according to the study .
 It is widely assumed that if Cuba had been attacked, there would have been a retaliation, probably against the Jupiter missile sites in Turkey . The conflict in all likelihood would have escalated to the point of general war, writes Andrew Hammond .
 New evidence suggests that if things had reached the point of a Soviet attack on the Jupiters, an American retaliation would have been far from automatic . But the new evidence suggests quite strongly that if . things had . reached the . point of the Soviet attack, the evidence suggests .
 This, however, was not nearly as dangerous as we have been led to believe . This was not the case of a terrorist attack in the UK .
 It is clear from the transcript of the 27 October ExComm meetings that the U.S. response to the attacks was not to order a counterescalation . The American response to these attacks was to not have a countereresalation .
 Cuban antiaircraft fire was instead leading the United States to pull back . U.S. pulled back from Cuba after it was attacked by Cuban aircraft fire .
 Low-level reconnaissance probably is on its way, says U.S. State Department . "One does not detect a process of escalation spiraling out of control"
 Daniel Ellsberg and Seymour Hersh developed an empirical argument in support of these general claims . There is one important empirical argument, developed mainly by Daniel Ellberg, that is offered in support .
 The Americans, this argument runs, felt during the crisis that they had to maintain surveillance of Cuba . The argument runs that the Americans felt they needed to keep tabs on Cuba .
 To protect the reconnaissance aircraft, the U.S. government would have to react militarily if these planes came under hostile fire . If any of these planes were shot down, they would be shot down . The reconnaissance aircraft would be protected by the American government .
 The calculation that the risk inherent in such a policy was tolerable was based on the assumption that Khrushchev, a responsible statesman, exercised control both over Castro and over the surface-to-air missile sites .
 Khrushchev did not control all SAM sites, and indeed the Cuban government itself might have taken over one of these installations with military force during the crisis .
 The American policy, rooted in a misperception about who was calling the shots in Cuba, was extremely dangerous . Because an American retaliation could have set off an escalatory process that might well have culminated in thermonuclear war, the American policy may have been wrong .
 As some of Greiner’s comments show, this argument is now in the process of being accepted even by professional historians . Greiner: “As some of the argument is being accepted, it's now accepted by even professional historians.”
 There are first of all a number of problems relating to the factual accuracy of their account. There are also a few issues relating to their account .
 The idea that the United States had unknowingly “passed the trigger” to Castro is based on the assumption that Cuban troops controlled at least one of the S A M sites . The U.S. government certainly already knew that the Cubans controlled the antiaircraft batteries
 CNN.com: What sort of evidence is there that Cuban %arianu of this argument are found in the Hersh. Hersh . CNN's John Sutter says the evidence is not there .
 Nothing in these intercepts indicated that the attackers were Cuban government troops, not, for example, anti-Castro guerrilla forces . Nothing in intercepts indicates that the attacks were government troops .
 The intercepts did not indicate the attack on the Soviet base had been successful . Nor did the intercepts in any way indicate that the attack had been unsuccessful .
 The most the NSA analysts had been able to conclude was that this SAM site “may not have been fully under Soviet control when the U2 was shot down” could not be ruled out . This was the only real basis for Hersh’s claim that the clash had
 Hersh had not actually seen the 27 October transcript, the ultimate source of these claims, when he wrote his article . Hersh relied instead on what he was told by people who had read it .
 Khrushchev, for example, was never singled out by name as the individual responsible for the downing of the plane . The Soviet leader was never publicly identified by name .
 President Kennedy did comment in passing that the attack was “an escalation by them,” but neither he nor anyone else elaborated the point in the way that Hersh suggested and argued that it had been ordered for bargaining purposes .
 Putting the issue of factual accuracy aside, one can pursue the basic question a bit further . The question is whether it's true to the question?
 The U.S. government blamed the Cubans for shooting down the U-2, but blamed the Soviets instead . The U.-2 was shot down by the Soviets, but the Soviets were blamed for it .
 The more isolated the Cubans were, the more their Soviet protector could be presumed to have been alienated by Cuba’s hostile behavior . Cuba's hostile behavior would have led the Americans to judge that the risks were low and thus to retaliate .
 The assumption is that an American retaliatory attack could have set off the avalanche and led to a full-scale war . But for these commentators, the assumption is not that the attack would have led to war .
 The U-2 was almost certainly shot down on the orders of the Soviet commander at the S A M base acting on his own authority . We now know, however, that the U.2 was probably shot down .
 The giving of such an assurance might be expected to reduce the probability of an American reprisal . It also reflects a Soviet eagerness to avoid provocation that should be taken into account in the risk of escalation .
 The Soviet leadership had clearly expected a SAM attack of this sort to be dangerous . But even if the U.S. had chosen to retaliate, the Soviet government did not order the attack . The new knowledge that the . Soviets did not .
 A U.S. reprisal was more likely to be ‘understood’ given that the attack was the result of a decision by the commander in the field, than if the strike had actually been ordered by the Kremlin . The U.K. would be more likely
 The Cuban crisis began with an act of deception, when the Soviets deployed missiles on the island . The Soviets said it was something they would never do, but the Cuban crisis was a deception .
 On 27 October, when the Kennedy administration was looking for a way out of the crisis, none of the normal diplomatic alternatives seemed at all attractive . It was also ended by an act of deception .
 It cut the Gordian knot by issuing what was in effect an ultimatum combined with secret ‘assurances”regarding withdrawal of the missiles from Turkey .
 President Kennedy, it was said, would never have considered anything of the sort . President Kennedy would never consider such a move .
 It was the administration’s skill in crisis management, the argument went, that had brought about a resolution of the crisis . The argument went that it was the president's skill that brought about the resolution .
 We are now well on the way to trading it in for a new set of myths, equally remote from reality, about the ease with which things can spin out of control in a crisis . We are, however, now well .
 We will be doing our job as historians only if we maintain a certain critical distance and refrain from accepting these new myths too quickly . We will do our job if we keep a critical distance from the new myths, historians say .
 It would be counterproductive to pretend that the mere expression of opinion, unsupported by factual detail, carries any real evidentiary weight, even by those who have fusthand knowledge of these events .