 Conventional wisdom has tended to rank the Cuban missile crisis as the Kennedy presidency's highest drama and grandest success . The Kennedy presidency is considered to be one of the greatest achievements in American history .
 President Kennedy imposed the blockade to persuade the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba . But this provocative recounting of the administration's policy toward Castro's Cuba suggests that Kennedy brought the crisis on himself .
 The orthodoxy is that such wisdom could only have been derived from lessons of the earlier mistake . It is thought that wisdom can only be derived from the lessons of an earlier mistake.
 To the American public, Castro’s acceptance of Russian missiles looked unprovoked, mysteriously aggressive, and threatening . The orthodoxy assumes that the missile crisis ended in a triumph for America, and that assumption needs some looking at .
 There was no way for Americans to know that Cuban protestations of a purely defensive purpose for the missiles were genuine .
 Castro knew that thousands of agents were plotting his death, the author says . Castro knew about the sabotage of his government’s economy, the sabotaging of his mines and mills, the crippling of his sugar and copper industries .
 We had invaded Cuba once; officials high in Congress and the executive department thought we should have followed up with overwhelming support for that invasion . By our timetable of a year to bring Castro down, the pressure to supply that kind of support in a new “rebellion” was
 In this game of power played apart from popular support, the Kennedys looked like brave resisters of aggression, though they had actually been the causes of it . All these realities were cloaked from the American people, though evident to the Russians and the Cubans .
 The Soviet Union did not consider Latin America ripe for Communist influence until the Bay of Pigs failure . Dinerstein has established, from study of Russian materials, that the Soviet Union considered the region ripe for communist influence .
 The Russians were aiming at influence by supporting the Cuban David against a Goliath too cowardly to strike in the daylight . That gave them an opportunity, as continued U.S. activity against Castro gave them .
 Americans unaware of all this, did not bother to ask themselves hard questions about the real purpose of the missiles in Cuba . Americans didn't bother to question themselves about the purpose of these missiles .
 The president said the missiles being placed could strike at any city in the United States . The president implied that this was their purpose .
 Even if Castro had wanted to immolate his nation that way, his missiles would not have helped the Russians . They might, rather, have been a hindrance, because of the ‘ragged attack’ problem .
 If missiles were launched simultaneously from Russia and Cuba, the Cuban ones, arriving first, would confirm the warnings of Russian attack . The Cuban ones would confirm a Russian attack on Russia .
 President Kennedy had arbitrarily defined ground-to-ground missiles as “offensive,” after saying that offensive weapons would not be tolerated . The U.S. refused to accept this explanation, and the U.N. never did .
 We called our ground-to-ground missiles on the Soviets’ Turkish border defensive . Yet we called it a ground to ground missile on the Soviet-Turkish border a defensive .
 Deterrence is a category of defense when we apply it to our own weapons, but we denied the same definition to our opponents . Deterrence—the threat of overwhelming response if attacked if attacked -- is the threat of an overwhelming response .
 Castro accepted the only reason he accepted the Russian missiles . Which meant that we blinded ourselves to the reason Castro accepted them .
 President Kennedy had two dangerous situations to deal with simultaneously—the missile emplacements and American panic over them . He wanted to force the Kennedys to stop plotting his overthrow by threatening that if worse came to worst, he would take some of our cities down with him .
 Robert Kennedy told the president he had to remove the missiles or be impeached . Robert Kennedy said he was forced to remove missiles from the White House . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In other words, the president was a captive of his own people’s panicky emotions . The president was held hostage by his people's panicked emotions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy had himself stirred up the feelings that limited his freedom . Options were denied him by the American people, he could not even think of leaving the missiles in place .
 It is understandable that he would not reveal all the American provocation that explained the presence of the missiles, he says . It's understandable that the U.S. provoked the missile strike, he adds .
 He told the nation that the Russians had lied to him in promising not to send offensive weapons to Cuba . He said the Russians promised not to use offensive weapons in Cuba .
 In this he was renewing a cycle that has bound all our postwar presidents . For defensive purposes, just as the Cubans said. For defense purposes, he was . Just as the Cuban president said.
 In order to have freedom of maneuver, they instill a sense of crisis, but once that sense is instilled, it commits the leader to actions he did not have in mind when he instilled it . The leader's actions commit him to action he didn't want when instilled
 War became a homeopathic cure for American bellicosity . War taps the aggressiveness that, bottled up, might break out in a larger war . War is a little war taps aggressiveness .
 "By a kind of devilish symmetry, the contemptuous manipulation of public opinion leads to a slavishness toward public opinion," he says .
 Kennedy thought he could wage a war out of sight of the American people, for the people’s good . But when the Cubans responded in open ways, he could not explain their effrontery . He had to ride the wave of public fear, and had to fight the
 In dealing with the Cuban missile crisis, John Kennedy displayed what has come to be seen as a legendary restraint . Kennedy displayed restraint, of a sort, in the quick rejection of a plan for outright conquest of the island .
 The option that did get serious consideration, and toward which the president at first inclined, was a preemptive air strike to destroy the missile launching pads . The option was a serious consideration .
 If the military had suggested technical difficulties in this procedure, it would have been given even more serious attention . Robert Kennedy’s first reaction to the idea was to slip his brother a note saying, “I now know how Tojo felt when he was planning Pearl Harbor”
 Kennedy humiliated them gratuitously, though the missiles had no military importance for us . Kennedy had already ordered the Turkish missiles removed, and mere procedural delay had kept them in place . In the matter of the Turkish missile, he humiliated them .
 "Not only were they of no value, they were a source of possible trouble," he says . "They were of no use. Not only were ... they were also a source for possible trouble."
 Though the Turkish missiles meant nothing to us, they were a symbolic grievance to the Soviet Union, it was exactly the kind of affront we were complaining of . The missiles were a symbol of the Soviet Soviet Union .
 The Russians had to live with the ignominy of hostile missiles right on their border . The Russians were forced to live under the threat of a missile attack .
 If Kennedy’s first and only concern was the removal of the missiles from Cuba, a trade was the safest, surest way to achieve it . Kennedy's first concern was removing the missiles, as he and his defenders proclaimed, was removing them .
 Kennedy wanted to remove the missiles provided he did not appear forced to bargain with the Soviets to accomplish this . Kennedy wanted the missiles removed provided he didn't appear to be forced to do this . But Kennedy wanted them removed .
 He must deliver the ultimatum, make demands to which Russia would act submissively, he must deliver . Russia must respond to the demands made by the West, he says .
 He had to rub Khrushchev’s nose in the dirt, and had to put up with it . Which meant that he had to . Put up with . It meant that Khrush . had to be put up by it .
 Kennedy would even risk nuclear war rather than admit that a trade of useless missiles near each other’s countries was eminently fair . Kennedy would have risked nuclear war if he admitted that trade was fair .
 He was the one who had to back down, admit his maneuver had failed, and take the heat from internal critics for his policy . He was one of the ones who backed down and took the heat .
 The reaction to missiles in Cuba was not a model of restraint, of rational decision making, of power used in peaceful ways . Macho appearance, not true security, was the motive for Kennedy’s act, not security .
 Khrushchev’s loss contributed, or appeared to contribute, to his later downfall—depriving us of a leader who was easier to deal with than his successors . The loss contributed to the downfall of the Soviet Union, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Jimmy Carter declared, in 1979, that the presence of Russian combat troops in Cuba was “intolerable,” there was no sign of accommodation from Russian leaders . Carter declared in 1979 that Russia’s presence of Cuban combat troops was ‘intoleranceable”
 Cuba is the most important one they cannot afford to fail again . Russia has only two or three enthusiastic allies outside their satellite system . Cuba is one no Russian leader, with the example of Khrushchev, will abandon .
 Those who praise Kennedy for his conduct in the missile crisis often reach the conclusion that he learned pacific ways in this “restrained” success . We purchased submission at the price of later intransigence .
 Eisenhower must have learned that his own and his party’s popularity soared when he could make an opponent visibly “eat crow,” even if the only way to serve up that dish was to risk national safety . Eisenhower years represented a tacit acceptance of limits, at odds with
 John Kennedy had different teachers on the nature of power . Little challenges around our periphery of influence were being neglected, cumulative losses not redressed, he writes .
 They thought any recognition of limits signaled a failure of nerve . They thought that any recognition . of limits would signal a failure . of nerve. They thought . of . nerve .
 U.S. resources were limitless—brains, science, talent, tricks, technology, money, virtuosity, says President Obama . "American resources are limitless," he says .
 John Kennedy, in his inaugural address, assured us that he had courage to use all that might . The only matter to decide was whether one had the courage to take action, he said .
 It might not have been possible for the Romans to protect an expanding perimeter of power, one thinned by its extension to enclose the known world . Anywhere along the outmost sweep of our vast reach, we would strike if provoked .
 America could protect the whole world, because we had things the Romans lacked, including jet planes, helicopters, napalm and defoliants . America had the ability to use napalm, water-walking rockets, computers, and other tools .
 "We could do everything, it was believed, so long as we never did, in any one spot, more than was absolutely necessary," says the author of the book . "We were believed to be able to do everything," says author .
 Robert McNamara’s computers dispatches exactly the right-sized teams to troubled spots . That is where McNamara's computers came into play . McNamara: "The computers came to play"
 Admittedly, the computers could not measure such things as the strength of anti-colonial feeling . Admitting, "It could not be measured such things"
 Kennedy’s ‘pragmatic’ nonideologists were considered an advantage . But that was considered an unfair advantage by Kennedy's ‘nonideologists’
 For men holding such views, Vietnam was an ideal place to try out new tools of power . Vietnam was a place to prove that development could be encouraged without colonial exploitation . For them, the hard facts of cash and firepower spoke louder than sentiment .
 Jungle and swamp would train our new guerrillas for all kinds of conditions, says President Obama . "Jungle and swamp" would train them for all sorts of conditions .
 "Conventional wisdom has tended to rank the Cuban missile crisis as the Kennedy presidency's highest drama and grandest success" But this provocative recounting of the administration's policy toward Castro's Cuba suggests that Kennedy brought the crisis on himself .
 Castro's acceptance of Russian missiles looked unprovoked, mysteriously aggressive, and threatening . Castro’s acceptance of Russia missiles looked threatening, mysterious . Castro accepted Russian missiles .
 The Kennedys looked like brave resisters of aggression, though they had actually been the causes of it . All these realities were cloaked from the American people, though evident to the Russians and the Cubans .
 The Soviet Union did not consider Latin America ripe for Communist influence until the failure of the Bay of Pigs failure .
 The Russians were aiming at influence by supporting the Cuban David against a Goliath too cowardly to strike in the daylight . That gave them an opportunity, as continued U.S. activity against Castro gave them a excuse, for large-scale intervention in this hemisphere .
 The President could not even think of leaving the missiles in place . Options were denied him by the American people, he said .
 The president was renewing a cycle that has bound all our postwar presidents . For defensive purposes, just as the Cubans said.\"",\""subtype":null,\""innerHtml"":\""In this he was . renewing the cycle that . has bound
 If the military had suggested technical difficulties in this procedure, it would have been given even more serious attention . Robert Kennedy’s first reaction to the idea was to slip his brother a note saying, “I now know how Tojo felt when he was planning Pearl Harbor”
 Hilsman notes that they were “obsolete, unreliable, inaccurate, inaccurate and very vulnerable” The missiles could be knocked out by a sniper with rifle and telescopic sights .
 Kennedy did not appear forced to bargain with the Soviets to accomplish this . Kennedy wanted to remove the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 The reaction to missiles in Cuba was not a model of restraint, of rational decision making, of power used in peaceful ways . Macho appearance, not true security, was the motive for Kennedy’s act .
 "We purchased submission at the price of later intransigence," says Kennedy . "Those who praise Kennedy for his conduct in the missile crisis often reach the conclusion that he learned pacific ways"
 Eisenhower must have learned that his own and his party's popularity soared when he could make an opponent visibly “eat crow,” even if the only way to serve up that dish was to risk national safety .
 John Kennedy had different teachers on the nature of power . Little challenges around our periphery of influence were being neglected, cumulative losses not redressed …\"",\""subtype:"":null,\""innerHtml":\""John Kennedy had . different . teachers on . the nature
 The only matter was whether one had the courage to use all that might, and John Kennedy assured us that he had . John Kennedy, in his inaugural address, assured us he had. John Kennedy .
 "It might not have been possible for the Romans to protect an expanding perimeter of power, one thinned by its extension to enclose the known world" "Anywhere along the outmost sweep of our vast reach, we would strike if provoked," says Romans .
 For men holding such views, Vietnam was an ideal place to try out new tools of power . For them, the hard facts of cash and firepower spoke louder than sentiment .