 Read excerpts from interviews with historians, journalists, and analysts . Read excerpts of interviews with journalists, analysts, historians, analysts .
 Her interviewees had much more to say than could fit in a two-hour program . The interviewees were interviewed for the first time .
 Read excerpts from interviews with historians, journalists and analysts . Read these excerpts from these interviews by historians and journalists .
 You have the generation that fought the first war of independence against Spain in the 1860s and '70s . You have a generation who fought for independence from Spain . It's the first generation of independence fighters .
 The second revolutionary generation fought against Spain beginning in 1895, led by Jose Marti . The second generation fought for Spain in the Spanish Civil War .
 "Generation '33" overthrew Machado, but had their revolution cut short by U.S. intervention . "You have then the generation of '33," says the Venezuelan politician . "They overthrew ... Machado," he says .
 Each generation defines itself in a way by overthrowing a dictatorial regime . So there's this long tradition in Cuba of revolutionary generations, of each generation defining itself .
 When Castro says, "This is going to be a real revolution, in 1959," he's referring to the aborted revolutions of 1898 and 1933 . Castro was referring to those aborted revolutions, historian says . Castro: "I think he's talking about the aborted revolution of 1898"
 I think he wants to carry those revolutions through to their promise -or to what he thinks their promise was, which is in particular . Reforms that will address the economic and social inequalities of Cuban society will be needed .
 Even the republic of 1940, even though it was democratic, did not address the issue, he says . And those are reforms which even the republic . Even though it's democratic, it was not addressed, he adds .
 I think my generation was used as a test dummy for the revolutionary process. I think I'm not the first generation to be used to be a test dummies for the revolution . I think it's a good start to a new era of social reform in the world .
 The first uniforms were worn by my generation; it was like trying to convert Cuba into an arm of China . The first uniform was worn by the first generation of Cubans . The uniforms were like those worn by his generation .
 "We were put through every type of experiment possible in order to convert us into ""the new man" "That's exactly what we are, a generation with many socially inadapted people," he says . "We are a generation of people with many social inadaptive people,"
 "I would talk to them -it was fairly open -from Guatemala, from Nicaragua, from Salvador, from Vietnam, from Central Africa," says the former president .
 "He wanted to be a real world military power, and he saw himself as standing up to the United States. He wanted -there is no question in my mind -he wanted to . He wanted to stand up to . The United States, he said .
 Khrushchev was capable of responding pragmatically to a progressive movement, but what you see in this attachment to Cuba is something quite different . The former Soviet Union leader's attachment to the Cuban people is something different .
 This was not like Egypt, his relationship with Egypt, Iraq, or Guinea, he said . This is not the case of any of his relationships with other countries, he added .
 Russia's anti-Putin protests were a spontaneous movement that shared Moscow's ideas . They seemed to be willing to take Moscow's guidance, the Kremlin says .
 In summer of 1960, the U.S. intelligence community judged that there was a good likelihood that one or more Latin American countries would fall under the sway of revolutionary regimes sponsored and supported by Cuba .
 Kennedy administration was being told that other Latin American countries were going to fall to communist revolutionary regimes with the help of Fidel Castro . The Kennedy administration told the Kennedy administration that the Castro regime was going to help topple them .
 "If it was exaggerated in retrospect, I think it was only slightly exaggerated," he said . "I think it's only slightly exaggerating," he added .
 The Cuban revolution is an example, an inspiration for young people, especially in Latin America but even beyond Latin America, in the U.S. and in Europe, during the 1960s because of the kind of idealism and promise that it represents .
 It's a revolution that promises to deal with the inequalities of underdeveloped Latin America . It's the first of its kind in Latin America, it promises to address the inequalities .
 It's a revolution that promises more openness and freedom on the cultural front initially . It's the first time a revolution has been held in the country's history . It will be the first of its kind in the Middle East .
 It's a revolution, that promises to get beyond the corruption that's been so traditional, not just in Cuba but in many Latin American countries . Cuba's new president is expected to be the first to take over the Cuban government .
 It's a revolution that promises to try to solve all those problems by finding a third way between socialism and capitalism . The revolution will be a revolution to find a way between capitalism and socialism . It's not just a revolution, it's a socialist revolution .
 It is a time when the human rights discourse was not yet internationally developed, the way fortunately, it is today . It is now an internationally-recognised issue of human rights today .
 "The idea began to take shape, we've got to get rid of him and make it look like somebody else is doing it. Because the American image in Latin America was not good and they were sort of conscious of this," he says .
 Cuban exiles would be trained and lead ashore at the Bay of Pigs, says CNN's John Sutter . "They came up with the somebody else that they [Cuban exiles] would train and lead them," he says . Sutter: "They [Cubans] would
 "We did not envision an invasion supported by American planes, American tanks, American marines," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be surprised at what happened," says Obama .
 He announced, for the first time, that this is a socialist revolution . We'd already bombed the airfields, knew that there was a task force off the coast... he announced . He announced that this was a 'socialist revolution'
 This was a transparent effort on his part to get the Soviets to come to his support. This was the president's attempt to get them to support him .
 "Well, certainly, he didn't expect that we were going to put 1,200 exiles ashore and leave it at that. Well, certainly," he said .
 He expects the first and second Marine divisions to come in right after them .
 President Obama defeated the American, the CIA effort without any difficulty on his own, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "From that point forward, from having said this is a socialist revolution, he then began to convert it into a Soviet-style system with a party-state government apparatus," he said .
 The repressive machinery of Castro's government rounded up many thousands of Cubans -real and imagined opponents of the regime . In the days immediately preceding, during and right after the Bay of Pigs in mid April of 1961, the security and the internal police and other intelligence services rounded up thousands of
 Held them, incarcerated them, fearing that that they would become involved with the exile brigade and offer them assistance, they held them in detention . Held them fearing they would join the exiled brigade and help them in their exile .
 This broke the back of the internal resistance of the unorganized opposition to Castro at that time, says Castro . Castro's victory over Castro broke back the internal opposition to the Castro regime, he says .
 The opposition to Castro, organized or not, was very large, in the spring of 1961 . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba . Castro's government was overthrown in 1961, but Castro was not .
 It is the possibility of beheading all of the opposition with a single blow, it is said . It is also the possibility that the government could be behead all of its opponents .
 Hundreds of thousands of people are detained in Cuba at the moment of the invasion . Hundreds of Thousands of people were detained at the time of the Cuban invasion .
 "The political opposition is left without leaders and at the same time the opposition suffers a demoralizing defeat," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela says the political opposition suffers from a "demoralizing defeat"
 "The possibility of defeating Cuba militarily ended in April of '61," says President Nixon . "I think we didn't realize it but the possibility ... ended in '61" says Nixon . Nixon: "I'm not surprised at the end of the war"
 Che Guevara and Richard Goodman met in 1961 in South America . Goodman was a White House speechwriter for Kennedy . Goodman is a former journalist for the U.S. government .
 Guevara walks across the room and shakes Goodman's hand and says, "Mr Goodman I would just like to thank you for the Bay of Pigs, thank you very much"
 The Bay of Pigs provided the perfect pretext for Castro to say, ""I am a socialist and I've always been a socialist,"" to declare the Cuban revolution a socialist revolution . Castro also rolled up the whole internal resistance movement, to round up somewhere between 50,000 and 100,
 Cuba was still a civil war going on inside Cuba at this point . Risky because there was still an ongoing civil war inside Cuba . Cuba is still a dangerous place in Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs, to the Americans, was a little dinky thing that happened, 1500 guys that went ashore, 72 hours later they were either dead or running around in the jungle . But the Bay of Pigeas was a show trial for the U.S.
 Castro: "It might have looked like that to the Americans, and it was kind of a humiliation, but it didn't really affect our security much" Castro -Playa Girón, April 1961, is the primal event to which he always goes back when there's ever any question
 "The hostility, the enmity in the relationship is guaranteed. After that, the hostility is guaranteed," she said . "After that, it is guaranteed, there will be hostility," she added .
 In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban military victory over the exile brigade, Castro's credibility, his strength in Cuba and throughout Latin America, was enormously enhanced . The Cuban military won over the exiled brigade in the immediate aftermath .
 His revolution at that moment was more consolidated than it had ever been before . His revolution was consolidated than ever before .
 He had done what no Latin American leader before him had ever done and that was to defeat a really significant challenge --military kind of challenge -mounted by the U.S. President Obama .
 Castro was no longer the David fighting the Goliath; he was a Goliath of a different sort, in his own realm . Castro's credibility on the island, in Latin America, soared . Whatever remaining opponents he had, they were cowed .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion so closely associates opposition to the revolution with the United States . Castro is able to wrap himself in the Cuban flag and declare the revolution socialist .
 It's not a coincidence that he declares the revolution a socialist revolution at the time of the Bay of Pigs, because he now he can wrap the socialist project in Cuban nationalism . Cuban nationalism is key to the success of the Cuban revolution, Cuban president says .
 If the U.S. had acted, Cuba would have been like Vietnam, author says . "The biggest contribution that Kennedy made was stopping any further action," he says .
 Khrushchev's idea for deploying missiles in Cuba, nuclear missiles, was Khrushchev's . Khrushchchev's plan to deploy missiles was the idea for deployment of nuclear missiles in the country .
 In the spring of 1962, Khrushchev began thinking about what to do about several problems at once . In the summer of that year, he decided to take action .
 The Soviets had a very inferior missile battery, missile capability, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "One of the reasons for the success of the Soviet Union is that the Soviets had an inferior missile capability"
 Their missiles didn't fly often, they didn't go straight, the bombs didn't explode - a classic Soviet problem . Their missiles also had a problem: They didn't always go straight and didn't blow up .
 Most of the missiles that were launched in Siberia wound up exploding somewhere in Siberia . Most of those missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 If you put them in Cuba, it's like putting them in Florida, says Nikita Nikita . But one way around that problem was pointed out to him by his generals, which is, it might sound strange Nikita, but it's not strange .
 He wanted conventional weapons to defend his country against an attack that he assumed would occur, perhaps, in 1963, or 1964 . What he wanted were defensive conventional weapons .
 The Soviets, themselves, did not expect an attack until just before the Kennedy reelection of 1964 . The Soviets were not expecting an attack on Kennedy until 1964 .
 The assumption was that John F Kennedy would have some kind of October surprise in 1964 so that he could be reelected . Kennedy was reelected in 1964 . He was elected to the White House in 1968 .
 The Cuban request was for tanks, surface-to-air missiles, and for some Soviet soldiers . The request was to train the Cuban army to be ready for the attack in 1964, he says .
 The missiles came as a surprise to Fidel... his reaction was, well, I'll take them, but you know we don't need them . Fidel Castro: "I'll take [missile] missiles, but I'll never say anything about them."
 I will take them for the sake of socialist unity, but for Cuban defense, we don't need them, he says . Cuban President Evian Castro says he will not take them . Castro: "We don't have them"
 He suggested, why don't you just let us sign a collective security agreement? He suggested that the government should sign a security agreement . He suggested instead of a deal, the government would sign an agreement with the EU .
 Nikita Khrushchev would talk about this as a defensive measure, but in the very beginning, the Soviets were talking about it as an offensive strategy to apply pressure to the United States in the game of 1962 .
 When Khrushchev raised the possibility of putting these missiles in to defend Cuba, Castro understood immediately that the real purpose was to improve the balance of power . The United States had far more intercontinental missiles than the Soviet Union did . The real purpose of the U.S. missiles was
 If they placed these missiles in Cuba, that strengthened the hand of the Soviet Union . So if they . placed these . missiles in . Cuba, it strengthened the Soviet . Union's hand, he says .
 Castro said he would do it to as his support for the socialist bloc . Castro said it wouldn't really defend Cuba because if the Americans had not decided to invade before the missiles came in, they certainly would invade once they knew the missiles were coming in .
 The South Korea-U.S. alliance has agreed a new mutual defense agreement with the U.S., South Korea . The two countries signed an agreement to allow missiles to be brought in as part of the agreement .
 If the Americans didn't like it, there was a possibility of negotiating and maybe the Soviets could bring about the withdrawal of the American Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Then, if the U.S. didn't want it, it was possible to negotiate and bring about a withdrawal .
 The U.S. might get a pledge not to invade Cuba, if the Soviets wouldn't put the missiles in . And they might even get the United States to give some pledge not invading Cuba if the missiles were in .
 There was no way that the Soviets could get those missiles in secretly, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There were no way" that the missiles could be hidden .
 Construct the site, bring the missiles and the warheads to the ports, truck them up to the sites, raise the missiles, mate the warheads . had U2s going over periodically, P-4 reconnaissance planes sucking up all the radio messages inside the island . No way that that could
 Many issues came to the fore immediately when the Soviets began arriving in the summer of 1962 . The Soviets arrived in summer of that year .
 The Soviets said, "We're going to put the missiles here, and they'd clear away an area" The Soviet Union said it would clear an area of the area .
 CIA later discovered, what they actually did was to create a missile site with the pad and the bunkers and so forth, that was identical to the ones they had in Siberia . The site was created by the Soviets in Siberia, the CIA later found .
 The idea was to take this hilly, thickly forested terrain, bulldoze it, and turn it into a more humid, warmer version of Siberia . The idea is to turn the hilly terrain into a wet, humid version of the Siberian peninsula .
 If truth had gotten out about the contract that they signed, sort of a treaty, what it really did was to grant the Soviets four pieces of property a little bit like Guantanamo . This was one of the problems for the Cubans because of the truth .
 The Russians arrived -this is one of my favorite stories about Soviet cleverness -43,000 arrived by the time the missile crisis erupts in October, and in order to disguise themselves they all wear striped shirts so as not to be seen .
 Fidel wanted to tell Khrushchev, that if the Soviet Union had to use nuclear weapons to defend the socialist world and if that meant that Cuba might be sacrificed, that's OK . The Cuban people would sacrifice themselves for the greater good of the socialist commonwealth, he says .
 Khrushchev, who was an optimist, was pessimistic only about nuclear war . In fact, he was optimistic only about the threat of nuclear war, he says .
 The only thing he felt that could disrupt the development of socialism worldwide was a nuclear war, he said . He said the only thing that could stop socialism being developed was nuclear war .
 "The most critical mistake that the Soviets made was to lie about it. If you ask any of the Americans who were involved in this, it was to Lie about it," he says . "The Soviets made a critical mistake," he adds .
 Kennedy's speech -7:00, 22nd of October -he came on and told the American people what was going on . Kennedy came on with a speech that led to his death .
 Seven times he says they're lying, they're deceptive, and in a superpower this is intolerable, he says . Seven times in a row he says 'they're lying' seven times . In a superpower, it's intolerable .
 "You cannot tolerate a nuclear superpower that doesn't play by the rules of the game," says Putin . "These things are coming out on principle, as well as for all kinds of strategic reasons," he says .
 In addressing Fidel as an enemy, the U.S. has to realize that you are dealing with an individual who is obsessed with his place in history . The United States has to be aware of Fidel Castro's obsession with history, the author says .
 Fidel Castro is indifferent to the well being of his people, says Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro has been a dictator for more than a decade . Castro's regime has a history of being indifferent to its people's well-being . Castro is the only ruler in the world to be indifferent to
 Fidel Castro tried to get the Soviets to launch a nuclear attack on the United States, a preemptive attack, in 1962 . This will result in a response on the part of the U.S. that will wipe out Cuba, he says .
 President Obama has never worried about the Cuban people's well being, he says . And he didn't care, because he had never cared about their well being . The Cuban people are still at risk, he said .
 Castro hoped that the Soviets would not withdraw the short-range missiles, the tactical missiles, that his people could use against American invasion . When the Soviets decided to withdraw the big missiles, Castro hoped they would not . Castro hoped .
 Cuba's president wanted to tell the world that Cuba had a nuclear defense on its beaches . He very much wanted to . Cuba had nuclear defense, he said, "but it's not a nuclear war"
 Initially, the Soviets were prepared to share those missiles, to give those missiles to the Cubans . Initially, it was hoped that the Soviets would share them with Cubans, but it was never shared .
 Moscow realized that it was too risky to let the Cubans have nuclear weapons . After Fidel Castro's behavior, Moscow decided to withdraw them from Cuba .
 Cuba was the port of entry to the Americas for Spain, and its main source of sugar . Cuba was also the source of the Spanish sugar, which is now owned by Spain .
 Cuba's independence came very late, in 1902, 80 years after most of the Latin Americans had their independence . And it was 80 years before most of Latin America had their own independence . Cuba was the only Latin American country to have its independence .
 The Spaniards held onto Cuba much tighter than almost any other country . The Spanish hold onto Cuba more tightly than any other nation .
 At one point there were 200,000 Spanish troops in Cuba, as much as in all the rest of Latin America together . At the same time, the whole Latin American region was home to more than 100,000 troops .
 The United States put as a condition for withdrawing American forces from Cuba in 1902 that in the Cuban Constitution there would be an amendment saying that the United States had the right to intervene in Cuba . The U.S. put that condition as part of withdrawal from Cuba as condition .
 This was abolished by President Roosevelt in 1933, but it was part of the history of the Cubans trying to get this blemish off the independence and sovereignty of Cuba through all those years .
 Today, perhaps, 1933 is very far away, but not for the people of my generation . 1933 is not for my generation. 1933 is far from far away . 1933 was very far from 1933, but perhaps not for today's generation .
 It peaks in the 1920s, and then gradually declines from the 1950s to the 1960s .
 The U.S. owned and operated the majority of Cuba's sugar mills, and certainly the most efficient ones, through the first quarter of the 1920s . Cuba's most efficient sugar mills were owned by the United States .
 In the second quarter of the 20th century, the proportion of the sugar harvest accounted for by U.S. farms declines . In the first half of the century, it has declined .
 United States banks control the Cuban financial system in the first quarter of the 20th century . U.S. banks control Cuba's financial system .
 Their control of the Cuban financial system declines during the second quarter of the 19th century . They control the Cuban banking system declines .
 The effective power of the United States over Cuba declined from the first to the second quarter of the 20th century . In subject after subject, the U.S. over Cuba has declined .
 The role of the United States in Cuba begins in 1898 with the Spanish-American War . The U.S. sends troops to Cuba to fight Spain, but really is intervening in Cuba's war of independence .
 The Cuban government was turned over to Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1991 . President Vladimir Putin's government was overthrown by a coup d'Orlando in 1994 . The Cuban military ruled the country for a number of years .
 Cuba's Platt Amendment gives the U.S. the right to intervene in Cuba whenever we find it convenient . Cuba's rights as a sovereign country to have dealings with other countries, constrains its rights as sovereign country . We impose the Platt amendment on Cuba .
 The United States then does, in fact, intervene in Cuba several times over the next decade . And the U.S. does, of course, intervene several times .
 The U.S. ambassador was the second most powerful person in Cuba, behind the president himself, behind him . The ambassador is Cuba's ambassador to the island .
 The United States intervenes in 1932-33 in the midst of a revolution against the dictator Machado . The U.S. intervened in the beginning of the revolution .
 The U.S. overthrows a very popular nationalist government that gets rid of the Machado regime in 1933 . The United States imposes a solution on that situation .
 Cuban nationalists feel that every time Cuba is about to seize control of its own destiny - in 1898, in 1933 - the United States steps in and takes control of Cuba . The United States moves Cuba in a way that's consonant with the interests of the U.S. rather than
 Fidel Castro is adamant in 1959 that the U.S. doesn't control his Cuban revolution . Fidel Castro was adamant that the United States didn't control the Cuban revolution in Cuba . Castro's Cuban revolution was a success story for Castro .
 Since independence, that was one of the constant factors in Cuba politics, the support of the U.S. government for a particular political figure, or a president, is one of Cuba's constant factors . Cuba's support for the United States government has been a constant factor in Cuban politics
 It was constant participation, involvement and involvement in political matters in Cuba . "It's constant participation and involvement," she said .
 The American occupation signified, from the economic point of view,... a positive thing . The occupation of the U.S. was a 'positive thing' for the country, says historian Peter Bergen .
 In 1952, the United States recognized Batista immediately because it was U.S. policy to recognize dictators . "One can't forget that in 1952, in 1952 ... it was American policy," she says .
 Fidel Castro stirred up marvelously in the Sixties in Cuba . So all the elements mixed in with the idea of an unfinished revolution, were found in all the unrest . The Cuban nation was diminished by the conflict, which diminished the Cuban nation .
 There are two ways to think about the impact of the U.S. on the Cuban revolution at the end of the first quarter of 1959 . The Cuban revolution was the Cuban uprising in 1959 .
 One argument is that the U.S. government pushed Fidel into the arms of the Soviet Union, the communists, and radicals . One has been very common, and it is the argument that the United States pushed Fidel .
 In January, February, March, early April of 1959, the United States undertook a variety of initiatives to try to reach out to the Cuban government . The U.S. government was trying to discuss, professionally and effectively, a number of ways to help the government .
 Fidel Castro thought there could be constructive, mutually beneficial relationship with the U.S. that included accepting international assistance and foreign investment . Fidel Castro's own words: "There are a number of instances that he thought, at least for a short period of time, a few weeks in early
 The second way to think about the impact of the United States on Cuba in 1959 is the long legacy of United States presence, the role of U.S. firms, the salience of the way of life on Cuban society . The United States is a powerful force in Cuba, but
 Fidel Castro says he could not build the Cuba that he wanted unless he extirpated the United States from Cuba . Fidel Castro: "There could not be a revolution in Cuba"
 There was very little the U.S. government could do to shake that conviction . And at that point, there was little the United States .
 Fidel Castro instructs his economic team not to ask for aid, not to accept aid . Eisenhower administration tries to open up discussions on foreign aid and other means of international cooperation .
 The reason it has maintained itself is because of its encounters, and nearness to the United States . They have made an aberration out of the hate towards the U.S. and have canalized their hostility by supporting Fidel Castro, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "Nobody in the United States cares about it. They think that by doing so they're driving the Americans nuts, but the truth is nobody in the U.S. cares," says CNN's John Sutter . "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going
 The objections to U.S. policy come about because from 1898 until 1959, the United States controlled Cuba . The objections come because of the U.N. control of Cuba .
 There is something odd about the sense of Cuban nationalism that is perhaps summarized by the fact that one of the national drinks is rum and Coke, cuba libre as it is called in Spanish . Cubans today and over time, for a long time, consider that one .
 Rum and Coke is rum, a Cuban drink, and Coca-Cola, a U.S. product . Rum is rum in Cuba and Coke in the United States .
 Cuba and the U.S. have been intertwined for at least a century, and perhaps more . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been at odds with Cuba for decades . Cuba is the only nation in the world to have a democracy .
 It's not possible to be a Cuban without incorporating the United States into that sense of being, Cuban president says . Cuban President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro awakens a deep anthropological curiosity - he's the bearded man dressed in military costume with a heroic history, and he militarily defeated a dictatorship . Fidel Castro is a bearded man with a history of defeating a dictatorship in Cuba .
 The legendary image that he constructs is assisted by the fact that there are very powerful feelings against the U.S. and the capitalist economy, and he is looked upon as a hero .
 The Latin American leftists perceive him as a hero that battles against adversity, and even though he has erratic behavior, his untamable character is more important than anything else .
 The illogical result of that is that he has been able to exculpate himself, to remove himself morally from virtually all of the consequences of his actions . The president has been accused of lying about his actions in the past .
 "It's not him as an individual acting, it's historical forces that are compelling him to act," he says . "I'm not acting as a person. It's not me acting," he adds .
 Through his entire career, beginning with Moncada and maybe going back even to the student activist days, he has been able to absolve himself . He has had a long history of being a student activist in his youth .
 The attack on Moncada barracks launched the Cuban revolutionary process . That was what he said, that was the closing line, the main theme of his speech in self-defense when he was tried .
 I may have engaged in this violence against the Batista dictatorship, we may have attacked this military barracks in Santiago, the Moncada, but what we did was right, he says .
 "He lives by his code and on that basis he decides that his ideas are correct and what he does is the right thing to do," he says .
 'If you don't follow that way of thinking then you're out of his code, you're punishable, condemnable -you lose everything' 'You lose everything. You're punishable and condemnable,' he said .
 When you're with him, in his circle of power, you have influence, but if he, as they say, ""lets go of you,"" then you turn into nobody, it's over . Fidel Castro's protection is over and everyone finds out that you're no longer under
 He almost never gives a speech without making reference to earlier struggles . He almost always makes reference to previous struggles with the president .
 From the very beginning, he said that the revolution in 1959 was not a separate revolution, but was a continuation of the struggles that began against Spain and continued throughout the twentieth century . He said that from the beginning of the 1959 revolution, he . said that .
 He really has a feel for the icons of Cuba's political culture and its history of struggle for independence . Cuba's independence was achieved in the 1950s .
 "I didn't know very much about him except that he was up in the Sierra Maestra and that people pinned their hopes on this man," she says . She says he was "a very successful man" who died in 2011 .
 In Cuba, everyone went out to pay back taxes after the revolution came to power to pay their back taxes . "Now there was going to be an honest government in Cuba," says Fidel Castro .
 Fidel Castro not only came with the legend of Sierra Maestra but also from having defeated the Americans at Playa Girón - that was magnified .
 Fidel Castro was motivated by two sets of important values during the struggle against Batista . Fidel Castro is motivated by the values of two important values, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "He saw the terrible discrepancies between rich and poor, urban and rural, men and women, black and white, and he felt compelled to do something about that," he said . "He felt compelled not to do that. He saw it as a matter matter matter, and felt compelled
 The second set of principles had to do with Cuba's relationship to the U.S. The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 He saw the history of Cuba being dominated by U.S. power, both economic and political, he said . He had as an objective of the revolution to free Cuba from that United States dominance .
 I'd put Ho Chi Minh probably in there, I might put Lenin, Lenin, Churchill, Churchill . I'd also put Ho-Chang Minh and Churchill in there . "I might put Churchill," he said. "I'm not sure what I would say about Ho
 Fidel Castro is in some ways even more interesting, because he leads a country that is 1/87th the size of his principal mortal enemy . He not only gets away with it, but he does it with flair, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He has co-opted the United States in so many ways, including getting, I would say, even now, the majority of nonU.S. citizens on his side, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He has been able to slip between this alliance and get out of that one, to bring back tourism that he said he wouldn't, to survive the collapse of the Soviet Union when everybody said he would't . He has also managed to survive collapse of Soviet Union, survive collapse when everybody
 A document from 1959- '60 written by Paul Nitze - it said six months. And then I found a document from '60 '60 . It said that six months had to be spent in prison .
 Fidel Castro was able to stay in power after so many challenges, particularly the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, because he was so clever -and usually much, much more clever than the people who were against him . Fidel Castro managed to stay alive for so many years after the collapse
 "A lot of people weren't paying that much attention to him, and he was attending very carefully to the United States," he says . "Also, a lot of ... people were paying that little attention," he adds .
 "He knew how to reach our young people, how to appear to be the romantic hero," he says . "By the time people sort of got onto him in the '80s and more into the '90s, there was nobody who was going to overthrow him"
 Explore the 1928 dam collapse, the second deadliest disaster in California history . Now Streaming Flood in the Desert, explore the 1928 California dam collapse .
 Cuban-born filmmaker Adriana Bosch describes working on Fidel Castro . In this interview, Bosch talks about working on Castro's life .
 There are almost as many views about Cuba's past, present, and future as there are individuals . Fidel Castro is Cuba's first president . Castro is a former Cuban president .
 For the leader of a small Caribbean nation, Fidel Castro's impact on the latter half of the twentieth century has been inordinate . Fidel Castro has been a leader of the Caribbean nation for decades .