 Documents help explain some of the frustrations of Cuban leaders that other documents in this chapter address .
 In analyzing the situation that has arisen through the information at our disposal, it seems that aggression in the next 24 to 72 hours is almost inevitable . October 26, 1962, Khrushchev wrote .
 Most likely one is an air attack on certain installations, with the aim of destroying those installations . The most likely one of the most likely is to be an air strike on certain sites .
 A less likely, but still possible variant, is a direct invasion of the country . A direct invasion is a less likely scenario .
 I believe that the realization of this variant would require large forces, and that this may hold the aggressors back . Such an aggression would be met with indignation by global public opinion, he says .
 You can be sure that we will offer strong and decisive resistance to whatever form this aggression may take. You can't wait to see if this aggression takes any form of its own .
 The morale of the Cuban people is exceptionally high, and will face the aggression heroically, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The morale of Cuba will be exceptionally high. It will be very difficult to understand how to deal with this aggression."
 I would like to express in a few words my deeply personal opinion on the events which are now occurring. Now I would also express my own personal opinion of the events that are occurring.
 If an aggression of the second variant occurs, and the imperialists attack Cuba with the aim of occupying it, then the danger posed by such an aggressive measure will be so immense for all humanity that the Soviet Union will be able to allow it, or to permit the creation of conditions in
 I say this because I believe that the aggressiveness of the imperialists is becoming extremely dangerous . I believe this is becoming very dangerous, especially in the future .
 If they initiate an attack on Cuba — a barbaric, illegal, and amoral act — then in those circumstances the moment would be right for considering the elimination of such a danger, he says .
 "There is, I believe, no other recourse. However difficult and horrifying this decision may be," she said . "I believe, there is, for the sake of my life, there are no other options"
 "I understand how difficult these hours are for you, when the results of your superhuman efforts in the struggle for peace are so gravely threatened," she writes . "You have been and remain a tireless defender of peace," she says .
 "We will keep hoping up to the last minute that peace will be maintained, and we will do everything in our power to pursue this aim," says the group .
 I once again express our whole country’s endless gratitude to the Soviet people, who have shown such brotherly generosity towards us . The Soviet Union has shown such generosity towards the country, says the PM .
 We express our admiration and deep thanks to you personally, and wish you success in your immense and crucial endeavor . We also express our deep thanks for you personally .
 Our message of 27 October to President Kennedy makes it possible to normalize the situation to our advantage, and to protect Cuba from invasion and war . Cuba's message was made to Kennedy in order to prevent war and invasion of Cuba .
 President of the USA responds with agreement to my messages of 26 and 27 October 1962 . Kennedy’s response, which you appear familiar with, provides a guarantee that the USA will refrain from invading Cuba not only with its own forces .
 President Obama's speech is being broadcast now by radio . He will not give a lengthy account of it, since you will become familiar with the text .
 "Not to yield to your emotions, to show restraint. In connection with this we would like to . recommend to you now, at this critical moment, to . show restraint," says CNN.com .
 It must be said that we understand your indignation over the US aggressions, and their violations of the basic guidelines of international law . We understand your outrage over the U.S. aggressions and their violation of international laws .
 At present it is not so much the law at work, as the recklessness of certain military figures in the Pentagon . But at present, the law is not about the law, as it is about recklessness .
 The Pentagon is looking for an opportunity to undermine that agreement . Now that an agreement is beginning to take shape, it's looking for a way to undermine it .
 You shot down one such plane yesterday, although you had never shot them down before when they flew over your territory . You shot it down yesterday, but you didn't shoot it down before . It's not the first time you have shot down a plane in the past .
 Such an action will be exploited by the aggressors for their own purposes. Such an act will be exploitable by those who want to take advantage of the situation .
 Of course if there is an invasion, then it will be necessary to repel it with all the forces at your disposal, says David Cameron .
 Do not let yourselves be provoked by the frenzied military men in the Pentagon now . They want to undermine the agreement and provoke you to actions which could then be used .
 President Obama: "We are doing everything we can to stabilize the situation in Cuba, to protect Cuba from invasion, and to safeguard the possibility of the peaceful building of a socialist society"
 We send our greetings to you and to all your administrative collective . We send your greetings . We are happy to congratulate you and all your colleagues .
 Khrushchev: "I have just received your letter. I have just gotten your letter" October 28, 1962 . "I am very pleased to have received this letter from my brother," she wrote .
 Our government’s position on the issues you raised is laid out in our declaration made today, the text of which is certainly familiar to you . The text of this declaration is certainly known to you, and it is a reference to the Declaration of Declaration of Principles .
 Anti-aircraft defense measures have been put in place in Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I want to explain to you a few things concerning the measures we have taken"
 Earlier there had occurred random violations without definite military goals, so that those flights did not represent real dangers . Earlier, there had been random violations .
 We have decided that we should not sit back with our arms folded, since the suddenness of attack, in circumstances in which the radar system was still not operational, could lead to the complete annihilation of those targets . We have thus decided that .
 "We believed that after our expenditures of money and effort we should not allow that to happen," says President Obama . "It would weaken us from the moral as well as the military point of view," he says .
 Cuban armed forces have on 24 October of this year mobilize from their reserves 50 anti-aircraft batteries for the defense of these Soviet targets . With regard to this, Cuba has on 24 Oct. this year mobilized from their . reserves 50 . anti-missile batteries .
 "Since we did not want to run the risk of sudden attack, it was necessary to order the artillery to open fire," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to be surprised by the fact that we are in danger"
 Soviet military leadership can provide you with additional information on how the plane was shot down . The Soviet military will be able to provide additional information .
 In the past, violations of air space have been carried out secretly, without any attempt to justify them juridically . The past, however, have carried out such violations without a legal justification .
 The U.S. government tried as before to find juridical justification for the right to the violation of our air space at any hour of the day or night . But yesterday the United States .
 "We cannot accept this, since to do so would be a renunciation of our sovereign prerogatives," says Prime Minister David Cameron .
 "We agree to avoid incidents, especially now, since they could pose obstacles to negotiations," he says . "But we agree that we avoid incidents ... especially now," he adds .
 Cuban batteries given instructions not to open fire, but only for the period in which negotiations are being conducted . Cuban batteries will not open fire during negotiations, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 At the same time, we should take into account the gravity of the fact that, in the current tense situation, incidents can arise by chance .
 I want to inform you as well that we are generally opposed to the inspection of our territory . We are also opposed to inspections of our territories. We are not allowed to inspect our territory. We will not inspect our territories, we will inspect them.
 "We are in full agreement on the necessity of fighting for this goal. I highly appreciate the efforts you have made to maintain peace," he says .
 If we are successful in reaching a just, stable, and conclusive peace settlement, it will be an invaluable service to humanity. If we're successful, we will be able to reach a just-stable peace settlement .
 “Letter from Fidel Castro to Khrushchev,” October 26, 1962, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation (AVP RF) all available at digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org .