 Post-positivist approaches to political science eschew causal analysis altogether . Political science increasingly eschews causal analysis entirely .
 This article argues that the source of these divisions is methodological, not philosophical . It argues that these divisions are the result of a lack of understanding of each other .
 Using the example of the Cuban missile crisis, a contrastive, counterfactual approach to causation, where a cause exists when the occurrence of one event rather than another leads to one event . Political scientists engage in different methodological approaches with different purposes .
 A contrastive, counterfactual account meets the intuitions of scholars engaged in quantitative and qualitative methods . The book captures many of the debates guiding debates within qualitative and interpretive methods . It is a contrastive account of the events leading up to the conclusion of the book .
 By developing a common, unified approach to a key philosophical division, it is easier to identify the differences that matter . The U.S. should develop a common approach to the philosophical division .
 In August 1962, the Soviet Union unloaded its first nuclear rockets in Cuba . In August 1963, the Soviets unloaded their first nuclear weapons in Cuba. The Soviet Union then went on to develop nuclear weapons .
 U-2 detected the Cuban missile launch two months later . The Cuban missile crisis began when the U.S. detected the rockets .
 These empirical questions, unfortunately, are not the only source of debate concerning the causes of the crisis . The debate is not only about the causes, but it also about the reasons for the crisis, it is also about how the crisis began .
 Some scholars argue that causes are events or properties that raise the probability of an effect . Others argue that an event must be mechanistically linked to an effect; others argue that a cause must be necessary conditions for an effect.
 The nature of causation has also created a divide between positivist and post-positivist approaches, with the latter focusing on constitutive instead of causal relationships .
 Advocating a position concerning causation has become a marker of one’s position on a range of theoretical, methodological, and empirical issues . Advocating such a position has become an important marker of an individual's position on such issues .
 Advocates of statistical models often argue that causes are probability-raisers . Comparisons of case studies argue that causation is related to necessary conditions . The results of comparative case studies differ from statistical models .
 While theoretical, methodological, and empirical divides in political science are very real, I argue that causation should not be one of them . Political science is very different from a purely theoretical or empirical approach .
 A careful, nuanced reading of contrastive, counterfactual accounts of causation overcomes disciplinary debates which have little to do with the substance of international politics, but also leads to better research questions and more focused causal explanations .
 The following analysis of causation focuses on the Cuban missile crisis . The analysis was based on the timing of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The missile crisis is one of the most studied events in world history . A range of arguments from a host of perspectives have taken positions on its causes .
 The first half of this article makes the case for a counterfactual theory of causation as a bridge between positions in the positive approach to political science . Through this lens, this article argues that the theory of causality is necessary for political science to be considered .
 At present, there is no agreed-upon definition of cause in political science . Instead, there are warring accounts of causes . Political science is a form of science where causes are defined .
 This debate, created by diverse methodological approaches to political science, has created a divided intuition about what causes are . This debate was created by different methodological approaches, political science has created an intuition about causes .
 To bridge the divide, one must shift from a methods-centered discussion of causes to a question-centered approach, says author .
 We cannot agree on the methods for determining causation, but we can agree on questions for which causes are answers . We can agree that causes are causes, but not methods .
 Many questions related to causation within the positive approach to the social sciences become moot . If the positive element of political science moves to a counterfactual account of causation, the debate between positivist and post-positivist scholars over causation also becomes moot .
 ‘how-possible’ questions are more appropriately recast as contrastive why-questions to which contrastive, counterfactual answers are given . Through an analysis of Jutta Weldes’ account of the Cuban missile crisis, I show that 'how-
 In sum, our disciplinary differences might relate to the relative importance we place on different questions, our value orientations, or our methods we use to make causal claims . But our differences should have nothing to do with causation itself, says John Defterios .
 I am not arguing that contrastive why-questions are the only form that research questions in political science should take . Instead, contrastive questions should be asked by political science students .
 There are interesting questions related to description, moral evaluation, measurement, measurement and categorization that are not causal in nature and therefore have different forms . These questions have different ways of categorizing, measuring and measuring .
 A response to a contrastive why-question may require, in part, an elaborate description . This description emphasizes causal processes, mechanisms, and social kinds . Realists prefer to emphasize causal processes and mechanisms, like scientific realists .
 A simple description of a correlation thought to adequately explain a contrast may take the form of a simple description . Likewise, a response may be thought to explain a difference in a correlation .
 I am not arguing that every field should rely on contrastive why-questions as a clue to causation, and therefore I am certainly not proposing to offer a unified definition of causation . Most importantly, I'm not arguing .
 Scholars in quantum mechanics, for example, may work in such a radically different area that contrastive why-questions hold no value .
 By separating causal statements from other intricate issues in the philosophy of science, this article makes four important contributions to science . This article is an attempt to separate causal statements into causal statements .
 The first two contributions relate to the question of philosophical method . The other two contribute to the philosophical method of thinking .
 Social scientists, including IR scholars, debate philosophical questions often without discussing methods for settling philosophical disputes . IR scholars often discuss philosophical questions without discussing how to settle disputes .
 Understanding different ways to tackle problems, such as ‘What is a cause?’, is crucial to making forward progress . Understanding different causes is key to solving problems such as 'What is the cause?'
 Focusing on research questions that demand causal explanations is a clue to what types of causal statements should be given in response to those questions . Focusing in on the research question that demands causal explanations should be a clue .
 I elaborate an account of contrastive, counterfactual causal statements that meets these demands . I develop common ground between ‘positivist’ and some ‘post-positivism’ approaches to social science research by highlighting good work in both traditions .
 Post-positivist scholars claim that their work is distinctive, in part, because it avoids causal analysis . Many post-positsivist scholars say their work avoids analysis of causality .
 An important traditional philosophical method relies on shared intuitions among a community about the meaning of causality . The method is a way of thinking about causality that can be used in science .
 Political science does not have recourse to this traditional solution . Differences in methodological training and practice prevent a shared intuition about what causes are. Yet, in political science, our community has no such a solution .
 This section argues that without reconstructing our causal intuitions, there is no sense in judging causal accounts . The author argues that this is not the case for a causal account .
 In political science, most approaches to debating theories of causation resemble attrition warfare . Political science is a form of warfare in the U.S. politics .
 When political scientists debate causation, they criticize alternative accounts without attempting to develop a common intuition about what causation is . Politicians debate causation without trying to develop an intuition about it .
 John Gerring and James Mahoney are advocates of probabilistic reasoning . Each claim that the other’s account is reducible to their own . Gerring, Mahoney and Gerring claim that their accounts are similar to theirs .
 Some political scientists arbitrarily reserve the term ‘causation’ to refer to certain types of relationship, claiming that other forms of analysis are separate but equal . The term 'causeation' is reserved for certain relationships and relationships .
 Hollis and Smith . separate explanation, as a causal domain marked by positive science, from understanding, as an interpretive domain . Hollis . Smith . Smith and Smith. Hollis. Smith .
 These discussions of causality show logical problems with the others’ accounts or claim that certain methods point to certain accounts . These discussions are shown logical problems .
 Every account has logical problems, has been criticized in various philosophical literatures, and is considered by its opponents to be unsuitable for political analysis . Unsurprisingly, every account has a logical problems .
 The method of evaluating causal claims in political science is strikingly different from that pursued in the philosophy of causation . Political science is different from philosophy of causality, and the method of evaluation is different .
 In the philosophy of science, it is not enough to criticize alternative accounts . Instead, one shows that a specific account makes more sense than another in capturing what we mean by cause .
 Critics then propose cases where the prior account does not accord with our intuitions, and the original model is either refined or abandoned .
 The standard for evaluating accounts of causation is how well an account handles our common-sense intuitions about what causes are . The standard is that accounts handle our common sense intuits about causes, such as causation .
 One evaluates accounts based on their ability to make sense of things as causes for those things we want to say are causes . One of the most important accounts is that accounts can be made sense of what we say are causing .
 We do not want to say, for example, that nuclear weapons are the cause of the Cuban missile crisis . We want to avoid saying nuclear weapons caused the Cuban crisis .
 The development of nuclear weapons relates to mechanisms through which conflict over Cuba nearly escalated into war . Yet, nuclear weapons raised the probability of and were necessary conditions for the crisis, he says .
 In the philosophy of causation, one tries to develop an account of causation that excludes intuitive non-causes, such as nuclear weapons, while including intuitive causes such as concerns about Kennedy's reputation or the dynamics of crisis escalation .
 Many are quick to move to the second step, criticizing accounts of causation, without moving through the first step, trying to show how accounts meet the community’s intuitions .
 I suspect that we have deeply divided intuitions about what causality means . I suspect the reason is that we are divided about causality . We have a deeply divided idea of causality, and we have a very different idea of what it means .
 Political science is steeped in debates over methods and methods . The political science community does not admit to shared intuitions about causation . Political science has a long history of debating how to explain causation .
 Scholars are often deeply immersed in the study of specific types of methods relying on different inferential tools . From graduate school on, scholars often use inferential techniques to study specific methods .
 I cannot prove this bet here, but there are two reasons to wager it is true . The bet is true, but it's true, and there are reasons to bet it .
 Any good discussion of the methods we use to infer causality should come with a discussion about what causality is . Any discussion of causality must also be a discussion of what it is .
 In general, the intense study of techniques, accompanied with claims that they are ‘causal,’ likely shapes scholars’ and students’ intuitions about what causality is and why we study it .
 Claiming that a specific methodological approach has the ability to generate ‘causal’ explanations while others are simply constant conjunctions or description is to make a judgment concerning the merit of others’ work . Claiming a specific methodology approach has . the . ability to . generate �
 "Appealing to a common, unreconstructed intuition of what causes are is not helpful," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Appeal to the cause of a cause is not a cause"
 Sociological divisions within our discipline mean that any discussion of cause that is linked to the way we conduct research is incapable of generating a satisfactory account . Sociological division means that discussions of cause are not able to be productive .
 There is no method through which political science, as an unreconstructed field, is capable of generating an even partial answer . Political science is not a science field that can generate an answer, it's a formative field .
 There are no grounds for one side in the causality debate to ‘win’ because there is no common measure — no scoring system — for what constitutes a winning argument .
 The first approach admits that our discipline has divided intuitions about causation and adopts a pluralistic definition of ‘cause’ The second approach accepts multiple types of analysis as incommensurate responses to different kinds of research questions . This approach is the first to admit that the discipline
 The pluralistic approach is appealing because it incorporates a broad range of theoretical and methodological perspectives . The pluralist approach incorporates a range of different perspectives on the subject .
 Pluralists often hope that admitting multiple species of explanation to count as causes will broaden the field . It is equally likely that admitting pluralism and eschewing the attempt to reconstruct a common conception of cause will deepen division .
 There is little reason to expect a pluralistic account of causality to fare better . There is also little reason for the public to believe in a pluralist account of causalities .
 A second approach turns away from our intuitions concerning what causation is (the ordinary language approach) to actual causes in the social and natural world . A third approach turns from the ordinary language to a second approach to the actual causes .
 This approach, shared by many scientific and critical realists, has effectively broadened the concept of causation to include interesting relationships . This approach is widely accepted by the world of realists .
 Milja Kurki suggests adopting the fourfold Aristotelian typology of causation . The typology includes material, efficient, formal, formal and final .
 Approaches such as Kurki’s are laudable for cataloguing types of interesting relationships . Kurki's approach is laudable to cataloguing interesting relationships, he says .
 A third approach attempts a reconstruction of our intuitions regarding causation . A third attempt attempts to reconstruct the history of causation .
 If we do not have recourse to an unreconstructed common-sense understanding of cause, then we need to generate one . We need to have a common sense sense sense of cause .
 We agree that certain research questions, contrastive why-questions, demand causal explanation . While we differ over what we mean by cause, I argue that one clue for how a reconstruction may be possible is that we agree .
 By moving from question to concept to method, we can reconstruct what we mean by cause . Only then, only then, we develop methods conducive to causal analysis .
 Political science as a field has divided intuitions about causation . The previous section argued that political science has divided people's intuitions on causation .
 IR scholars are more methodologically divided than they are by accounts of causation . One cannot be sure what methods are suitable for causal inference unless one knows what ‘causal’ means .
 The first part details the relationship between research questions and causal inference, and the second part suggests a contrastive account of appropriate research questions .
 This, however, does not rig the ‘causation game’ in favor of qualitative methods, it says . ‘This is not the case for the first time,’ says the author of the book .
 Most discussions of the nature of causation begin with discussions of specific examples, and then expand to analyze populations . Most discussions begin with specific examples of the type of causation .
 The account of causation that I develop, as I suggest, is easily extended to probabilistic accounts of cause, relying on quantitative tools for inference . Moreover, I suggest that the account could be extended to the probabilism of cause .
 The Cuban missile crisis has been approached by scholars from a variety of traditions, each of which has interesting things to say about the crisis . More importantly, I want to focus on a single example, the Cuban crisis .
 Political scientists have long noted the relationship between research questions and causal explanation . Political scientists say research questions can be used to infer causal answers .
 The traditional reason for emphasizing research questions is largely pedagogical . This is not the traditional reason to emphasize research questions . Instead, it's the reason for the research questions to be answered by students .
 Highlighting appropriate forms of research questions focuses scholars on important dependent variables (e.g. dependent variables) Highlighting relevant forms of questions is important for scholars to find appropriate answers .
 Research questions may serve another important purpose, providing a clue to what is expected from causal inference in political science . I argue that research questions may help provide a clue about what to expect from causal inferences .
 Focusing on research questions may be a first step toward developing an account of causation, but only if the form of the request is precise . The form of a research question may be the first step to developing a causation account .
 Asking why-questions — ‘Why p?’ — is not enough because many why-questionions are not requests for causal explanation . Asking ‘why p?' isn't enough, it's not enough to ask for causal explanations, it says .
 When one asks why something is measured in a certain way, one expects scientific responses that are not causal . France is a democracy, one asks, ‘Why is France a democracy?’
 Why-questions are more intimately related to causal explanation than semantic concerns with why-questioning . Why-quiz questions are often more closely connected to causal explanations than they are .
 All events or groups of events have long and elaborate causal histories . To isolate some part of that history and refer to it as causal is always an arbitrary process . All events have a long and complex causal histories, such as those of the past .
 Two common solutions are to exclude less salient causes or to exclude causes that are remote and hard to measure . The solution to the problem is to find out what causes causes are the most difficult and remote .
 These solutions raise important methodological issues involved in responding to why-questions, I argue . But they do not serve as appropriate guides to understanding what types of questions demand causal explanation .
 IR scholars have long been interested in finding an objective method for assessing whether events are causes . IR scholars want to find a way to assess whether causes are caused by an event .
 For a population of crashes, drunk drivers might be a better predictor of crashes than blind corners . Drunk drivers are a more salient cause, therefore, in crashes, experts say .
 Techniques for determining salience, however, do not respond to demands for causal explanation . Techniques are used to determine salience of an object, but do not provide a causal explanation, experts say .
 When one asks ‘What are the causes of the Cuban missile crisis?’, one wants the full list, not just salient causes . ‘When one asks what are the . causes of . the Cuban . missile crisis,’s full list of causes, should be
 The wars in the 20th century might not have occurred if Cleopatra’s nose had been shorter, Fearon says . Fearon's example is an example of the wars that might have occurred in the past .
 In answering ‘Why did the Cuban missile crisis occur?’, we need not go as far back as Cleopatra . In answering 'Why did Cuban missile crises occur?'
 One reason the missile crisis was a crisis was the delay in the U.S. detection of the missiles . The US did not detect the missiles until the missile was launched .
 If Kennedy had known weeks earlier, his administration would have had more time to consider a response . Kennedy would have known sooner if he had known about the situation .
 The delay was partly caused by infighting over sending a U-2 over Cuba . The U.2 was sent over Cuba, but the delay was part of a plan to send it over .
 China had shot a U-2 a month earlier, and there was internal debate over whether the Air Force or CIA should run the program . China had already shot a plane a month before .
 Had China not shot down the U-2, had McCone remained a bachelor, or had the Air Force taken the program from the CIA a month earlier, the crisis may never have been a crisis .
 Fearon suggests that we should not allow Cleopatra’s nose-type causes because they are difficult to assess . Fearon also suggests that the nose type causes should be avoided .
 Fearon is right to discount Cleopatra’s nose because it is unverifiable, but that does not mean that other remote events are not causes of modern political phenomena . Fearon: "Cleopatra's nose is not a factor in modern politics"
 Cold weather led to icy roads leading the car to skid in the wake of a car crash . Cold weather was the cause of the crash, but not the cause .
 When asked ‘Why did the First World War happen?’, one usually does not want a description of ancient European history, culminating in the German state, making possible a German invasion of France . Similarly, when asked why did the war happen?
 Cleopatra’s nose-type causes are often uninteresting, even trivial, and do not point to interesting elements of a causal explanation . The queen's nose type causes are uninteresting and trivial, but they are often trivial .
 The problem is not that they are hard to measure; even if one can demonstrate them, they are usually not the type of causal explanation we want . Even if you can prove them, you can't get the causal explanation you want, it's not easy to measure .
 Cleopatra’s nose-type explanations are bad explanations because they respond to bad questions, says John Sutter . Sutter: “Cleopatra's nose-like explanations don’t work,” he says. “They are bad. Cleop
 When one asks ‘Why did the Cuban missile crisis happen?’, almost any response related to any part of any causal chain leading to the missile crisis provides an element of a response . Almost any response to any of the events leading up to the crisis provides a response.
 After outlining the form contrastive why-questions take, I suggest several advantages of their form for understanding causal inference . The form of contrastive questions is similar to the form of a why-question .
 Contrastive why-questions eliminate the problems associated with ambiguous whyquestions . Contrastive questions eliminate the problem of ambiguous why questions . Contrasting why questions can be used to solve complex problems .
 Peter Lipton argues that most requests for causal explanations are better understood as causal explanations of contrastive outcomes . Lipton: "Most requests for explanations are more likely to be causal explanations"
 Contrastive why-questions focus research on interesting elements of causal explanation and avoid Cleopatra’s nose-type explanations . Contrastive questions focus on interesting factors of causal explanations .
 The contrastive why-question focuses attention on a specific set of causes . Contrastive why questions screen off non-explanatory responses, screening them off .
 The Cold War, for example, does not explain the timing of the crisis because it drives incentives to send missiles into Cuba in both periods . Cold War doesn't explain why the crisis occurred in Cuba during the Cold War .
 Khrushchev’s birth is causally relevant to his making a decision . Similarly, his ability to make a decision counterfactually depends on his birth, but not to his decision .
 Contrastive why-questions focus research on politically and theoretically important causal explanations . By screening off non-explanatory responses, contrastive why questions focus on political and theoretical explanations .
 Specific, contrastive questions screen off bad explanations and focus research on the types of responses we are looking for . Specific questions screens off bad answers and research on what we're looking for.
 Asking successive why-questions might provide the best approach to understanding the causal dynamics of historical events in their richest details . The question is whether or not historical events can be explained in the best way possible .
 Contrastive why-questions, like a microscope, zoom in on theoretically important questions . Simple why-questiones risk losing important trees in the forest . Contrastive questions zoom in and out of the forest, but simple why-asks risk losing trees .
 Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow pursue this approach to the Cuban missile crisis . Graham Allison: The U.S. should have been prepared to deal with the crisis .
 Rather than asking ‘What caused the missile crisis?’, they ask a series of questions best described as contrastive why-questions . The missile crisis is not ‘what caused the crisis’ but what caused it?
 Each question hones in on specific dynamics that contributed to the Cuban missile crisis . Each question focuses on specific elements of theoretically and practically important causal chains that culminated in the crisis .
 Emphasizing contrastive why-questions as important for causal explanation is a first step toward an adequate account of causes in debates over foreign policy decisions .
 Contrastive why-questions highlight variation and puzzling phenomena and enable detection of salient causes . Contrastive questions highlight variation, puzzling phenomena, and help detect salient causes of problems .
 As a community, contrastive why-questions almost always require causal explanations . Contrastive why questions almost always need causal explanations. We can agree we can agree that .
 Political science can take clues concerning causation from contrastive why-questions . A contrastive, counterfactual analysis of causation can help explain causation . Political science is a form of analysis that can be used to understand the world .
 This section outlines a contrastive, counterfactual definition of causation of causation . Using contrastive why-questions to steer toward a consensus definition, this section uses contrastive questions to steer to consensus definition .
 I discuss shortcomings with simple counterfactuals, showing how they mirror problems with simple why-questions . I then explain why contrastive counterfactsuals avoid these problems . I first discusses shortcomings with counterfactorials, then explains why they avoid them .
 Despite the methodological attention to counterfactuals, there has been no attention to the relationship of counterfacts and causation . Unfortunately, despite the . methodological attention . to counterfactsuals and causation, there is no attention .
 Not all counterfactual claims are causal claims, but all causal claims seem to require analysis . Counterfactual analysis is necessary to determine whether or not causal claims are true .
 Discussing methods and counterfactuals without first asking what types of counterfacts are causal in nature puts the cart before the horse . Discussing method and counterfactsuals before first asking if they are causal or causal is a problem .
 In political science, the extant treatment of counterfactuals and causation is binary . In politics, this treatment is binary, and it's not always the case for causation or counterfactoriality .
 Fearon shows this form of counterfactual analysis is important for statistical and small-n causal inference . Fearon: Counterfactual analyses are important for small- n causal inference and statistical and statistical analysis .
 The conventional approach is binary because it is only interested in two events and is not explicitly cast in terms of contrastive possibilities . The conventional approaches are binary because they are not explicitly set out of possibilities .
 I refer to this strict binary account, where c causes e if and only if not-c then not-e, as a strict, counterfactual account of causation . C causes c if not c then not e if not not c causes not e .
 Several philosophical and methodological problems with strict counterfactuals mirror problems with simple why-questions . Several philosophical . problems mirror problems of simple why .
 The strict counterfactual theory is prone to a severe form of Cleopatra’s nose-type problems . It treats every proximate element of a causal history as a cause as a result .
 Counterfactually, if there were no Cuba, no missiles, or no Cold War, there would be no Cuban missile crisis . Counterfactualally, the crisis would have been averted by the Cold War .
 If we are interested in causal explanation, simple counterfactuals seem problematic . Counterfactualists treat intuitive non-causes as causes, rather than intuitive causes, as causes .
 Counterfactual theory treats d as a cause of e because, counterfactually, no d implies no . The Soviet decision to install missiles during the day, for example, caused Soviet engineers to sweat profusely and also caused the missiles to be detected .
 The strict account treats sweating profusely as a cause because, if the engineers did not sweat, that would mean the missiles were installed at night, camouflaging their existence . If the engineers didn't sweat it would mean they would have installed missiles at night .
 A strict counterfactual theory also makes it impossible to isolate elements of a causal chain without moving needlessly back into the chain’s causal history . Counterfactual theories are difficult to use in the world of science and technology .
 The Cuban missile crisis, for example, was a crisis because of the short timeline for decision-making, the author says . The Cuban crisis was because of a short timeline, he says .
 The delay was in part caused by the loss of a Chinese nationalist U-2 over China . The delay has been caused by a loss of the U.2 .
 The communist movement in China would not have been popular if the Soviet Union had not provided aid to China in 1921 . The Soviet Union provided the aid in China in the early years of 1921 .
 China asked for aid from the Soviet Union because the West ignored Chinese requests . The West ignored China's request for help from the Soviets .
 A strict counterfactual account treats the West’s refusal to provide aid to China before 1921 as a cause of the missile crisis, along with every other step in the causal history before and after 1921, as a result .
 The standard way of saving counterfactuals is to adopt methodological rules of thumb, says Simon Tisdall . He says the standard way to save counterfactorials is by adopting methodological rules .
 Fearon, Tetlock and Belkin and Lebow respond to the last objection by arguing that we should not allow the refusal of aid to count as an explanation of the crisis because of possible measurement errors .
 If one could show that Western aid to China in 1921, with 100% certainty, would have prevented the missile crisis, then strict counterfactual theories treats it as a cause . Western aid in 1921 would not have prevented missile crisis .
 No one finds an interesting explanation for the missile crisis . Yet, no one finds it interesting . The U.S. has been hit by a missile strike in Syria .
 Significant philosophical and methodological problems exist with simple counterfactual theories of causation . Counterfactual theory of causation is based on historical data .
 Even if we admit that every necessary condition is a cause, it is unclear how this type of causal analysis relates to causal explanation . Even if . we admit . that every . necessary condition in a cause is a . cause .
 Explanation is a practical, purposive activity, and treating events as causes that do little to answer concrete questions creates problems in understanding the role of the philosophy of science in creating accounts useful in the social sciences .
 A contrastive, counterfactual theory of causation is designed to avoid these problems . Counterfactual theories are designed by contrastive theories, such as a counterfactorial theory .
 ‘causes’ is a relation of counterfactual dependence . As Northcott phrases it, causation is when c-ratherthan-C* causes e-rather-than-E* .
 Events like the Cuban missile crisis are interesting, in part, because they are multifaceted, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Events like this are interesting because of their complex nature and complexity .
 By emphasizing the context-dependent nature of causal explanation, a contrastive account of causation avoids the pitfalls of strict counterfactuals . The author argues that this account of causal causation avoids a strict account .
 A contrastive, counterfactual treatment of causation eliminates unimportant proximate factors . Counterfactual treatments eliminate unimportant, unimportant propriate  factors .
 Contrastive counterfactuals avoid trivial explanations . By pointing to specific effects of interest and using contrastive cases where unimportant elements of events are common, contrastive counterfacts avoid trivial explanation .
 A contrastive account avoids these trivial explanations because these non-explanatory facts are true for both the factual causal history and its counterfactual foil . The result of contrastive accounts avoids trivial explanations such as "explanations"
 If one asks ‘Why did the Cuban missile crisis occur in 1962 instead of 1961?’, the existence of missiles, Cuba, Khrushchev, and the Cold War are common in both the fact and foil .
 Relying on contrast cases to screen off unimportant elements of explanations focuses debate on crucial questions . Relying to contrast cases is a way of avoiding unimportant issues of explanation, says David Cameron .
 Kennedy’s meeting with Khrushchev at Vienna in 1961 emboldened him to send missiles in 1962 . Kennedy was perceived as weak, and his reputation emboldened the move in 1962, he says .
 Unlike the geological formation of Cuba, these explanations are interesting . Unlike Cuba, however, these geological formations are interesting.
 Well-posed research questions can focus attention on specific time periods, screening off Cleoaptra’s nose-type causes .
 If one asks, for example, ‘Why was the Cuban missile crisis a crisis ?’, a strict counterfactual account of causation treats shooting down the ROC U-2 and the entire chain of events that led to its shooting down as causes . If one asked,
 Contrastive why-question screens off candidate contrastive causal chains because it explicitly rules out causal responses that require manipulating events before September 1962 . The contrastive why question screens off candidates for contrastive responses .
 Using well-crafted questions, one can bound the domain of possible contrastive causes . Using well crafted questions, a person can bound a domain of possibilities .
 There is still room to debate the role of bureaucratic turf wars, McCone’s honeymoon, or the effect of nuclear weapons in shortening time horizons, or domestic politics in pushing Kennedy to make snap decisions .
 Unlike debates about the origins of Chinese communism, these debates are confined by purposive inquiry . Unlike these debates, however, they are confined to purposives inquiry .
 A contrastive, counterfactual approach enables a focus on important historical events far from the action of the crisis when called for . Unlike many methodological approaches to counterfactorial analysis that prevent using remote events as causes, a contrastive approach also enables a . contrastive . approach to counter
 For some scholars, distant causes where there is a ‘grotesque disparity between cause and effect’ are the most interesting . Hannah Arendt puts it as there is 'grotesque' disparity between causes and effect . The most interesting causes are distant causes, such as a '
 Arendt: Overproduction in a few countries caused imperialism, which caused a transformation in global political structures . Overproduction led to a transformation of global politics, she says . The world's most powerful powerhouses were created by overproduction .
 Long-forgotten causes that occurred centuries before an effect explain modern events . These distant causes of modern phenomena are of particular interest in comparative politics . The study of comparative politics is particularly relevant in the United States .
 Barrington Moore’s study of the origins of dictatorship and democracy traces regime type to fate of the aristocracy and the growth of agriculture .
 Benedict Anderson traces the impact of the printing press, showing that only through the creation of standardized print languages were communities able to communicate and think of themselves as part of a nation . The printing press was created in order to create standardized languages .
 The contrastive question not only specifies the actual and hypothetical effects of interest, it also limits the domain of causes to what happened during the French Commune . It is not the only question to be asked about what happened in France .
 Contrastive explanation provides a more intuitive way of highlighting these distant explanations as causal, allowing one to treat remote causes as non-trivial when appropriate . Contrastive explanations provide a way to highlight distant causes as causal .
 A contrastive, counterfactual account meets our intuitions about causal explanation . It can also capture the intuitions that guide other leading approaches to causation, says author .
 Contrastive, counterfactual accounts focus attention on specific mechanisms through which a cause is linked to an effect . Counterfactuals focus attention to specific mechanisms to link a cause to a cause and a cause .
 IR scholars often suspect that the political world is probabilistic, not deterministic, and emphasize mean causal effects rather than mechanisms . Many IR scholars engaged in large-n quantitative work tend to suspect that .
 A contrastive, counterfactual account easily travels to a probabilistic world . A counterfactorial account of a future travels to the probablistic world, says the author . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 A contrastive account of cause captures our intuitions about what is needed for causal explanation in positive approaches to political science . A counterfactual account of causes captures our intuition about what we need to know to explain .
 While it provides a bridge between camps on causation, it does not bridge divides elsewhere . It does not provide a bridge to bridge divides on causation .
 Political scientists can adopt a common definition of cause without adopting common methodological strategies or substantive focuses . Political scientists are able to find common ways to define causes without adopting a common methodological strategy or focus .
 Adopting a common conception of cause focuses debate on differences between causes and causes . This prevents philosophical debates over the nature of causality from infecting our discussions of more important issues .
 This is true not only within positive approaches to political science, but also between positive and post-positive approaches . The next section argues that this is true in both positive and non-negative approaches .
 The first two-thirds of this article argued for a contrastive, counterfactual definition of causation . This account is an intuitive, philosophically appropriate response to well-posed demands for causal explanations . Post-positivism and causation is a response to demands for explanations .
 The first part of this article was confined to discussions largely within ‘positivist’ social science where the avowed aim is causal inference . The second part of the article will focus on the social implications of causal inference in social science .
 Adopting a contrastive, counterfactual analysis of causation points to commonalities between these approaches that are unrecognizable unless we use such a model . Adoptting a counterfactorial analysis of causality would be unrecognizable if we use it .
 This does not mean that there are no important differences between these approaches, rather, focusing on the structure of causal statements is not the appropriate place to locate our differences . Instead, focus should be on causal statements .
 The divide between interpretivist and positivist research has many dimensions . The divide is often not defined by interpretivist or positivist theories .
 Methodologically, interpretivist research often concentrates on probing single cases in extended depth . Positivist research focuses on understanding populations rather than understanding populations .
 Philosophically, there are divides between scholars working within the traditions of scientific and critical realism who assert the importance of real processes, structures, and relationships, and positivist scholars .
 Conceptually, interpretivist scholars are often interested in constitutive relationships . They are interested in chains of probabilistic or deterministic causal histories . In contrast, positivist scholars focus on constitutive and deterministic relationships .
 Many post-positivists argue that their camp does not have an interest in addressing causal relationships . In addition to these real differences, to which many more might be added, they argue that they do not have a interest in discussing causal relationships.
 IR scholars distinguish between logic of explanation and logic of interpretation . IR scholars often distinguish between explanation and interpretation . They often distinguish from explanation to interpretation .
 Alexander Wendt suggests that there is a difference between causal relationships, in which causes are independent of and precede effects, and constitutive relationships, where there is no independence or time lag between cause and effect . Wendt .
 The first part of this section suggests that translating how-possible questions into contrastive why-questions is usually possible, and more importantly improves the precision of the research question . The second part of the section concludes that translating the how-and-why questions is possible .
 Research that responds to most how-possible questions engages in causal explanation in the same way as ‘positivist’ research if it is treated as a contrastive, counterfactual relationship .
 The second section shows how this works by showing that Jutta Weldes’ account of the Cuban missile crisis, an exemplar of how-possible questioning, can be translated into contrastive, counterfactual language . This is an example of how, from Weldes,
 How-possible questions usually are implicit requests for causal explanations . Understanding how they make these requests is essential to providing good responses to research questions .
 translating how-possible questions into contrastive why-questions makes research more precise, highlighting research puzzles of interest . Translating how-and-why questions to contrast-questionnaires makes research better precise .
 Scholars working with post-positivist methodologies and approaches to the philosophy of science often argue that they are not engaged in causal theorizing because they ask how-possible questions .
 Alexander Wendt argues that there is a gap between research focusing on why-questions and how-possible questions . Wendt says research should focus on how-to-be and not why-be-ask questions .
 Jutta Weldes asks how it was possible for Soviet missiles in Cuba to seem inherently offensive, and for the Kennedy administration to dismiss Soviet claims that they were defensive as deception .
 These how-possible questions search for explanations about the systems of meaning and structures of power that make certain events possible .
 Some claim that how-possible and why-why-questions are fundamentally different . Yet, despite this crucial similarity, some claim that . some say that how and why are different .
 The independence and precedence of cause and effect raise interesting issues, few of which I explore here . The independence of causes and effect raises interesting questions, many of which he explores .
 There are significant reasons to think that this distinction is not enough to cut a line between howpossible questions and why-questions .
 IR scholars working with how-possible questions are usually working in areas with independent causes and effects . Usually, IR scholars work with how possible questions . IR scholars usually work in areas of independent causes or effects .
 Wendt: Most of Wendt’s concrete examples of howpossible questions have independent causes and effects . Wendt says Wendt's concrete example of how possible questions can be answered by Wendt himself . The author's work is based on a series of ideas from Wendt
 The Earth’s gravitational pull makes the moon orbit, but it relies on a cause independent of the effect . The response relies on the Earth's gravitational pull, and the moon's orbit is dependent on that .
 There are many straightforward causal explanations for Stalin’s power that posit separate causes and effects . Stalin's power may have been a factor in the rise of Stalinism in Russia .
 The lack of an independent judiciary enabled Stalin to use government agencies to terrorize people . An independent judiciary would have made Stalin accountable for the terror he imposed . A free judiciary would make Stalin accountable .
 One might object, arguing that responding to the how-possible question is different because one wants a description of the entire social, political, and economic system that maintains Stalin’s power . One might argue that . .
 To understand how each factor within the system contributes to an effect requires understanding that factor’s influence on the rest of the system . To understand each factor in the system requires understanding its influence on other factors .
 Isolating these factors and describing their causal powers is necessary to fit together the description of the larger system . Isolizing these factors is necessary, says the author .
 The last section argued that requesting an explanation of the influence of a factor takes the form of a contrastive why-question . And the last part argued that requests for an explanation take an explanation from a different factor .
 Wendt argues that causal accounts can focus on a broader class of events than Wendt emphasizes . Wendt says that separating causal from constitutive statements is problematic . He says that such accounts can be causal accounts of events .
 Underlying the notion that cause and effect are separate is that causes and effects are two discrete events with no intrinsic connection to one another . The idea of cause and effects is that they are separate from each other, says the author .
 Wendt takes this to mean that a promise and a language of promising are the same event . Wendt says a promise has an intrinsic connection to a language that is connected to a social phenomenon . The promise and the language are linked to social phenomena .
 An event is an instance of an action, condition, mechanism, and object in a state of affairs . Recall that I defined an event as an instance . An event can be defined as an event in an event that occurs in an action or condition, condition or mechanism .
 Saying ‘I promise’ is independent of a language of promising in two ways . Saying 'I promise' can be independent of saying 'I'm sorry' or ‘promising'
 On the one hand, a language of promising can exist whether or not I make a specific promise, he says . On the other hand, he said: "I'm not going to make a promise. I'm going to do a lot of things I'm not doing anything wrong."
 I can say ‘I promise’ without being obligated if the language of promising is counterfactually manipulated . On the other hand, I can promise to say 'I promise' without being . obligated .
 A broad definition of events allows us to treat structures, reasons, or mental constructions as causes of action . Even if there is no independent existence in space-time, we can treat structures as a cause of action even if there are no independent exist in space time .
 While some positivist accounts of causation are deterministic, many are not . Many of the reasons for causation are not deterministic . Some of the world's most famous scientists believe that causation is not detergent .
 Probablistic accounts often embrace indeterminism, and necessary-conditions-based accounts do not imply determinism . Needed-conditioned accounts often involve indeterministism, but not determinism.
 How-possible questions treat social rules, institutions, norms, and structures as necessary conditions for social actions . To ask if a social action is possible, one asks about the enabling conditions that are part of the causal explanation for the action .
 Weldes’ account of the Cuban missile crisis discussed later highlights these similarities . Weldes: The example of Weldes' account of this crisis highlights similarities to the Cuban crisis . Welds: It's a good thing that Welds’s account of a missile crisis is similar
 The most important reason often advanced to separate how-possible from why-questions is that they require different answers . It's important to separate 'how' and 'why' questions from 'how possible' questions, rather than how possible .
 How-possible questions seem to ask for broad descriptions of social structures and systems in which they are incorporated . Why-questions highlight specific aspects in the effort to make causal statements . How-Possible questions are different from why-quiz questions .
 In short, causal statements are interested in explaining temporal sequences, rather constitutive statements . This is because they are concerned about static systemic totality, rather than temporal sequences .
 Separating causal and constitutive relations because of a concern about the referents of inquiry is unnecessary . translating how-possible questions into contrastive why-questions is required to give an adequate response .
 Each contrast provides an understanding of a different element of the whole and enables an analysis of the relationship between the parts . The contrast provides a different understanding of the different elements in the whole .
 Contrastive-why questions highlight the specific areas of interest for the researcher, making inquiry more precise . Contrastive questions also highlight the focus of the researcher’s research, making it easier to understand .
 Louis XIV’s power was possible because he was alive, alive, and because of his status as a monarch, he was male, and so on without limit . Louis XIV was able to hold on to his power without limit because of the fact that he was a monarch .
 The latter question is much clearer because it asks for contrasts and isolates elements of interest . It asks the question: 'What do you want to do with this?'
 Louis XIII and Louis XIV were both alive, male, and monarchs . Louis XIV had a different relationship to the nobility from Louis XIII, enabling him to exert more power and influence .
 Contrastive why-questions clarifies elements of interest in an inquiry through demands for causal explanation . In either case, the use of contrastive why questions clarifies the interest of interest .
 Jutta Weldes’ account of the Cuban missile crisis shows these connections between constitutive and causal theorizing . Weldes: Causal theorizing is a formative formative and causal theory of the crisis .
 Weldes claims to begin with a how-possible question and partly eschews causal explanation . Weldes proposes a contrastive counterfactual response that is clear and persuasive . Welds says she is beginning with contrastive why-question .
 When the Kennedy administration discovered Soviet missiles being introduced into Cuba, they found it an 'obvious' threat to U.S. security .
 The Soviet introduction of missiles was portrayed as swift and secretive, hostile and expansionist . Within the administration and in its public statements, the Soviet introduction was portrayed by the Soviet government as swift .
 Weldes argues that the obviousness of the crisis is a puzzle because the Soviet buildup need not have been depicted as expansionist . Weldes says that the crisis was a mystery because it was not portrayed as an expansionist.
 The Kennedy administration might have believed the build-up to be a reaction to U.S. actions in Cuba, such as the Bay of Pigs or Operation Mongoose . On the one hand, the Kennedy administration may have believed it was a defensive reaction to United States .
 The Kennedy administration might have believed the introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles into Cuba could stabilize the nuclear balance . Alternatively, the Kennedy administration may have thought the move would stabilize the balance of the country .
 By 1962, the United States realized that the Soviets held fewer nuclear weapons . The U.S. realized that they had fewer nuclear arms than the Soviets .
 United States representation of the Soviet Union linked Soviet conduct to the conduct of Nazi Germany . U.S. representation of Soviet Union emphasized the links between totalitarianism, duplicity, and expansionism .
 This representation explains why Soviet conduct was always considered treacherous and offensive . The United States, in describing its own conduct, emphasized its open nature . This representation also explains why the U.S. emphasized its openness .
 The United States styled itself as the leader of the Western free world . Furthermore, the U.S. styled itself . as the . leader of . the Western Free World .
 This ‘world leader’ image legitimated a U.S. response to the missiles to protect others from aggression . It marginalized defensive narratives by representing the United States as the defender . This image legitimized a United States response .
 If the United States had not linked expansion to its representation of the Soviet Union, or if the U.S. did not describe itself as a world leader with legitimate interests in the western hemisphere, then a contrastive effect would have occurred .
 The United States representation of its interests in Cuba would have been different . The U.S. representation of Cuba in Cuba has been different.
 Weldes’ treatment of constitutive relations is not only a prime example of making contrastive, counterfactual claims, it's also an example of his counterfactorial claims . Weldes' treatment is not the first example of such a claim, but it's a counterfact
 It is clear and persuasive because she makes causal arguments with clear contrasts . More importantly, it is persuasive because it's clear and compelling because of the contrasts in her arguments .
 Claiming that statements about constitutive relations and statements about causal relations are usually the same does not mean that all elements of varied post-positivist research programs can be reduced to positivist programs . Claiming to be a positivist, however, does not necessarily mean all post-
 There are significant disagreements in other areas of the philosophy of science, methods, and substance that are not overcome by emphasizing contrasts, says author .
 Focusing on a contrastive causal account highlights those differences that are already thorny, tough problems, preventing them from becoming entangled in causal talk . Focusing . on contrastive . causal account, however, highlights . those differences .
 In his review of the philosophy of science debates in IR, Patrick Jackson argues that when the term ‘science’ is used, it is in the attempt to discredit rival methodological approaches . He argues that the term 'science' is used to discredit other methodological approaches.
 Several authors, noting the politicization of scientific arguments, recommend avoiding philosophical debates about science, causation and related issues .
 Monteiro and Ruby emphasize a prudent approach that ensures scholars are consistent with their own tradition, rather than adjudicating between positions . In place of discussions of science, causality, and related concepts, they emphasize discussing science .
 Pluralists presume that IR scholars do not share foundational intuitions about what causes are in political research . Therefore, they are skeptical about the prospects for advancing a common account .
 By contrast, I argue that the sources of division are not related to causation . By contrast he argues that the source of division is related to the fact that it is not caused by causation . He argues that this is not the case of causation .
 Methods debates have bled into our intuitions about causation, infecting a field that agrees on important questions with needless divisions . Methods debate has bled to our intuits about causation . Methods debates are often misunderstood by the public .
 At a minimum, it is worth exploring how far we can develop a common intuition using practical research puzzles and their demands for explanations as starting points .
 A focus on research questions as requests for causal explanations provides grounds for a reconstruction of our intuitions about causation . A focus of research questions is needed to reconstruct our intuition about causation, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 I thank Kevin Clarke, Scott Powell, Alexander Wendt, the editor of the European Journal of International Relations, anonymous referees, and especially Robert Adcock for suggesting substantial improvements .
 A strong definition of the independence of events posits that they must occupy different places in space-time . The independent nature of events is defined by the definition of space-times .
 We often talk about causality when cause and effect occupy the same space-time position . However, this is not the case of causality, as it is not always the case for causality .
 For mental phenomena to be treated as having causal significance, we must relax the physical separation of cause and effect . For example, a belief or reason is a cause of a decision, a decision is a decision .
 A weak condition for independence, posited here, is that events are independent if they are logically separable and are capable of being treated as explanans and explanandums . The weak condition is that the events are separated from each other and can be logically separated .
 There may be some concern that this definition of event contains underlying ontological assumptions . There may also be concern that it contains underlying Ontological assumptions, such as the definition of an event .
 Events, however, are treated as component parts of causal statements and do not necessarily refer to isolated objects that exist in the world . Events are treated in this article as part of the causal statements .
 A post-positivist analysis of U.S. counterinsurgency policy in the Philippines . The Philippines is one of the most violent countries in the world .
 George A. Bennett and Bennett A Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences. George A and Bennett . Bennett . A Case Study of Case Studies in Social Sciences . George A
 Goertz G and Levy J. Causal explanations, necessary conditions, and case studies, are necessary to explain the causes of disease .
 Goertz G and Levy J. Explaining War and Peace: Case Studies and Necessary Condition Counterfactuals . Goerts and Levy . Levy .
 Hollis M and Smith S Explanation and Understanding in International Relations . Hollis and Smith wrote a book on the relationship between the two countries .
 Philosophy of Science and its Implications for the Study of World Politics . Philosophy of the World Politics: The World Politics of Science is a Theory of Science .
 Tetlock PE and Belkin A Counterfactual Thought Experiments in World Politics . Tetlock . Belkin . A counterfactual thought experiment in world politics. Tetlock.
 Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology. Box-Steffensmeier J, Brady H and Collier D . Brady H. Collier . Collier: "We are not going to be surprised by the results"
 Monteiro N. and Ruby K IR and the false promise of philosophical foundations. Monteiro and Ruby . Ruby . K. Ruby . IR .
 Constructivism and International Relations: Alexander Wendt and his Critics. Wendt's Critics. Constructivism. International Relations . Wendt. Wendts . Wendts. Constructivist and International . Relations: The Theory of Constructivism, International Relations, is open-ended and open-minded