 On Leadership special feature explores present-day Iran tensions in the context of leadership lessons from crises confronted by Presidents Truman, Eisenhower and Kennedy .
 Events are moving, seemingly inexorably, toward a showdown at which point President Obama will have to choose to either attack Iran’s nuclear facilities or acquiesce in an Iranian nuclear bomb .
 When examined in turn, each of these two options seems worse than the other . Each of these options seem worse than one of them .
 Historians agree it was the most dangerous moment in human history . 50 years ago this coming October, President Kennedy faced an eerily similar choice in what historians agree was the greatest moment in history .
 The United States had discovered the Soviet Union sneaking nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba . The U.S. discovered the Soviets had been trying to sneak the missiles into the country .
 He and his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev confronted each other “eyeball to eyeball,” each with nuclear weapons on hair trigger . Over 13 days, they faced each other over 13 days .
 Both took actions they knew would raise the risks of war in the short run . But justified these actions as necessary in order to prevent the even larger dangers of nuclear conflict .
 The intensification of bellicose rhetoric and actions against Iran is necessary, but also risky . Today, the intensification is necessary but risky, and it is also necessary, says Iran expert .
 Over the past year, the U.S. and Israel have increased the cost to Iran of pursuing its current path . Cyber attacks, targeted assassinations of Iranian scientists, embargoes on some of Iran’s oil exports and exclusion of Iran from the international financial system .
 Iran's Supreme Leader is feeling the pressure on his regime . Unquestionably, Iran’s Supreme Leader feels the pressure . Iran's supreme leader is under pressure .
 One out of every five barrels of oil that flow to international markets goes through the Strait of Hormuz . That can quickly translate into higher prices for Americans at the gas pump, undermining America's weak economic recovery .
 An Israeli attack on Iran and subsequent Iranian retaliation could produce wider war in the Middle East . Not to mention, an Israeli attack against Iran and a response could also produce wider Mideast war .
 In 1962, that alternative combined a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener . "In 1962, the alternative was a deal between the U.S. government and the Soviet Union"
 Publicly, the United States would pledge not to invade Cuba if the missiles were withdrawn immediately . The U.S. would pledge to withdraw the missiles if they were withdrawn from Cuba .
 Announce withdrawal of the missiles within 24 hours or watch America eliminate the missiles by an air attack . America will either withdraw the missiles or use an air strike on North Korea .
 Khrushchev promised U.S. if Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, the missiles in Turkey would be gone within six months . The president’s brother promised to withdraw the missiles from Cuba if they were withdrawn .
 It could start with selling Iran 20-percent enriched uranium fuel for its Tehran Research Reactor in return for an Iranian pledge to stop its own enrichment beyond 5 percent . The level required to fuel nuclear electricity plants is needed to fuel electricity plants .
 If Iran were to agree, the United States could communicate privately to it that any violation of that agreement would justify U.S. military action . The United States would then tell Iran that a violation of the agreement would be justified .
 A United Nations Security Council Resolution could also authorize punitive actions to enforce the deal . A U.N. Security Council resolution could authorize states to take punitive actions .
 The sweetener would be acknowledgement of Iran’s right to enrich uranium to the level required for fuel for civilian nuclear electricity plants . In return for its adherence to maximal nuclear inspections and related transparency measures, Iran would agree to maximal inspections .
 Such a deal would offer the best assurance available that Iran is not secretly undertaking a nuclear weapons program . Together with intelligence efforts by the U.S. and other countries, such a deal could offer assurances .
 Creating an agreement that would be acceptable not only by the standards of Iran’s Supreme Leader but also by those of U.S. and Israeli politics would be a challenge equal to JFK's finest hour .
 For Obama, it would require imagination, courage and a willingness to weather attacks from political opponents . Obama would have to weather what would undoubtedly be withering attacks .
 Even if such a plan would be ugly and painful, it would be preferable to either war or a nuclear-armed Iran . Still, even if such an ugly plan is ugly, it is clearly preferable to war or Iran's nuclear-army .
 The first lesson from the Missile Crisis for Obama is that when presented with a binary choice between unacceptable options, it is important to explore alternatives that, however unacceptable, are less catastrophic . The first and most important lesson .
 The CEO of the U.S. Navy SEAL Team USA is retiring from his post in Washington, D.C. He has been in the Navy since 1999 .
 Graham Allison is the Douglas Dillon Professor of Government at Harvard Kennedy School . He is also the former director of Harvard’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs .