 No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publishers .
 British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data . A British Library CIP record is available to download .
 The Harry Allen Memorial Lecture commemorates a pioneer in the field of American Studies in Britain . Allen was the first director of the Institute of United States Studies . He was also a pioneer of the field in American Studies .
 Previous scholars who have delivered this public lecture include Richard Carwardine, Peter Parish, Richard Crockatt and Steven Lawson .
 A reworking of my doctoral dissertation, it examined the roles played by a number of key figures in the coming and handling of the October 1962 crisis . It examined the role of a key figure in the crisis .
 It was followed by Missiles in Cuba, which was aimed at the undergraduate market . It was launched in 1993 and was followed in 2004 . Missiles In Cuba was launched a year later .
 In both these works, I utilised the available primary sources, including transcripts of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council that had been secretly taped by John F Kennedy using concealed microphones .
 Transcripts were available only for the ExComm meetings held on 16 October 1962, the opening day of the missile crisis, and 27 October, the penultimate day . For my 1996 book, these transcripts were only available for the meetings held in 1962 .
 For my 1997 study, I was able to use the very rough transcripts that had become available for a couple of additional ExComm meetings . For the 1997 study of ExComm, I used the rough transcripts of those meetings .
 For other ExComm discussions, myself and other scholars were dependent on the laconic minutes that had been taken . For other scholars, such as myself and others, the minutes had to be taken .
 Ernest May and Philip Zelikow’s The Kennedy Tapes was published in 1997 . In 1997, the Kennedy tapes were published .
 This paper aims to reflect on the Kennedy administration’s handling of the most dangerous episode in the Cold War era, an appropriate endeavour in 2012, 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis .
 In doing so, I will make use of a good deal of primary source material that was not available when I wrote my two books on this subject . I will use a lot of primary sources that were not available at the time of these books .
 Much of what scholars have said on this subject has been influenced by Robert F Kennedy’s posthumously-published memoir of the missile crisis, Thirteen Days, which — it was later revealed — had been edited by JFK’�s speechwriter Theodore C Sorens
 Thirteen Days claimed that Robert Kennedy was the hero of the missile crisis . Robert Kennedy, along with his elder brother, was a hero of missile crisis, it claimed .
 He was the man who had the courage to oppose the administration hawks, who were recklessly recommending a U.S. attack on Cuba . He proposed imposing a naval blockade around the island to prevent the Russians from deploying any more nuclear weapons .
 He was the one who conceived the vivid Pearl Harbor metaphor . The metaphor was crucial in making credible the argument that a U.S. blockade was preferable to a strike on Cuba .
 Khrushchev devised the brilliant strategy at the denouement of the missile crisis of accepting the proposals contained in his letter to JFK, but rejecting the less conciliatory ones articulated in his message the following day . Thirteen Days further suggested, that he was the one who devised the
 Much of the general historiography on the Kennedy presidency over the past 40 years has involved scholars attempting to extricate the debate on JFK from the powerful ‘Camelot’ myths propagated by court historians such as Sorensen and Schlesinger, Jr.
 Former Kennedy Library historian Sheldon Stern has used the tapes to provide his own refinements to the ExComm transcripts . Sheldon Stern's work has been used when textual changes made are significant .
 The ExComm tapes expose the hyperbole surrounding Robert Kennedy’s role in the missile crisis, evident in both Thirteen Days and in many subsequent histories of the event . The tapes reveal the hyperbrio surrounding Kennedy's role in crisis .
 The ultimately successful U.S. effort to defuse the missile crisis was a collaborative one in which Robert Kennedy’s role was significant but in many instances less so than his ExComm colleagues . Robert Kennedy's role in defusing the crisis was significant .
 In all of these respects, there were ExComm officials whose contributions were more important than Robert Kennedy’s . Robert Kennedy's contributions were important to the ExComm, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Robert Kennedy had greater influence on JFK’s thinking than other ExComm officials . Robert Kennedy's closeness to JFK was greater than that of other officials, he says .
 Bobby Kennedy was the president’s most intimate adviser, and his purview extended far beyond the usual domain of an attorney general . Bobby Kennedy: "Bobby Kennedy was an intimate adviser to the president"
 Following the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in spring 1961, the U.S. government focused on foreign policy . After the invasion, Cuba was the focus of the nation's foreign policy in the 1960s .
 JFK and RFK’s relationship was exceedingly close . Unquestionably, the ethos of intense familial loyalty promoted by patriarch Joseph P Kennedy ensured the pair's relationship was extremely close .
 There was no closer relationship between president and adviser in 20th-century U.S. history . Indeed, there were no closer relationships between presidents and advisers in history .
 In that sense, Robert Kennedy’s views were more important than other advisers’ because his access to and potential influence over the president were greater . Robert Kennedy's views were important because he had greater access to the president .
 The ExComm records raise the issue of whether Bobby Kennedy’s views were largely dependent on the ideas expressed by other officials . Bobby Kennedy's views may have been influenced by the ideas of other officials, the records show .
 ExComm tapes shed light on the importance of McNamara's role in managing the missile crisis . McNamara’s role was revealed in the early days of the crisis in the United States .
 JFK and Bobby Kennedy were informed of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba on Tuesday 16 October 1962 . McNamara and most other senior US officials were informed .
 JFK convened the first two ExComm meetings that day by JFK to frame his administration’s initial response to the Russian challenge . Both participated in the meetings, convened to frame the administration's initial response .
 Most U.S. officials, including the president himself, advocated a retaliatory American attack on Cuba . Shocked by the reality of Soviet nuclear weapons 90 miles off the coast of Florida .
 Supporters of that approach focused on the idea of a U.S. air strike on the Caribbean island that would destroy the Soviet missile sites .
 There was also a ‘superhawk’ position of proposing a full-scale invasion of Cuba . The 'superhawk' position was also proposed a 'full-scale' invasion .
 Robert Kennedy was generally taciturn in those first two meetings held on 16 October . Kennedy's reputation as always being central to the ExComm discussions, he was not .
 A good deal of the discussion that day was about whether a strike on the missile sites in Cuba, or a more general strike, would be the more appropriate response . A strike on a missile site or a general strike would be more appropriate, the author says .
 The thrust of Robert Kennedy's comments was that his brother should probably plump for the more drastic alternative of an invasion of the island .
 I would say that you’re dropping bombs all over Cuba … dropping it on all their missiles. I would . drop it on Cuba, he said . "You're dropping bombs over Cuba, dropping it over Cuba," he said of Cuba .
 You’re going to kill an awful lot of people, and we're going to take a lot of heat on it,’s President Obama says . “You’ll announce the reason that you”re doing it is because they’ve sending in
 CNN's John Sutter says it's almost incumbent upon the Russians to send in again . Sutter: "We’re going to send them in again. Well, I would think it’s almost incumbent on the Russians"
 Kennedy was suggesting that because Khrushchev could respond to an American air strike on missiles in Cuba by sending in more nuclear weapons, it would be better to invade the island and replace the Castro regime with a pro-US government that would not accept further Soviet missile deployments .
 Taylor to clarify how long it would take to carry out an invasion of Cuba and take control of the island . Taylor was asked to clarify the length of a Cuban invasion .
 In the evening ExComm meeting of 16 October, the attorney general continued to focus on the invasion option .
 Bobby Kennedy reminded his brother of the invasion alternative . When the president reduced the alternatives for the U.S. to an air strike on the missile sites in Cuba, Bobby Kennedy said . Bobby Kennedy: "When the president . reduced the options for the United States to a strike, Bobby
 He also speculates on pretexts that could be used to justify a U.S. invasion . He also speculated on “some other way we can get involved in this, through Guantanamo Bay or something”
 A similar incident to the one that led to the Spanish-American War in 1898 would help make another invasion of Cuba seem necessary in 1962 .
 JFK was angry at the way Khrushchev had deceived JFK by giving assurances that he would not send offensive missiles to Cuba . JFK felt the same way he did when he had promised not to send offensive missile missiles to the island .
 For Robert Kennedy, it was a case of Khrushchev damaging U.S. national security interests . Robert Kennedy's family as well as his family were hurt by the incident .
 JFK’s anti-Castro covert programme Operation Mongoose began in November 1961 . His basic aim was to fashion a truculent U.S. policy towards Cuba that would lead to Castro's overthrow . JFK was assigned a leading role in the programme .
 At the start of 1962, he had told other U.S. officials that ousting the Cuban leader was the Kennedy administration’s top objective . The Kennedy administration's top objective was the ousting of Cuban leader .
 Once the missile crisis began those hardline sentiments continued to shape Robert Kennedy’s thinking, at least initially . Robert Kennedy's thinking, however, continued to be shaped by hardline views .
 McNamara's assessment of the situation on the opening day of the missile crisis was more wide-ranging and impressive than Robert Kennedy’s . McNamara: “I’m not surprised that Robert Kennedy was more accurate than Robert McNamara.”
 JFK encouraged JFK to sanction more extensive surveillance of the island . He speculated that Republican and Democratic politicians, and perhaps the press, would find out about the missiles in Cuba within a week . JFK also speculated that the press and Republican politicians would soon find out .
 Kennedy, II, 416; transcript, ExComm meeting, 11:50m., 16 October 1962, Kennedy Tapes, 74 . Kennedy, I, 416, 416 . Transcript: "ExComm meeting" is Kennedy's first meeting with the White House .
 Later in the meeting he reminded his colleagues of the blockade alternative, though he made clear he was not yet endorsing it . He reminded them of the alternative, but he did not endorse it .
 McNamara made a vital contribution to the Kennedy administration’s successful management of the missile crisis . McNamara introduced the idea of a blockade of Cuba into ExComm's deliberations .
 The ExComm debate had been, for the most part, over different ways of attacking Cuba . Prior to that point, the ExComm Debate had been about different ways to attack Cuba .
 McNamara converted the discussion from an evaluation of the military alternatives to an assessment of the potential effectiveness of a naval blockade . McNamara said the discussion was about the effectiveness of those military options in comparison to a naval embargo .
 The prospect of a severe, military Soviet response was less likely with a blockade than with a U.S. air strike on or invasion of Cuba . That was crucial because of the prospect of severe military response, one that could bring about war .
 The rest of what McNamara said on 16 October strengthened the argument for the blockade and against an attack on Cuba . McNamara’s comments strengthen the case for a blockade of Cuba .
 Russian missiles on the island were ‘primarily a domestic political problem’ but had little bearing on the Soviet-American military balance . He maintained that the missiles were of political significance — they were “primarily” a domestic issue .
 In the ExComm meeting, McNamara again promoted the blockade in a way that Robert Kennedy did not . The ExComm met two days later in the late morning of Thursday 18 October .
 The attorney general agreed with McNamara that the blockade had emerged, along with a military strike, as one of the two main alternatives . McNamara said the blockade and military strike were the main alternatives to the military strike .
 He did not indicate his unequivocal support for the quarantine . However, he did indicate he would support the quarantine.
 He indicated his scepticism towards this approach, telling his brother that “the argument against the blockade is that it’s a very slow death.” Indeed, at one point, he indicated he was scepticism .
 Russian ships, shooting down the Russian planes that try to land there. And it builds up, and it goes over a period of months, and during that period of time, you’ve got all these people yelling and screaming about it, you've got all the people yelling .
 A major drawback with the blockade was that it would not bring about a speedy resolution of the crisis . Put another way, a major drawback was that the blockade would not solve the crisis quickly, he said .
 You’ve got to say to him: “They can’t continue to build these missiles.” The chances are slim, says CNN's Robert Kennedy .
 In this way, McNamara presciently identified the path that led to the ending of the missile crisis . McNamara was prescient in this way .
 McNamara's emphasis on the importance of negotiations squared with the analysis provided by McNamara just prior to this exchange with Robert Kennedy . McNamara discussed with Dean Rusk and National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy how Khrushchev and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation would respond to either a U.S
 With the strike option, the secretary of defense argued, Khrushchev would probably retaliate by destroying American missiles in Turkey and Italy . NATO would fracture over such drastic US action against Cuba, he said .
 With the blockade, NATO unity would be preserved and the Kennedy administration would need to agree to the removal of its missiles from Turkey and Italy in order to persuade the Soviets to withdraw their nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 A compromise settlement, following the imposition of a blockade, would be an acceptable resolution of the missile crisis, McNamara suggested . McNamara: "A compromise settlement" would be acceptable .
 The secretary of defense played a vital role in October 1962, one for which he has received insufficient credit . A villain on Vietnam policy, to be sure, but he has played a key role in that month's events .
 McNamara was not the only Kennedy adviser to extol the virtues of the blockade at an early stage in the ExComm discussions .
 Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union Llewellyn E Thompson expressed his support for it, as did Assistant Secretary of State Edwin M Martin, at a meeting of senior officials (that JFK did not attend)
 JFK asked how to remove the missiles already in Cuba . Thompson replied that the US would need to maintain surveillance of the island . The US might be compelled to carry out a strike on the missile sites .
 The blockade at least had the potential to end the crisis peacefully, he said . But, he implied, a military strike on Cuba did not have the same potential .
 McNamara and Thompson played key roles in the first week of the missile crisis . McNamara, Thompson, therefore, played key role in the crisis .
 McNamara originated the idea of a blockade, converting a debate on the various military options to a discussion of the pros and cons of military action and a blockade . McNamara: "A blockade is the answer to the question: A blockade is a blockade"
 ExComm officials were influenced by those who had championed a blockade from an early stage, notably McNamara but also Thompson . They had been influenced by McNamara, Thompson and McNamara .
 Deputy Director of the CIA Marshall S Carter and Undersecretary of State George W Ball also helped convince the Kennedys that a military strike would be an unpalatable U.S. response and that the blockade was the better approach .
 They did this by bringing into the discussion the Pearl Harbor comparison . The comparison served to discredit the military-strike alternative on the grounds that it was akin to the nefarious Japanese attack in 1941 .
 Thirteen Days is a line of argument that has been associated with Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy is associated with the Kennedy legacy .
 The attorney general did embrace and articulate in ExComm discussions the Pearl Harbor analogy . The comparison between that 1941 assault and a prospective U.S. attack on Cuba was important in turning him against the notion of a military strike .
 A surprise strike on Cuba would diminish America’s moral authority in the world, Ball said . Ball noted in a memorandum shortly afterwards that, “We tried Japanese as war criminals because of the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor”
 Ball made the Pearl Harbor comparison in the ExComm meeting on the morning of 18 October in a way that struck Robert Kennedy powerfully and so altered his thinking . Kennedy says Ball's comments changed his thinking and changed his mind .
 If the U.S. did attack Cuba without warning, that would be “like Pearl Harbor’s “Pearl Harbor” that would have been “Like Pearl Harbor.” If the United States did attack, it would be like Pearl Harbor, says
 We’ve talked for 15 years that the Russians being the first strike against us, and we’d never do that,’s not doing that. The Russians would be first strike, he says . We've never done that, he adds .
 Robert Kennedy’s use of the Pearl Harbor analogy was different from George Ball’�s . George Ball's and President Carter's use of an analogy was not the same .
 It was not a comparison that could be considered by other ExComm officials, as it was made in a private note and not a group discussion . The comparison was not considered in a public discussion, but it was in private .
 It was meant literally at a time when Robert Kennedy was proposing an invasion of Cuba and the consensus in ExComm was for military action .
 It was not, as Ball and Carter had used it, to castigate those who were calling for a hasty and dangerous strike on the island . Instead, it was not a comparison to those who had called for a strike .
 Bobby Kennedy began to reject the idea of a military strike on the grounds that its resemblance to Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor would damage U.S. moral standing .
 In particular, he must have worried about the impact of a Pearl Harbor-type strike on his brother’s reputation, both at the time and historically .
 In a meeting with JFK, former secretary of defense Robert A Lovett and a few other officials on the evening of the 18th, Robert Kennedy made clear that he now supported the blockade of Cuba .
 He did the same in an ExComm meeting the following day, making the Pearl Harbor comparison to condemn the belligerence of the administration hawks .
 By the 19th, then, Robert Kennedy was playing the role that he described in Thirteen Days . By that time, he had been playing a role in the role described in the book .
 Had it not been for McNamara and Ball, however, it would be questionable whether he would have done so . McNamara: "I'm not sure whether I would have been able to do this again."
 Robert Kennedy’s contribution was important and generally commendable, but it was not as impressive as he himself later claimed . Robert Kennedy's contribution to the Kennedy legacy was important but not impressive, he says .
 JFK’s U.N. Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson, like McNamara, emphasised the importance of diplomacy .
 The following day he furnished JFK with a memorandum in which he again advised against military action, warning that it could lead to nuclear war . The next day he advised JFK that military action against the U.S. should be avoided .
 Stevenson: Many nations would view U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey as comparable to Soviet missiles in Cuba . This was a clear reference to the United States Jupiter missile in Turkey, Stevenson said .
 Stevenson urged Kennedy to consider the diplomatic possibilities for ending the crisis . Stevenson: "We need to talk to each other about what we can do to end the crisis"
 JFK's position was that JFK should implement a blockade but then move rapidly to a diplomatic settlement . The U.S. should make concessions to induce Khrushchev to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba, he says .
 Later in the meeting he also mentioned U.S. missiles in Italy as something Kennedy should be willing to forfeit .
 Stevenson’s point on ceding Guantanamo was unrealistic from a domestic political point of view, as it would have left the president open to charges of appeasement . Stevenson: Ceding Guantanamo would have been politically risky to the president .
 JFK, unsurprisingly, was quick to refute Stevenson’s argument on surrendering the Guantanamo base . JFK was also quick to respond to Stevenson's argument .
 President Obama says he's prepared to discuss removing U.S. missiles from Turkey . But he says he would be prepared to talk at a later point in the crisis . He said he would discuss removing the missiles, but that it would be discussed at later point .
 Stevenson impressed upon the Kennedys and other ExComm officials the importance of diplomacy and a willingness to compromise in order to bring about withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 Kennedy's response to Stevenson’s recommendations on 20 October demonstrated the change in his views since the opening day of the missile crisis . Kennedy still held the following morning, 17 October, when he spoke with CIA Director John A McCone .
 By the climax of the crisis on 27 October, there was no U.S. official more determined to end the confrontation over Cuba by diplomacy rather than force .
 This development is linked to a broader theme of the Kennedy presidency, namely his increasingly progressive outlook, in both domestic and foreign affairs . This development was linked to the president's increasingly progressive approach to foreign policy .
 The Kennedy of 1961 sanctioned the Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose to oust Fidel Castro, authorised an enormous peacetime increase in military spending . The U.S. enjoyed roughly a 17-to-1 advantage over the Soviet Union in nuclear weapons .
 He may also have begun to develop doubts about America’s role in Vietnam .
 Kennedy had a vivid understanding of the severity of racial oppression in the South . The Cuban missile crisis impressed upon him the dangers of the Cold War and the need for him to craft a more conciliatory approach towards the Soviet Union .
 The maturation in JFK’s thinking during the missile crisis was the start of a longer process in which he reshaped his views on politics and international affairs . JFK's maturation was the beginning of a larger process, he says .
 A shift away from his initial belligerence in the missile crisis was evident on the third day, 18 October .
 JFK’s switch from an air strike-advocate to a backer of the blockade merits praise . On the other hand, JFK's switch from a strike-advocator to a supporter of the blockage merits praise.
 It showed his open-mindedness, the flexibility of his thinking, and this enabled him to make the sound decision of rejecting the risky military option that he and the majority of his advisers originally espoused, in favour of a blockade . It put pressure on Khrushchev whilst furnishing
 JFK’s ability to reflect and change his mind in the Cuban missile crisis stands in stark contrast to the sort of dogmatism exhibited by George W Bush when considering whether to go to war against Iraq .
 Stevenson’s 17 October memorandum calling for give-and-take negotiations had vexed the president . The following day in ExComm JFK showed an understanding of how diplomacy and mutual concessions might play a role in defusing the crisis .
 When discussing the air strike option, he speculated on whether it would be worth warning Khrushchev that a U.S. attack on Cuba was imminent but to use a carrot as well as a stick by saying if he withdrew his missiles from the island, the US would take its Jupiter
 Kennedy now viewed the military alternatives as representing but one of two options, the other being a blockade . Kennedy later that day it was the blockade that he came to prefer .
 He was concerned about maintaining NATO solidarity, decreasing the likelihood of drastic Soviet reprisals against Berlin and preventing a superpower nuclear exchange .
 The following morning, Friday 19 October, Kennedy’s preference for the blockade led to a brutal encounter with the Joint Chiefs who were strongly in favour of military action against Cuba . The Joint Chiefs strongly supported the blockade .
 JFK explained his reservations to that approach related to his fear of escalation, particularly in Berlin . JFK explained that his reservations were related to the Joint Chiefs' support for an air strike without warning .
 The irascible General Curtis E LeMay disagreed, arguing that a blockade constituted something close to appeasement . General Curtis LeMay argued that the blockade constituted a close-assassement .
 Admiral George W Anderson likewise asserted that the blockade would be ineffective . Admiral Anderson likewise said the blockade was ineffective .
 Kennedy countered that if he sanctioned an attack on Cuba, Khrushchev would be compelled to retaliate . The most likely target would be Berlin, Kennedy said . Kennedy, in robust fashion, countered .
 Kennedy tried to induce a degree of restraint on the part of his military advisers . He said the argument for the blockade was that what we want to do is to avoid, if we can, nuclear war .
 The dangerous belligerence Kennedy faced with from his own military was apparent from what the Joint Chiefs said, with the tape still recording, once Kennedy had left the room . Kennedy was faced with a dangerous belligerent attitude from the military .
 In a scene that would not have looked out of place in Stanley Kubrick’s 1964 cinematic masterpiece Dr. Dr. Kubrick's 1964 film, the scene was captured in a similar way . The scene would have been similar to the scene in Dr.
 For all the implausibilities of Oliver Stone’s 1991 film JFK, one theme it developed that was credible was the tension between Kennedy and his own military . The tension between JFK and the military was credible .
 Kennedy’s ability to withstand that considerable pressure reflected well on his leadership, and was a key part of the campaign he waged within his administration, from 18 October onwards .
 He made clear he was receptive to the idea of negotiations leading to the withdrawal of its Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy as part of a final settlement .
 He did not want to offer their removal — only to be ready to do so if the Russians raised the issue . He said he was ready to offer them removal only if they raised the matter .
 Kennedy explored the notion of trading the Jupiters more thoroughly than any other ExComm official during the first week of the missile crisis . Kennedy and Stevenson explored the idea of trading Jupits more thoroughly .
 Early in the second week of the missile crisis, Kennedy concentrated on the mechanics of establishing the blockade . He said little on the vital question of what step he should take next if the Russians respected the blockade but did not remove their missiles .
 He indicated a preference for the extension of the blockade so as to prohibit petroleum, oil and lubricants as well as weapons from reaching the island . When he did consider that issue, he indicated that he preferred to the extension .
 That would ultimately bring the Cuban economy to a standstill and so increase the pressure on Khrushchev and Castro . That would bring the country's economic woes to a halt .
 General Lucius D Clay, the hero of the 1948–9 Berlin crisis, was put on standby to be sent to the city . General Clay concluded that any US invasion of Cuba would provoke Soviet seizure of West Berlin . He remained preoccupied with Berlin .
 By Thursday 25 October, JFK still viewed the extension of the blockade so as to include POL as his likely next step, as he informed British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan in a telephone conversation . JFK told the British prime minister that the blockade was likely to extend .
 McNamara argued that vigorous U.S. surveillance over Cuba would be sufficient to display American resolve for a few more days . McNamara, to his credit, disagreed, arguing that vigorous United States surveillance was sufficient .
 The following morning, however, he spoke in favour of the POL initiative as his next course of action, not the air-strike idea his brother had entertained . The next morning he spoke out against the idea .
 At that morning’s ExComm meeting on Friday 26 October, there was a definite sense, with the United States having just boarded the Marucla, that the first phase of the second week of the crisis was over . The Kennedy administration would need to decide on an additional course
 Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon argued that a U.S. air strike on the missile sites would be better than an intensification of the blockade . Dillon: A United States air strike would be a better option than an intensified blockade .
 President Obama said his priority had to be removing Cuba's nuclear weapons, not Castro . Some advisers were wary about considering a settlement that would leave Castro in power for the foreseeable future .
 The Obama administration's longstanding objective of ousting Castro should not be allowed to prevent the fashioning of a reasonable settlement to the crisis, says Julian Zelizer .
 Adlai Stevenson predicted Khrushchev would demand a US no-invasion pledge regarding Cuba . JFK defended him from McCone’s criticism by suggesting that Stevenson had identified one of only two methods that could actually bring about a withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba, the other being
 The following day, 27 October, was of decisive importance in determining the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis . Saturday 27 October was a crucial day for the Cuban government .
 John Kennedy responded by sending a letter to Khrushchev embracing his proposals of 26 October, not the 27th . Kennedy sent the letter after mulling over the issue with advisers .
 Bobby Kennedy dispatched Bobby Kennedy to Anatoly F Dobrynin to tell the Soviet ambassador in Washington that the U.S. would withdraw its Jupiters from Turkey but that this would have to be a clandestine part of the settlement .
 The following day Khrushchev agreed to back down and order the removal of Russian missiles from Cuba . This approach worked, for on the following day, for the next few days .
 Robert Kennedy claimed for himself the lion’s share of the credit for devising the wise strategy that ended the most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age, and specifically for hatching the plan .
 The transcripts for the ExComm meetings held on 27 October expose that claim as a self-serving chimera . The transcripts reveal that the claim that ExComm met with members of the U.S. government is a self serving chimera.
 Several ExComm officials voiced their support for that strategy, notably Pentagon official Paul H Nitze, McGeorge Bundy, Sorensen and Stevenson . Robert Kennedy came to back the approach of ignoring Khrushchev’s second proposition .
 John Kennedy, however, was immensely impressive in ExComm on 27 October . John Kennedy was the star of the show .
 JFK initially expressed reservations about Khrushchev’s 26 October offer on the grounds that its provision of a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba represented a guarantee that Castro would stay in power . JFK depended on advisers such as McGeorge Bundy and Ted Sorensen who
 Kennedy’s wariness over the use of American force to end the crisis was commendable, particularly as Maxwell Taylor and other military officials were pushing him towards an air strike on Cuba two days hence, to be followed by an invasion .
 JFK accepted Khrushchev’s 26 October proposal of a U.S. no-invasion pledge in return for removal of missiles from Cuba . JFK's brother dispatched brother to tell Dobrynin of their willingness to withdraw the Jupiters from Turkey as long as it
 JFK's consideration of what has become known as the Cordier ploy, first revealed by Dean Rusk in 1987, suggests that JFK might well have plumped for a publicly-made concession on the Jupiters to end the crisis .
 The ExComm tapes shed light on the roles played by leading U.S. officials . In addition to the light it sheds on the role it sheds light on some general themes of importance .
 The Cuban crisis and the Berlin situation are interrelated to each other, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "One is the interrelatedness of the Cuba crisis and Berlin situation"
 It's easy to think of those issues as linked but essentially separate . It's important to keep the issues separate from each other, but they are separate .
 The threads of the crisis in Berlin were tied to the strands of the . crisis in Cuba to form, from Kennedy’s perspective, a single tapestry . Kennedy's perspective: The threads in Berlin and Cuba are tied to each other .
 Kennedy and his advisers consistently viewed the Cuban missile crisis in a Berlin context . Kennedy's advisers said the crisis was viewed in a similar way in Berlin .
 Khrushchev’s missile gambit in the Caribbean was due in large measure to strengthen his position in Berlin . ExComm officials concluded that Khrushchchev wanted to strengthen himself in Germany .
 The respective merits of a blockade of Cuba and a military strike on the island were to be gauged to a great extent by the sort of Russian reprisals each would provoke in Berlin . Each would provoke a reaction in Berlin.
 JFK was still factoring Berlin into his analysis of the situation on 27 October . By the climax of the crisis, JFK still had to consider Berlin in his analysis .
 The ExComm tapes also add to our understanding of the Kennedy administration’s policies before the missile crisis as well as during the crisis itself . The tapes add to the understanding of Kennedy administration's policies before and after the crisis, as well .
 U.S. policies were designed to do everything possible, short of a direct attack on Cuba by American forces, to oust Castro . Those policies were meant to try and oust Castro, President Obama says .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion, covert pressure in the form of Operation Mongoose, economic sanctions, and diplomatic isolation by engineering Cuba’s expulsion from the Organization of American States . Cuba was forced to withdraw from the OAS .
 Even the assassination of Castro Castro was planned and attempted, though the extent to which JFK and his civilian advisers had been briefed about and endorsed these plots has been disputed .
 In a 1990 article in Diplomatic History, James Hershberg presented sufficient evidence to pose the question of whether in the autumn of 1962, prior to the missile crisis, Kennedy was seriously considering an attack on Cuba .
 The declassified ExComm tapes reinforce the point that U.S. military preparations were underway, even before JFK was informed about missiles in Cuba . Kennedy could sanction an attack on the island at short notice, according to the tapes .
 I believe that Castro is not going to sit still for a blockade and that that’s to our advantage. TAYLOR: I thought we were hoping last night that we would get the collapse of Castro. BUNDY: I believe . Castro is . not going
 I just think, his demon is self-destruction and we have to help him to that . I always thought … It never occurred to , I just . think, "His demon is . self-destructive and we . have to . help him . to that. I always
 Arguing that the U.S. should help Castro with his own “self-destruction” seems to be a reference to an effort to assassinate Castro . Arguing for the United States to help Castro seems to have been a reference .
 This highlights the importance of a continued assessment of the Kennedy administration’s policies towards Cuba before the missile crisis .
 Around two decades ago scholars examined the origins of the missile crisis in 1962 . The missile crisis was the first to occur in October 1962 .
 JFK's policies influenced Khrushchev’s decision to deploy missiles in Cuba . JFK bore significant responsibility for the onset of the missile crisis in 1962 .
 In 2008 study of the missile crisis One Minute to Midnight, Michael Dobbs started his narrative on 16 October 1962 . Dobbs: The missile crisis began on October 16, 1962, in 1962 .
 To skim over the question of causation would be, in a historiographical sense, a regressive step . The question is whether causation is causation .
 Monographs on the missile crisis should proceed along the twin tracks of the origins of the crisis and the crisis itself, as they tended to do in the late 1980s and 1990s .
 If this occurs, a consensus might crystallise around the idea that, when it came to Cuba, Kennedy's record was something of a curate's egg . Kennedy’s record was unimpressive before October 1962, but commendable during the crisis itself .
 JFK succeeded in bringing about the withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Cuba . JFK ended the crisis without triggering a superpower war and without having to proffer concessions that were excessively generous . JFK’s handling of the missile crisis, the bottom line is that he succeeded .
 JFK's ExComm tapes reveal the precise contributions made by JFK and his advisers . What the full ExComms tapes reveal is JFK's precise contributions to his administration . The full tapes reveal JFK's contributions to the project .
 Robert Kennedy was not the hero of the missile crisis, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy was a hero of missile crisis . He says he was not a hero in crisis .
 He did not hatch the plan for the blockade, originate the powerful Pearl Harbor metaphor in ExComm discussions, or devise the plan at the climax of the crisis that dealt effectively with Khrushchev's two different sets of proposals .
 Kennedy, II, 568; Stern, Averting ‘The Final Failure’, 115; . United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, interim report, S.Rept–465, 94th Congress, 1st session, Alleg
 JFK grasped at an early stage the necessity for mutual concessions, and showed no little fortitude in resisting the trigger-happy proclivities of his military advisers . JFK, though initially supportive of the air-strike option, grasped at the same time that the air strike option was necessary .
 A number of officials, notably McNamara, Ball, Stevenson and Thompson, merit considerable praise .
 It was McNamara's contribution to the management of the Cuban missile crisis was the greatest of any of John Kennedy’s advisers . McNamara was forever maligned by association with the Vietnam War .
 Works on missile crisis in the past decade have failed to highlight McNamara's crucial role . McNamara’s crucial role in the missile crisis has been overlooked .
 Institute for the Study of the Americas promotes, co-ordinates and provides a focus for research on the Americas . Canada, the Caribbean, Latin America and the United States are the focus of the study .
 Institute of Latin American Studies merged with Institute of United States Studies in 2004 . Institute was formed in 1965 . Institute is a result of a merger between the two institutes .
 Institute publishes in the disciplines of history, politics, economics, sociology, anthropology, geography and environment, development, culture and literature . Institute also focuses on Latin America, the United States, Canada and the Caribbean .
 ISA runs an active programme of events — conferences, seminars, lectures and workshops — in order to facilitate national research on the Americas in humanities and social sciences .
 The Institute's publications, events and other activities are available on the web at www.americas.sas.ac.uk .
 John Kennedy’s team of advisers is a fresh interpretation of the roles play by John Kennedy's advisers . Utilised declassified materials, he provides a fresh . interpretation of . the roles played by John . Kennedy .
 Robert McNamara and Robert Kennedy's contributions are re-evaluated . McNamara's contributions to the Vietnam War are being reevaluated, including those made by Robert Kennedy .
 Meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , 29 October 1962 Cecil Stoughton. Meeting of . the Executive . Committee . of the . National Security . Council . Meeting of a . meeting of the executive . Committee, 29 October . 1962, was the first time Cecil St