 The new Chevrolets are beautifully, dutifully built to suit your needs . Whether you're toting a noisy tribe of youngsters to a Fourth of J uly pienic or just heading off by yourself with nothing but a cargo of summer breezes frolicking .
 You have your choice of five wagon models with the widest seating, widest cargo area and widest selection of engines and transmissions in the low-price field .
 Check your dealer and see how convenient he can make it for you to be in a one by vacation time .
 Chevy's only car in its field with aniomatic transmiasion that eliminates even a hint of a shift . Chevy's the only car . in its . field . with an iomatic transiomatic . transiasion .
 Cherrolet Division of General Motors, Detroit 2, Michigan ” Air Conditioning—temperatures made to order —for all-weather comfort.” Air conditioninging .
 A baseboard along the walls carries a Nickel alloy resistance wire that transforms electricity into heat right in the room . The wire can be used to transform electricity to heat a room .
 Nickel alloys made electrical heating practical in the first place . In fact, they made electricity heating practical for the first time .
 Nickel plays an important part in almost everything in your home that uses electricity for heat . In almost everything you use electricity to heat your home, it's a nickel or dime .
 The International Nickel Company has worked closely with the electrical industry in helping to develop efficient heating elements . TIME, JUNE 20, 1960, is published on June 2, 1960 .
 This cooperation extends to promotional activities as well as to product development, research, and technical service . This cooperation includes promotional activities .
 Inco’s national advertising is telling millions of homeowners about the advantages of electric heating . Inco says electric heating is a better way to heat your home .
 Nickel in alloys for strength and corrosion resistance . Nickel in stainless steel for rust-free beauty . Nickel plating for gleaming protection. Nickel in steel for strength, corrosion resistance.
 Burns Panatelas, with Smooth Smoke* binder, lighter wrapper and Havana filler, are available on sale today .
 Burns 5 popular shapes— 2/25¢ to 25¢ straight . G } Sanatda de Lane 2 for 27¢°—or in the handy 5-pack Robt. G } .
 The best answer to Mr Khrushchev’s attempt to dictate to us is to nominate and elect Mr Richard Nixon .
 For those who are worried about Jack Kennedy’s Roman Catholic faith, let us remind them that it should be a good reason to vote for him for the presidency . Any other course by the Republicans, including the supporters of Mr Rockefeller, would constitute a tragic blunder .
 I became highly incensed at your coverage of the infamous U-2 incident in the May 30 edition . I became extremely incensed by your rather partisan coverage .
 Governor Stevenson and others of his party were not simply throwing American unity to the wind for the sake of pure political advantage . I feel sure that Governor Stevenson . Stevenson .
 Adlai Stevenson's remarks correspond to nothing anyone else has ever heard Stevenson say publicly or privately . Robert Boulay: Time is too much to expect Time to be fair to Stevenson .
 Governor Stevenson is fully and explicitly on record on the question of Berlin . Governor Stevenson says he is "comply on record" on Berlin .
 It might conceivably strain the credulity even of Time to suppose that he would sudFrench newspaperman views on Berlin which are incompatible with everything he has said on the subject .
 Historian Schlesinger knows “what anyone else has ever heard Stevenson say publicly or privately.” —Eb. G. Time is glad to learn that Historian knows what Stevenson said publicly .
 When I came upon a photograph of another statue of Moses which also displays horns, my curiosity deepened. I came across a photo of a statue of the same type of figure which also has horns .
 The Scriptures underwent many changes at the hands of the early scribes, so much so that in the 4th century, Pope Damasus commissioned the Bible scholar Jerome to do a definitive version .
 Pre-Renaissance and Renaissance artists generally depicted Moses with horns . Scholars have since determined that Moses was not literally horned but rather surrounded by luminous rays .
 Many thanks for the May 30 cover story of Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky and especially for Tite's "timely" reporting of Paris Reporter Blunden’s 17-year-old notes .
 I am now looking forward to your staff's coverage of Abe Lincoln's assassination . Abe Lincoln was assassinated in 1865 .
 Please explode the myth that any tailor in Hong Kong can get out a wellmade garment for $25 or less in 24 hours . Re the article in the May 30 edition on Hong Kong: Please explode an article in this article .
 The majority prefer more time, charge more, and produce, consequently, better quality goods . Of course, there are those who will do it, but the majority here prefer more .
 You mentioned that the King and Queen of Nepal had to be accommodated in a third-class hotel . The King and the Queen had to have a third class hotel .
 Second-class Volume LXXV June 20, 1960 postage paid at Chicago, Illinois and at additional mailing offices .
 This year, let a diamond gift make memorable that special anniversary, or important birthday, a debut, the birth of a child, or any significant event . This year's diamond gift is a special occasion to celebrate and make memorable .
 A trusted jeweler can help you choose a lovely diamond gift from stock . A pin, earrings, dinner ring or bracelet can be a perfect diamond gift for a family .
 Diamonds give your gift significance, enduring value . Whether you spend $100, $500, or more, diamonds give significance, value .
 Mr Nugent has a total of 15 policies with this company . He has been with the company for more than a decade .
 A report of special interest to young men by CHARLES A NUGENT Financial Vice President, Stokely-Van Camp, Inc. Financial vice president .
 I have seen in my own experience how the cash values build up over the years, thus providing a really sizable nest egg . However, I never forget think anyone else should ance is to protect growing families. and I don't that .
 I found the cost of this protection extremely low when I compared the actual cash value with the total premiums paid . I found it very low when compared to the actual value of the protection .
 As much as 85°, of all the money that men leave their families comes from life insurance, authorities estimate .
 Latest available figures show rate of return from Northwestern Mutual's investments to be above the average of the 14 other largest life insurance companies .
 Modern electronic equipment enables fewer Northwestern Mutual employees to give prompt, personal attention . Northwestern Mutual's income needed for operating expenses is about haif of the average for the 14 other largest companies .
 The percentage of Northwestern Mutual men selling over a million dollars of life insurance a year is fen times greater than the average of all life insurance agents . Northwestern Mutual agents sell more than $1 million a year .
 Almost half of all Northwestern Mutual policies are sold to old customers coming back for more . And almost half of the policies sold to new customers are coming back .
 Express Co., which handled the King and | Queen’s world trip, accommodated them on one floor of the Peninsula Court, the best hotel in the colony . Express Co. arranged the trip .
 Sterling Moss is no more obsessed with danger than Time's editors are obsessed with deadlines . Sterling Moss has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 Moss is simply a complete professional— and incomparably the best driver living — whose primary concern is unattainable perfection . Danger is only a factor in his profession, and not to him by any means the biggest factor Moss is . If Moss is ever obsessed with anything connected with motor
 Time seems to be expurgating after seeing the picture of Anita Ekberg in the May 30 issue, and the article about the Cannes Film Festival .
 These films which pleased the critics and ‘the professional cinema crowd’ were based on sex and sex alone . Sir I'm convinced the slogan should more correctly be “Movies are bedder than ever”
 I think we've reached the saturation point with this sort of thing. I'm certainly no puritan, but I think it's time to be a puritan . I'm not puritan but I'm no fool, but we're reaching saturation point, he says .
 The quotation about the recruiting of scholars is out of context and the inference made is completely erroneous . The quotation was taken from the context of a quote in which it was made .
 They are also justifiably proud of the scholastic achievements of their university and its continuous quest for academic excellence . Jep JOHNSON Jr. Jr. is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 Re your May 23 story about the i portance of dreams to health: I've often pondered why, after a night of answering the children’s intermittent needs, I feel as though I have been up all night even though the time spent out-of-bed-and
 Mother's sanity is threatened when she fails to get to the last page of half a dozen or more dreams, small wonder .
 William Dement has discovered another contributing cause of the Tired Mother disease . William has discovered a new cause of Tired Mothers disease .
 Send old address (exactly as imprinted on mailing label of your copy of Time) and new address . Allow three weeks for change-over . Change-over can take place in three weeks .
 Timu INc also publishes Lire, Forrune, Sporrs ILLUSTUSTRATED, ARCHITECTURAL Forum and House & Home . Timu Inc also published Lire and Sporre .
 Gettysburg was a three-day explosion of storm and flame and terror, unplanned and uncontrollable . “Gettysburg was an act of fate," says historian John Sutter .
 Gettysburg Battlefield is one of the nation's largest government-owned shrines . The 2500 acres of Gettysburg are one of our largest government owned shrines in the nation . Gettysburg is located in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania .
 Five observation towers give you an excellent bird’s-eye view of the most terrible battle of our most terrible war . The Battle of Gettysburg was the deadliest battle of the war .
 Gettysburg speech is Lincoln's finest speech, Lincoln's Gettysburg Address . Lincoln's speech was a speech that inspired Lincoln to give Gettysburgsburgsburg .
 Millions of us have forebears who fought on one side, or the other, hotly defending their own ideas of liberty . Millions of people fought on either side of the war, or one side of one, to defend liberty .
 "This great “THIS HALLOWED GROUND,""* DOUBLEDAY & CO battlefield, is so beautifully preserved by our National Park Service, is a tribute to the men who fought here . This great ‘this great’
 Plan now to visit Gettysburg or some other Civil War Battlefield. Plan now! Plan now . Plan now.
 George G Daniels, William Forbis, Henry Anatole Granwald, James Keogh, Hillis Mills, Hilli Mills, Joseph Purtell.
 Edward L Jamieson, Cranston Jones, Theodore E Kalem, John Koffend, Louis Kronenberger aban Norton Leonard, Robert’ Mclaughlin, Richard lahan Jr. Hartshorn, Edward L. Jamiesons, Theodore Kalem and Louis
 Marion Pikul, Madeleine Bittel Richards, Miriam Rumwell, Miria Rumwell and Deirdre Mead Ryan, Frances Stevenson, Strong.
 Joan Titus, Fortunata Frapeeh Mary Vanaman, Gayle Williams, Rosemarie Tauris Zadikov. Joan Titus . Joan Titus and Fortunat Frapeh Mary Vanamaman. Frapeah Mary Vananaman. Gayle. Williams
 Richard M, Clurman, Harry Johnston, Robert Parker. United States . United States and Canada . Canada .
 Robert Ajemian, Murray Gart, Dudley Doust, Leon Jarofi, Mark M Periberg, Edwin M Reingold. Robert Ajmian, . Murray Garts, Dudley . Doust . Dudley Doubts, Leon . Jarofi . Mark M.
 CNN's Martin O'Neill and Martin Boyle are among the stars of this week's film series .
 Kobert Manning, Honor Balfour, Monica Dehn, Michael Demare, James L Greenfield, Herman Nickel . The team is working on a new book called The World Series .
 Donald S Connery, James Shep HonG Kone, Stanley Karnow, Toxyo, Alexander Campbell, Frank Iwama. HonG. Connery: "I'm a big fan of the TV show, but I'm not a TV star."
 Harvey Rosenhouse, Rafael Delgado Logado Lozano, PANAMA Ctry: Bruce Henderson . Bruce Henderson: "We are not going to be able to go to the World Cup"
 Associated Press in exclusively entitled to the use or tepublication of the use of the local telegraphic and cable news . Published herein, originated by Time, The Weekly NewsMagazine .
 Time Associate Editor Jesse Birnbaum, his wife Elizabeth and their two children live in a well-mortgaged, brick and shingle split-level in a seven-year-old development in East Meadow, L.I.
 Writer Birnbaum had the advantage of this firsthand source . He was also provided with the extensive research of 21 TIME correspondents .
 Jesse Birnbaum was writing the cover story when he was writing it . He says the most revealing tableau of suburban housewifein-action came at home .
 Wife Beth was waiting for admission to a Manhattan hospital for a minor operation . Beth was in New York City waiting for the operation to be performed .
 In the last hours before she took to a hospital bed, while running a fever from a throat infection, she went through a schedule that would have exhausted a Pilgrim’s wife .
 She gave two music lessons, did a week's marketing, and decorated the den for an evening recital of one of ee a SUBURBAN WIFE BETH BIRNBAUM .
 The next morning Beth dropped Jesse at the Merrick, L.A. railroad station, returned home to chauffeur the children to a cub-scout jamboree at nearby Mitchell Air Force Base . The next day Beth dropped her son Jesse at a train station and returned
 On her way back, she stopped to pick up one of her students . She arrived home in time to answer the phone .
 She sped back to the base, which she had to cover from end to end in the rain before she could locate the children . She proceeded to give the music lesson, sped back .
 She took them home, fed and dressed them, packed, loaded them in the station wagon and drove them to Manhattan . She was met by her husband and her suburban—New Jersey sister-in-law, who took command of the children .
 Beth checked into the hospital after making sure that she could take the time to check in . Then, having made sure she could, Beth checked in .
 Birnbaum was happily back at home in East Meadow, ready to cast a knowing eye at what her husband had written about her . The suburban wife was happy to find out about her life .
 Eisenhower said his farewells briskly to U.S. officials and foreign diplomats at Andrews Air Force Base . Eisenhower: "On to Tokyo"
 After 74 years and 95,000 miles of diplomatic diplomacy, his leave-takings had become routine . The US president's leave-taking had become fairly routine .
 Tokyo’s police chief flatly announced that he could not “guarantee Eisenhower's safety” when the President arrives next Sunday . Tokyo police chief said he could no guarantee that Eisenhower would be safe when he arrives .
 If the trip now ahead of me were concerned principally with the support of a regime or a treaty or a disputed policy, if it were intended merely to bolster a particular program achieve a limited objective, such a journey would have no real justification . Nevertheless, he felt a ‘compelling
 Colonel John Eisenhower, and John’s wife Barbara, were aboard the jet . Colonel Eisenhower and his wife Barbara sat aboard the sleek orange-and-andsilver jet .
 With a final wave, Ike was off for the first leg of his 22.795-mile trip, to Anchorage, Alaska . Ike's final wave: "I'm off for Alaska. I'm off to Alaska"
 Alaska Governor William Egan welcomes President Obama to Anchorage, Alaska . President Obama arrives in Anchorage to welcome him to the U.S. State Department .
 He hustled off with Press Secretary Hagerty, who had flown in from Tokyo, for a lengthy conference . Then he hustled to the podium for a second time .
 All week long the State Department had pondered the wisdom of Ike’s going to Japan . The State Department has been mulling the decision .
 The President’s three-day visit will begin on the day the new U.S.-Japanese mutual-defense treaty becomes effective . Coincidentally, the new treaty will become effective on the same day .
 In recent months, Communist-directed leftists have launched a frenzied drive to topple the government and torpedo the treaty . The treaty was struck by the Communist Party of Japan in 1998 .
 To retreat before the agitation of a Communist-led minority would be certain to weaken proUnited States forces in Asia, perhaps bring the downfall of the Kishi government and the treaty too .
 The State Department’s Far Eastern experts predicted that the rough treatment of Hagerty would rally pro-Western Japanese and shame police into more effective action against rioters .
 Emperor Hirohito will meet the President at the airport and accompany him on the ten-mile drive to town . They pinned hopes on the traditional—if waning—Japanese respect for the Emperor, who will meet him .
 Ike still planned to give his scheduled speech to the Diet . Canceled was Ike’s round of golf with Kishi, but he still plans to give a speech .
 Manila has feverishly refurbished the presidential palace as the President's headquarters . The city has erected a bamboo arch and “Mabuhay Ike” banner, and planned a crowded schedule of ceremonial wreath-layings .
 Paul, Ike will go from Manila to Formosa for an overnight stay in Taipei . Ike will be the guest of Nationalist China’s Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek . Ike's visit to Taiwan is scheduled to take place in Taiwan .
 Ike will report to Chiang on the summit blowup, go the course in speechmaking and wreathlaying . Ike will be reporting on summit blow-up, wreathaying and speaking .
 State-owned railways will let passengers ride free to Taipei from any place on the island . State-run railways will also offer free rides to any place in Taipei .
 The Nationalists may press the President for long-range guarantees of Formosa’s position in United States defense plans .
 Ike will address the National Assembly and confer with Acting Chief of State Huh Chung during a fast-paced day . Ike will give a speech at National Assembly on Monday .
 He will return to Japan the same night, then head east on a nightlong flight across the Pacific to Hawaii . He will stop long enough to change planes, then fly east to Hawaii, an enormous aloha and rest .
 That afternoon at a Manhattan press conference Rocky tossed his firecracker . Rocky tossed it away at a press conference .
 Nixon moved in fast to quiet the Republican howling (“Remember November’s’) by setting a soft-answer tone in his own reply to Rockefeller . Nixon: "Remember November''
 Rockefeller disagrees with some Administration policies, said Nixon at a tense and crowded press conference in Camden, N.J., it is right for him to voice his disagreement publicly . Rockefeller: "It is right to voice your disagreement publicly"
 Nixon has set out his own views on national issues, Nixon said . Nixon went on to say he has set them forth in detail in detail .
 Pundits and politicians pondered, came up with a collective bagful of answers . CNN's John Sutter asked: 'What do you think? What do we think?'
 Rocky is an earnest and patriotic man who feels compelled to provoke debate on the nation’s growing problems . Rocky is a patriotic and patriotic .
 Rockefeller still cherishes a hope of wresting the Republican nomination away from Nixon in 1960 . Rockefeller still believes he can win the nomination in 1960 if he wins .
 He has announced that he would accept a draft, considered for awhile last week a proposal to announce his open candidacy for president .
 Rockefeller is harboring thoughts of a third-party bolt in the style of Theodore Roosevelt’s 1912 Bull Moose revolt .
 No Republican presidential candidate has openly attacked a Republican Administration since T.R. blasted William Howard Taft in 1912 .
 Rockefeller’s icy tone toward Nixon melted into proper smiles when the two men met at the opening of the British Exhibition . The two men exchanged what may have been the most insincere greetings of the week .
 Nelson Rockefeller’s firecracker, having made everybody jump, had left not a tremor behind . At that point, it seemed that Nelson Rockefeller's firecracking had left no tremor . At the end of the hour, Rockefeller's "firecracker" had left
 By Emmet he meant Emmet John Hughes, his own Speechwriter during the 1952 and 1960s and Campaigns . Hughes was also a Speechwriter for President Nixon .
 Emmet Hughes, 39, wrote most of Governor Rock's manifesto . Hughes has written many of Rocky's other major speeches and statements since last autumn .
 Rockefeller wrote a statement sharply criticizing the Eisenhower Administration’s record . Rockefeller is a Democrat (a “dissident” or “wandering Democrat, he specifies), who, under the President's auspices, delivered a major address to the 1956 Republican Convention . Rockefeller
 Handsome Emmet Hughes, son of a New Jersey judge, always had a way with words . Hughes is the son of New Jersey's former judge .
 Raised a Roman Catholic, he published his first book, The Church and the Liberal Society, a few years after his graduation, summa cum laude from Princeton .
 He spent the war years at the United States embassy in Spain, doing three-hatted tasks for the State Department, the Office of War Information, and the U.S Army Intelligence .
 Hughes went to work for Time Inc. as head of its Rome bureau in 1946 . He later became text editor of Lire. Hughes was head of the Berlin bureau during the airlift .
 Hughes felt that Dwight Eisenhower could provide the foreign-policy leadership that Hughes believed the nation needed . During the 1952 campaign, he got a leave of absence from Time Inc. to write speeches for Eisenhower .
 After serving as Eisenhower's assistant, Hughes returned to Time Inc. Hughes worked as an Eisenhower assistant in the Eisenhower administration .
 In 1957 he became chief of correspondents of Time Inc.’s Foreign News Service . He was editor of Time's Foreign Correspondent Service .
 Last November he published his third book, America the Vincible, a sharp attack on Eisenhower-Dulles foreign policy as a tangle of contradictions and myths .
 Hughes himself strongly urged continuous negotiations with the Russians . Hughes himself has urged continuous talks with the Russian government .
 Dwight Eisenhower, slashing away with a red pencil, read it with mounting anger . Eisenhower, who was in control of the White House, read the letter . Eisenhower: "I'm not afraid to read it. I'm angry"
 A keynoter is a Midwesterner with evident maturity, maturity and stature in foreign affairs to personify a cold-war tough line .
 Judd then sailed to China as a medical missionary for the Congregational Church . Judd was almost killed by malaria and by Communist rebels . Judd almost died in China .
 He came back to the United States in 1938 to preach of the peril of Japanese expansion . He made 1.goo speeches in two years urging the U.S. to stop sending supplies to the Japanese .
 After Pearl Harbor, he was elected to Congress by Minneapolis neighbors who raised funds and ran his campaign . He was elected by Minneapolis residents who raised his funds .
 In the capital he championed the cause of Nationalist China's Chiang Kai-shek when it was unpopular . The Cowles-owned Minneapolis Star and Tribune still belabor him .
 Irom 7,000 Protestant clergymen backed his stand against U.S. recognition of Red China . He thundered against the perils of the Chinese Communists, recently helped get statements of support .
 Judd was surprised to be chosen to make the keynote speech but not at a loss for words . Judd said he was surprised by being chosen to speak at the event .
 Walter Judd knows why he is a Republican, and why he calls himself a "progressive conservative" Judd: Republicans are the best folks to entrust with the management of the nation’s domestic and foreign affairs . Judd: "I'm a progressive conservative. I'm a conservative
 U.S. voters do not blame the Republicans for the summit failure . United States voters don't blame Republicans for failure of the summit .
 Not one of the voters interviewed interviewed this week is shifting his vote to the Democrats . United Feature’s doorbell-ringing Pollster Sam Lubell reports United Feature .
 A 5 to 1 majority of all voters praised Ike’s ‘dignity’ in the face of the Khrushchev tirade . Three out of four voters were in favor of larger defense expenditures .
 Most people were sticking to their original, presummit choice for the presidency . Vice President Nixon, because of his experience, got a “small boost” out of increased concern about war .
 In California’s primary elections, Richard Nixon trotted into the winner's circle with more votes than his Democratic rival, Governor Edmund Brown . Kennedy Nixon Don’t Know 37% 49% 14% Stevenson Nixon .
 Unopposed on the G.O.P. ballot, Nixon attracted 59% of the registered Republicans to the polls for a vote of confidence .
 The Democrats polled 53% of their registered vote . Brown found nothing very cheering in his 1,327,245 vote tally or his Democratic rival, Old-Age Pension Promoter George McLain, 634,950 .
 Harvard's Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and John K Galbraith, Amherst’s Henry Steele Commager and Washington Lawyer Joseph Rauh, onetime chairman of Americans for Democratic Action. Harvard’S Arthur Schleiner Jr. is a Harvard professor
 In Manhattan, a regiment of eggheads closed the gap in their ranks with a loyalty pledge supporting their favorite candidate .
 Poets Carl Sandburg and Archibald MacLeish, authors John Steinbeck and John Hersey, theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, Reinhold . Theologians Reinhold. Niebeuhr and John Mason Brown, Playwright-Producer
 Murray Chotiner abruptly retired from Nixon’s life, campaigned for Congress this spring with glacial silence from Nixon . After 1956 charges that he had % On location at Hyde Park for Sunrise at Campobello with Actress Greer Garson, who plays the young .
 Former Congressman Orvin B Fjare was chosen to oppose Metcalf in the Republican primary . Orvin will face a tight battle in November in November .
 Every wag had his political gag as the election moon waxed bright . From solons to saloonkeepers, every wag has a political gag . U. Johnson, Divided Honors, will be held in New York City .
 Joe Kennedy sits down for a man-to-man talk with his son, Jack . Father Joe Kennedy sat down for the first time with son Jack . The Kennedy family is proud of the Kennedy legacy .
 "The good Lord came to me and, in a blaze of white light, he told me he was going to make me President," he said . The good Lord told me, 'He told me that he was making me President. The good lord came to him'
 "I don’t remember talking to either of you guys last night. Maybe so, maybe so, but I’m not sure," he says . "I’s not sure if I remember last night," he adds .
 The battle for the Democratic presidential nomination seemed to go underground as the contenders, their aides and strategists were busier than an ant colony in their quests for delegates and deals . TIME, JUNE 20, 1960, is published by CNN.com .
 So far, 84 votes have been declared for Johnson, 7 for Russell, 14 for Symington . Georgia’s Richard Russell (probably ultimately for Johnson) is also in the mix .
 Uncommitted, with 14 votes each for Johnson and Symington, 3 votes for Kennedy and 3 for Stevenson . But voluntary unit rule could tip it either way at pre-convention caucus .
 Unless there are unmistakable noises of a bandwagon, the delegates will split wide open on the second ballot, with Kennedy picking up the biggest boodle—at least 44 votes . Kennedy is expected to pick up at least 44 of the delegates .
 Favorite Son George Smathers on the first ballot, with Johnson carrying about 20, Kennedy 5, and Symington 4 thereafter .
 A Dixiecrat movement to back Favorite Son Herman Talmadge is under way, but the unit rule should carry the state for Johnson . The unit rule is the state's unit rule .
 Kennedy is preferred choice of 15 delegates with a vote each, Johnson of 6, Symington of 3. Symington has 3. Kennedy is the preferred choice for 15 delegates . No commitments yet, though .
 Unit rule becomes effective on the second ballot, should throw the vote to Kennedy . Unit rule should become effective on second ballot .
 Chicago Mayor Richard Daley shepherding 52 delegates into Kennedy fold . Most of the downstate strays going over to Symington . Chicago Mayor Daley is expected to lead 52 delegates .
 Daley, boss of Cook County, should hold his two-thirds of the delegation through the second ballot . If the bandwagon breaks down, Symington will find easy pickings .
 All first-ballot votes for Kennedy as a result of his primary victory; perhaps 8 or 10 for Symington on the second . lowa : First,ballot bow to Goyernor Herschel Loveless .
 On the second ballot Kennedy has a rockbottom count of 20, Symington of 6 . Kennedy has 20 votes on the first ballot . Symington has 6 votes on second ballot .
 Under unit rule, Kennedy-leaning Docking could carry the state for Kennedy thereafter, though strong Symington support makes it close .
 Johnson counts on 22 votes, Kennedy 3, Symington and Stevenson 2 or 3 apiece . Kennedy 3 or 3 votes count on Kennedy . Symington 3, Stevenson 3 or 2 votes count each other . Stevenson and Johnson count on 22 .
 Johnson on the first ballot, though a wildcat Dixiecrat movement might change the voting order . Johnson would be the first person to be elected to Congress .
 Kennedy was committed to Kennedy on first ballot by primary vote; Symington could pick up a few on subsequent ballots . Johnson and Symington are also committed to the Kennedy on the first ballot of primary vote .
 Governor G Mennen Williams has ‘pledged’ the state to Kennedy but the delegates are not bound to follow him . Walter Reuther, a major power, has so far held off a formal endorsement of Kennedy . Current guess: Kennedy, 40 votes on the first ballot
 The delegation will go where Humphrey takes it, and best guessing is that he will climb on the Kennedy bandwagon . Best guessing: He'll climb on Kennedy bandwagon, but best guessing that he'll go where it goes .
 Kennedy looks good for 10 on first ballot, with Symington, Stevenson and Johnson splitting the rest of the rest . Kennedy has a good chance for 10th place on the ballot . Symington and Stevenson split the rest with Johnson .
 8 votes to Kennedy, 6 to Johnson, 1 to Symington . Sentimentally disposed to give Kennedy 8 votes . Kennedy, Johnson, Symington, Johnson and Symington voted for Kennedy .
 Kennedy now has at least 32 votes, may sweep the delegation by convention time . Governor Robert Meyner is desperately trying to maintain his favorite-son status .
 Kennedy was assumed to be Johnson’s own until last fortnight’�s state convention . The delegation will now give at least 4 votes to Kennedy .
 In second place was Lyndon Johnson, with 4104 votes, grounded on the rock of the South .
 If the voting goes into a second ballot, Kennedy’s indicated strength should carry him over the finish line with 7654 votes . Kennedy is expected to finish with 765 votes .
 If the Kennedy bandwagon should be wrecked, Stuart Symington, with widely scattered support all over the nation, probably stands to gain the most of such powers as the Kings and Bronx County chairmen . Despite preferences of such erstwhile kingmakers as Eleanor Roosevelt , James Farley and Carm
 Johnson should win 32 votes, with Stevenson and Symington getting 2 apiece and Kennedy a single vote . Kennedy should win one of the 32 votes in the Senate .
 Kennedy took Governor Mike Di Salle into camp last January . Kennedy is committed to Governor Kennedy, who took governor Mike di Salle in January .
 Symington has 6 votes and so has Kennedy, but the majority of the delegates are still awaiting a signal from Governor David Lawrence and Philadelphia Boss Bill Green . Symington and Kennedy have 6 votes each .
 Symington and Kennedy worth 44 votes each and Johnson getting the rest of the vote . Symington, Kennedy, Kennedy and Johnson got 44 votes apiece . Johnson got the rest .
 Kennedy and Stevenson got 74 votes and Stevenson 7 . Kennedy got 74 . Stevenson got 7 votes . Kennedy was elected president of the White House .
 Kennedy has just 12 votes, with Johnson second, with 8 votes, and Symington and Stevenson sharing the rest of the rest . Kennedy won the bloody primary with 12 votes .
 Kennedy, 204; Humphrey, 104, with powerful state leaders determined to lead most of Humphrey’s strength to Kennedy on second ballot . Humphrey was defeated by Kennedy in 1964 .
 It weaves through the hills beyond the cities, marches across flatlands that once were farms and pastures, dips into gullies and woodlands . It straddles rocky hillocks and surrounds the lonesome crossroads and surrounds a lonely crossroads .
 Salem, Greenwich, Chester, Berkeley, Evanston, Sewickley and Rye have roots in such venerable names as Salem and Greenwich . But it has roots in some venerable names such as Berkeley, Berkeley and Evanston .
 The splendor of a new summer seemed, as always, to give a new lilt to life . In those towns and hills and groves last week, the splendor seemed to be to give an extra summer .
 In the old towns, the giant oaks and elms threw rich new shade across the white colonial mansions and the square, peaked-roofed clapboard houses . In the past, the oaks, elms and oaks were the main shade of the colonial mans
 School buses headed toward the season's last mile . Power mowers and outboard motors pulsed the season’s first promise .
 Fragrance of honeysuckle and roses overlay the smell of charcoal and seared beef . The smell of searing beef is reminiscent of the meat of the day .
 The thud of baseball against mitt, the abrasive grind of roller skate against concrete, the jarring harmony of the Good Humor bell tolled the day . The clink of ice, the distant laugh, the surge of hi-fi through the open window came with the night
 For better or for worse, Suburbia in the 1960s is the U.S.’s grass-roots . Suburbania was a place for the first time in the United States. Suburbanization was a formative formative period of American culture .
 In Suburbia live one-third of the nation, roughly 60 million people . Park Forest represents every patch of democracy’s hand-stitched quilt, every economic layer, every laboring and professional pursuit in the country .
 Suburbia is the nation’s broadening young middle class, staking out its claim across the landscape, prospecting on a trial-and-error basis for the good way of life for itself and for the children that it produces with such rapidity .
 Suburbia is home to the talented and distinguished Americans who write the nation’s books, paint its paintings, run its corporations and set the patterns . Suburbania's avid social honeybees buzz from address to address in search of sweet status .
 Charles Munch, Milton, Milton Munch and Bobby Jones were photographed in Munch's work . Munch was the subject of Munch’s famous painting, "Munch" Munch died in 1964 at the age of 75 .
 President William Allen, The Highlands; Supreme Court Associate Justice Hugo Black, Alexandria . The nation marches for better schools, churches and charities .
 Suburbia is a particular kind of American phenomenon, and its roots lie in a particular type of American heritage . Suburbania is an American phenomenon that has its roots in American heritage, says author .
 In a casual, ill-planned way it is the meeting ground between the growing, thriving city and the authentic U.S. legend of smalltown life .
 I think there's idealistic about the search for a home in the suburbs, Call it a return to the soil. I think it's an idealistic search for the suburbs . Call it "a return to soil"
 Charles de Gaulle saw San Francisco’s suburban Palo Alto on his trip to the U.S. six weeks ago . He hailed Suburbia as “magnifique.” and “the most beautiful place in the world”
 Man has been moving to the suburbs ever since he invented the school (consomething urbs. urbs) Man has lived in the suburbs for a decade .
 From ancient times, the towns and walled cities of Europe, from ancient times were airless, fetid places choking with humanity . And small wonder, for the towns, wallsed cities, was airless places .
 In England lonely voices cried out against the grime and stench of the cities . In the UK lonely voices cry out against cities' grime .
 Masterman was perhaps the first of a urban critics to draw a bead on it . Masterman says it's a mistake to blame the city for the decline in income tax rates .
 Late Sé Char Grosse Pointe Hamtramck® Lake Ense . Time Maps by R.M.Chapin .
 Long before England’s Masterman had his say, Philadelphians and Bostonians were moving to the outskirts of town . The Masterman was born in Philadelphia, Massachusetts, in 1903 .
 A New Litt ro Lirt Leviton—Atlonta Den Moruer & Cus Scouts . At first the countryside communities . leafed and budded with the homes of the well to do, who could afford to come and go by the seasons .
 By the turn of the century, United States Suburbia was flowering with permanent residents . By the mid-century, it had more than 1,000,000 residents .
 New middle-income families swept beyond the gates to buy homes of their own, from which they could commute to their jobs . Freed from the city by the trolley and rapid-transit services, and then by the automobile, hoisted gradually by a strengthening economy . The new middle
 When World War II ended, the sweep to the suburbs turned into a stampede . Veterans came home, the legion of war workers burst out of crowded city quarters .
 New settlements spread across acre upon acre; small. sleepy old towns were inundated by newcomers . The suburban way of life became the visible substance of what a hard-working nation was working so hard for .
 The key figure in all Suburbia, the keeper of the suburban dream, is the suburban housewife . The thread that weaves between family and community is the housewife, the key figure .
 In the absence of her commuting, city-working husband, she is first of all the manager of home and brood, and beyond that a sort of aproned activist with a penchant for keeping the neighborhood and community kettle whistling .
 She takes her peanut-butter sandwich lunch while standing, thinks she looks a fright . She watches her weight (periodically) and jabbers over the short-distance telephone with the next-door neighbor .
 She keeps the checkbook, frets for the day that her husband’s next raise will top the flood of monthly bills . The tide never seems to rise as high in the city as it does in the suburbs, she says .
 She wonders if her husband will send her flowers, shoos the children next door to play at the neighbor's house for a change, paints her face for her husband's return before she wrestles with dinner .
 Spots through her day are blessed moments of relief or dark thoughts of escape . Spotted through her days are blessed .
 Harry Red Mitt Valley is just beyond sensible walking distance . Harry Red is the world's best place to read and relax .
 If the theory of evolution is still working, it may well one day transform the suburban housewife’s right foot into a flared paddle, grooved for easy traction .
 Suburbia’s housewife fills her newfound time with a dizzying assortment of extra-curricular projects . As her children grow less dependent on her, she gets involved in community life .
 Suburban housewife is the chief jungle fighter for school expansion and reform . Since Suburbia was conceived for children (and vice versa), she is a strong advocate for school reform . The Suburban schoolwife is also a strong supporter of school expansion .
 County council invaded by 1,000 P.T.A. members . Montgomery County manager whacked $11 million from the 1961 school budget .
 The council scrambled to retreat, not only restored the cuts, but added a few projects of its own for good measure . The council has also added a new project to its list of projects .
 Tax rate jumped s¢ per $100 valuation as a result, but there was scarcely a whimper . The tax rate jumped  s¢ s¢ to $100,000 .
 With husbands away at work and hampered by long commuting, women can share more . Women can share and contribute more with their husbands away from work .
 With a little prodding from his wife, suburban husband develops a big yen to mix in Government affairs at the local level .
 Suburbia often shines with the kind of topnotch talent that makes troubled big-city fathers wince with envy . The result is that Suburbania often shine with the best talent .
 $1-a-year mayor in Prairie Village, Kansas, is a lawyer with a growing practice . The president of the city council is a Procter & Gamble Co. division manager . The head of the village planning commission is assistant to the president of a manufacturing firm .
 In Philadelphia's suburban Swarthmore, the town council includes a banker, Du Pont engineer, the president of a pipeline company and a retired executive . The town council also includes a DuPont engineer, a former college executive and a former banker .
 Suburbia’s growing morass of overlapping services and functions in counties that have experienced a big building rush . Biggest of the problems that such people face are overlapping services in Suburbania . The problem is overlapping services, functions and functions .
 In the 17 towns that comprise Denver's four-county suburespepe, there are 27 school districts, 5 water districts, 59 sanitation districts . In the area, for example, there have been 59 sanitary districts .
 Los Angeles is fish-netted with 72 separate governments and an array of districts, districts, and unincorporated communities . The megalopolis of Los Angeles has an uncounted array of cities and districts .
 suburbanites, more than urban or rural brethren, tend to want to get things fixed . But suburbanites more likely to want things fixed than urban and rural dwellers .
 Lakewood, Calif., 22 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, was just another boondock of 5,000 people ten years ago . The boom thundered 10 years ago when the boom was still raging .
 A development group poured $200 million into 17,000 homes and a big shopping center . The development group also poured millions of dollars into a shopping center and a new home .
 As residents took hold, the sense of frustration that came from long-distance county rule and the absence of local services flashed into a new, self-starting energy .
 Lakewood, with a present population of 75,000, incorporated itself in 1954 . It sank its own home-nurtured political roots and fashioned an identity of its own . Lakewood was incorporated in 1954 and has its own history of politics .
 Police, road maintenance and building maintenance contracts to county government . Then, while running its own affairs, it devised a method of contracting for police and road maintenance to the county .
 The “Lakewood Plan’s” was later copied by many other California communities . The Lakewood Plan was a model for many other communities .
 Many Lakewood families who might have moved on to more expensive, status-setting locales have decided to stay where they are . So ably has Lakewood fashioned its living pattern to suit itself that many families have stayed .
 The suburbanite has been prodded, poked, gouged, sniffed and tweaked by armies of sociologists and swarms of cityside cynics . But in reality he is his own best critic .
 suburban living is a relatively new invention and already some of its victims are wondering if it has too much organization and too little living . Organized suburban living can be a problem for some .
 The pressure of activity and participation in the model suburb of Lakewood, for example, can be harrowed out .
 In season, the leagues play 5 boys’ and 30 men’s basketball teams, 77 football teams, all coached by volunteers . Other activities range through drama, dance and charm classes, bowling, dog-training classes, “Slim ‘n’ Trim
 The Organization Child is an image of an Organization Child, or Boy in the Grey Flannel Sneakers .
 Cub Scout movement has 1,822,062 beanie-capped boys who visit fire stations, make kites and tie knots . Little League has more than a million little sports who are cheered on by an equal number of overexuberant daddies .
 "I think people are so bored, they organize the children, and then try to hook everyone else on it," she says . "They organize children, then try and hook them up," she adds .
 Suburbanites sometimes wonder whether their children are cocooned from the rest of the world . In those suburbs, families, income, education and interest are homogenized .
 The all-weather activities often center on frenzied weekend parties in the “den,” attended by neighbors . Neighbors each in turn will throw a potato-chip and cheesedip party on succeeding weekends .
 In Kansas City’s suburban Overland Park, three jaded couples formed an ‘Anti-Conformity League’ to fight groupthink . The group disbanded soon afterward because, explains ex-Schoolteacher Ginger Ginger, ex-schoolteacher . Ginger: "
 For some, suburban euphoria often translates itself into a suburban caricature . For others, it translates itself to the suburban caricature of suburban caricature. For some of the world's suburbs, it's a problem .
 In the suburbs, immorality is no more or less prevalent than it is in the cities, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . He says it's not a matter of whether suburban wife-swapping stories are true .
 "Suburbia's clergymen tend to be most keenly aware of Suburbia’s disappointments," says the author . Suburban clergymen are aware of the disappointments and promise of Suburbania, says the writer .
 "So many of the people are on approximately the same level economically and socially," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not surprised by the level of people in the United States."
 "They tend to be new in the community and they're unstable and insecure," she says of the new members of the community . She says they are unstable, insecure and insecure .
 When they see someone else fail, in work or in a family relationship, they themselves feel a rung higher, and this is a great reason for gossip . When someone else fails, it is a good reason to gossip .
 "We don’t meet heart to heart any more, we meet at cocktail parties in a superficial way," she says . "I think socially we're flying apart," she adds .
 I think we're seeing a documentable rebellion going on against the postwar idea of mere belongingness and sociability . I think it's going against the notion of mere . belongingness, sociability and socialiability .
 Most suburbanites are having too good a time to realize that they ought to be unhappy with their condition . The fact surrounding all the criticism and self-searching is that most suburbanites have had too good of a time .
 Suburbia's men paused here and there to enjoy a spell of nothing more salacious than wifewatching . At week’s end, they nursed their power mowers down the lawn .
 Amateur chefs prepare juicy sacrifices on the suburban Buddhas —the charcoal grills . In the patios, amateur chefs prepared juicy sacrifices .
 Mint-flavored iced tea or tart martinis chilled thirsty throats . From across hedgerows and fences came cries of exultant youngsters and yells of men and women .
 The suburban counterpoint leaps forward in optimistic measure, creating a new framework for the American theme . Thus the suburban counterpoints leaps forward, creating an optimistic measure .
 Every suburban husband wishes he earned more money, every mother with young children wishes she had more help . Small boys wish there were fewer days of school, small girls wish there are fewer small boys, and babies all wish there is no such thing as strained spinach .
 By midday, 20,000 people had converged on Tokyo's International Airport . Plane bearing Press Secretary James Hagerty was due to arrive at 3m.
 On the terrace of the terminal buildIng were gathered middle-aged men and kimono-clad women clutching U.S. and Japanese flags . The terminal was built in Tokyo, Japan .
 The signs were in English, and clearly intended for United States photographers and eventually, the United States public .
 United States Ambassador Douglas MacArthur II landed at the airport in a green Marine H-13 helicopter . MacArthur II was the U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines for the first time .
 MacArthur said he and Hagerty would take a helicopter or a car into Tokyo . MacArthur said, “What the hell we will drive, of course.” MacArthur said .
 As Hagerty’s Lockheed Super Constellation touched down from Oki30 minutes late, a wild melee broke out on the terrace between the right-wing and the left-wing toughs . The right wingers and left wingers clashed on the ground as Hager
 Some 2,000 police surged forward to separate the com batants while the sedate elders looked on in dismay . Police surged into the crowd to separate them from each other in a bid to break the deadlock .
 Ambassador MacArthur wel comed Hagerty and his companion, Ap pointments Secretary the three paused brietly for photographs and then hurried to the ambassador's offi cial black Cadillac . The three paused for photographs for photographs .
 Two Fords carrying six United States Secret banners and 1,500 students squatted in a spot rises nawa Thomas Stephens .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower was scheduled to drive the same route with Emperor Hirohito by his side . Just nine days later, President Eisenhower was set to travel the same path .
 All three cars bowled along at high speed, but as the Cadillac emerged from the underpass and ascended the curving rise, the driver said, "I'm not surprised"
 MacArthur's Japanese chauffeur saw the students squatting en masse on the road and braked sharply . The students were squatting on a highway in Tokyo, Japan, when he saw them .
 The Cadillac swerved to the right and stopped; the two Fords stopped bumper to bumper behind it . The Cadillac was pulled to a halt; the Fords were bumper-to-bummer behind it. The Cadillac pulled up to a stop; the other two stopped to bumper .
 The mob beat on the car with fists and hammered its body and kicked the locked Glass cracked in the windshield . The mob began rocking the car in rhythpoles doors .
 Thousands of students who had been snake-dancing and marching near by rushed to join in . Thousands of other students also joined in .
 A Socialist member of Parliament, wearing a red sash, looked on approvingly from the sidelines and puffed at a cigarette . A Socialist . member of the . Parliament looked approvingly as he puffed up his cigarette .
 The mob began rocking the car and began singing the /nternationale . Obediently, the mob stopped rocking the vehicle and instead sang the song .
 Six Secret Servicemen pushed their way through and ranged themselves around the Cadillac . They faced a singing, shouting crowd .
 The student leaders obligingly helped linking arms to keep their followers from like fish in a fishbowl . Helicopter helicopters went round and round in the watery sky .
 When the Marine H-13 helicopter roared low over the car, the crowd hurled stones and broken poles at it . Crowd hurled stones, broken poles and broken trees at it.
 Each time the heli copter tried to land alongside the road way, the crowd rushed forward so that the chopper had to veer upward or risk injuring the demonstrators . The chopper veers to avoid injuring the protesters .
 After a quarter of an hour, the 2,000 policemen who had been left behind at the airport terrace came marching slowly across the airport . Behind the car's closed windows James Hagerty smoked a cigarette and took pictures of the gibbering crowd with James .
 The police forced open a path through the mob and the Cadillac inched forward . Students squatted in front of it halted again, surrounded by swirling red flags .
 Police managed to clear a grassy space by the roadside, and the Marine helicopter dropped 19 pressing too close . Finally the police managed to remove the area, and dropped 19 people .
 Overhead composedly composedly a small Japanese camera. grass down only so feet from the stranded Cadillac . Overhead . a small . camera . grassed down only . feet from a stranded Cadillac. overhead .
 MacArthur, Stephens and Hagerty emerged from the car in order to sit in the order of their seating . MacArthur and Stephens were seated in the back of the car .
 Secret Servicemen tried to hurry Ambassador MacArthur toward the waiting helicopter, but he ordered them to walk, not run . MacArthur ordered them not to run, but to walk .
 The instant Hagerty was aboard, the chopper rose like a whirring pheasant . The instant he was aboard was a whirlring chopper .
 The last of the Secret Servicemen tumbled from the open door and fell six feet to the ground . The takeoff was so fast that the last of them tumbled six feet into the air .
 Marines landed Hagerty, Stephens and MacArthur at Hardy Barracks . A waiting embassy car whisked them the 14 miles to the ambassador’s residence, taking them in the back way .
 At 8 that evening, still without having dined, Hagerty pugnaciously faced a microphoneladen table and a clutch of U.S. and Japanese reporters . At 8:30 p.m. ET, he said, "I'm not going to eat
 Hagerty said the demonstration was obviously “carefully planned by a group of professional organizers’s organizers”
 The mobs’ spearhead is the Zengakuren students’ federation which claims to represent half of Japan's 677,000 undergraduates . The mobs claim to represent more than half of the country's students .
 Mainstreamers are so far out politically that they consider Khrushchev a “traitor” to the proletariat . Mainstreams are so out of touch with the Communist Party that they call him a traitor to the masses .
 Communist students are considered "moderates" by the Japanese press in contrast with the club-swinging mainstreamers . As a result, Communist students in Japan are considered “moderators” by the press .
 Communist "moderates" besieged Hagerty’s car at the airport . But it was the Communist ‘moderants’ who besieged the car . The Communist Party was responsible for the attack .
 Zengakuren’s leadership equips picked agitators with whistles and megaphones to direct the mobs, pays them $1-1.s0 a day for their efforts . The leader of the Chinese government has become extraordinarily efficient at organizing riots .
 The question that most bothered the newsmen was one that Hagerty could not be expected to answer . The question was asked: "What do you do? What do we do?"
 The leftists filled Tokyo's streets with 150,000 demonstrators . Next day, the leftists filled the streets with 15,000 protesters .
 8,000 police looking on, they stopped a bus bearing 20 of Kishi’s Liberal Democrats, poked sticks through the windows, dragged out three of the legislators and roughed them up . The bus was carrying 20 Liberal Democrats .
 Some 4,000 students laid siege to Premier Kishi’s suburban home to prevent his leaving to keep an appointment with Jim Hagerty . Kishi denied having the appointment, saying he was trying to keep it .
 Jim Hagerty spent the day indoors at the home of Japan's Foreign Minister Aiichiro Fujiyama . The Japanese Foreign Minister's home is in Tokyo .
 He left quietly for the United States airbase at Tachikawa, west of Tokyo . He met for several hours with Foreign Office aides and at dusk left quietly .
 As Hagerty flew off to Alaska to meet Eisenhower, he left behind him an exultant anti-Kishi coalition . The coalition seemed confident that it had the government on the run .
 Socialists say Eisenhower's visit would only be for the purpose of propping up the tottering power of Kishi . That would represent an interference in the internal affairs of Japan, they say .
 There are also ominous signs of a weakening of nerve among non-Communist Japanese . There were also signs of an increasing number of Japanese defections .
 Ex-Imperial Prince Naruhiko Higashi-Kuni, Tetsu Katayama and Tanzan Ishibashi urged that Kishi resign and the Eisenhower visit be postponed . The question of the U.S.-Japanese security pact be decided by a new government after a national
 Big businessmen of the Japan Employers Federation felt that Eisenhower should still come, but with the reservation that after the ratification of the U.S.-Japanese treaty (scheduled for June 19, the day of Ike’s arrival), Premier Kishi should resign and call new elections
 There were indications that factional leaders within Kishi’s own party were sharpening their knives to dispose of the Premier and take his place .
 Nobusuke Kishi was at last exhibiting some of the resourcefulness for which he has long been noted . He was at the end of the week, but at week’s end, he showed some of his resourcefulness .
 The 25,000 police will be augmented by 50,ooo pro-Kishi students who will guard the road to the airfield . The pro-kishi students will also guard the main entrance to the airport .
 Kishi hopes that the presence of the Emperor at Ike’s side will be an added protection . The Emperor will be at the Emperor's side to protect Ike .
 Demonstrators were no frenzied mob carried away by fury or passion . But the worry was not over, for the demonstrators were not carried away .
 All week long they reacted on cue from their leaders, and every blow seemed as stylized and dispassionate as a Kabuki play . Instead of reacting on cue, the players react on cue to their leaders' leaders .
 It will be just as violent—or as mild—as the leitwing strategists choose . And it will be as violent or mild as they choose, strategists say . The U.S. has a long history of radicalizing the Middle East .
 The heart of Nikita Khrushchey’s oftproclaimed intention of lifting the Russian standard of eating to the U.S. level lies in a vast expansion of grain production . Grain is the raw material of meat, dairy products and poultry .
 Huge dust storms originating in the Soviet Union and sweeping westward into Europe have announced to all and sundry that Khrushchev’s food program is in serious trouble .
 The storms began in early April, when hot, dry winds off the Central Asian plateau, melting the skimpy snow cover, swept across a 1,500-mile belt extending from the Caspian Sea through the Caucasus, southern Ukraine and Crimea to Moldavia .
 Radio Moscow guardedly began reporting ‘dirty rain’ around Kiev . Dust and sand began falling on Bulgaria, Rumania, and even Yugoslavia and Poland .
 17 “heroic collective farm workers” shoveled four feet of dust offi a hog-farrowing shed near Krasnodar, then stayed around to play midwife to the sows . /zvestia de .
 Radio Moscow admitted moisture conditions in Caucasus and southern Ukraine were the worst since 1928 . In places a third of the winter wheat was destroyed and would need to be replanted for even partial harvest .
 The prospect is that they are in for another year of the same old bread-and-cabbage diet . But it is unlikely they will be in for more than a decade .
 For no nation does the United States feel such direct responsibility as for the 14-year-old Philippine Republic . U.S. feels responsibility for the Philippines . The Philippines is now the world's most populous country .
 A half-century of U.S. colonial tutelage, generously administered and gracefully relinquished, has left the Philippines a heritage of universal suffrage, widespread education, press freedom and press freedom .
 Garcia’s regime became conspicuous chiefly for influence peddling, nepotism and economic mismanagement . Garcia took over after the death of Ramon Magsaysay in 1957 .
 Garcia awoke to the fact that government corruption had been the major popular issue against him . He shrewdly concluded that he had better change his party’s ways before the 1961 presidential elections .
 Aytona is named Secretary of Finance, in charge of customs, internal revenue and import licensing . Ayton was appointed by Garcia after he said reform was necessary . Garcia has been in office since 2010 .
 He warned ministry employees to stay away from race tracks, cockpits, casinos and especially Manila’s thriving new “dayclubs” A collection of cabarets with B-girls catering to men who found it easier to get away from their jobs in the afternoon
 Aytona’s drive has already boosted tax and customs revenues by 20% over last year . He is now trying to change tax laws to catch wealthy tax dodgers who, he claims, cheated the government of $65 million last year, he says .
 His biggest reform was to institute a ‘controlled decontrol’ of the peso designed to create a free currency market within four years . The biggest reform is to institute “a ‘control of the . peso’
 Under new regulations, importers of “essential goods” get their dollars at more favorable rates than those who bring in Cadillacs and air conditioners . Under new rules, importer of "essential goods" gets more favorable rate rates .
 Aytona hopes that his cleanup will lure back U.S. investors . Already the Philippines’ foreign exchange reserves have built up to a healthy $180 million .
 There is some talk that Garcia plans to select him as his vice-presidential running mate in 1961 . Aytona says he has only scratched the top of the dirt .
 The handshakes would be for Garcia, but the admiration would go mainly to that rising young Filipino, Dominador Aytona . Garcia is a rising star in the Philippines, but his idol is the rising young man .
 An enterprising Parisian pimp named Pierre Sorlut set out two years ago to corner the nymphlet market . The Little Cats is the latest in a long line of pimp-infamous creatures .
 Pierre recruited pubescent charmers among girls aged 12 to 18, first by seducing them . He arranged dates with wealthy clients with infantile tastes . Pierre recruited his pubescent . charmers . among girls .
 Pierre’s particular prey were the pouting little imitators of Brigitte Bardot, with puffball hairdos .
 Pierre would say as he collected the earnings of Janine, Colette and Monique . Janine and Colette's earnings would be collected in the family home . Monique would say: "Janine, Monique, Janine ... I'm sure you can't wait to see
 Pierre would speak musingly of vitriol and its effects on a pretty face . If a girl proved difficult, Pierre would say: 'If a girl proves difficult, she would be difficult'
 Pierre was once a police chauffeur . Flashing his out-of-date police card, he would add; “You see. You see. He would say, ‘You see.'
 Personable Pierre drove a blue Oldsmobile, dressed nattily, talked of his glamorous past as an Air Force pilot and a Resistance fighter . Pierre was a French Air Force fighter .
 André Le Troquer, 75, was then president of the National Assembly . Pierre was looking after his 13-year-old daughter Rose "like a little sister," says Rose .
 Pierre was arrested last year in a complicated affair involving the shakedown of a businessman by a brace of phony policemen . Pierre was caught in a shakedown involving a businessman .
 In jail, Sorlut soon began singing, gave the police a score of names of prominent Parisians to whom he had supplied young girls . Politicians, manufacturers, department-store directors, a hairdresser, a fashionable tailor, an art curator, a restaurateur,
 At the trial, mothers came—or were pushed—forward with selfrighteous complaints about the corruption of their daughters . The trial was held in New York City .
 Newsmen learned that there had been striptease parties, involving young girls and boys, at the Villa Butard, a onetime royal hunting lodge that was Le Troquer’s official out-of-town residence .
 Le Troquer denied everything except that he was acquainted with Pierre Sorlut . He said he was not aware of the affair . The former president of France said he would not reveal details of his life .
 Abruptly the entire affair went off the record, and the hearings were closed to the press and public . The hearings closed to press and the public .
 Last week, after more than a year of hearings in chamber, the court made known its verdict . The court heard the verdict after more of a year in chamber .
 André Le Troquer was fined $600 and given a one-year suspended sentence . He was also given a $600 fine and a $1,000 fine . André Le Troquer received a suspended sentence for the incident .
 In some places, it was impossible to register a birth, take out a marriage license or even obtain a permit to bury the dead . In some parts of the world, it is impossible to obtain a birth or marriage license . It is also impossible to get a permit for the dead to
 Many tenants on upper floors of apartment buildings had to forgo washing . Because of falling water pressures, many tenants on higher floors had to wash their clothes .
 Millions of unscrubbed schoolchildren obtained an extra bonanza in the form of a holiday from school; teachers were on strike . Millions of schoolchildren were given an extra holiday .
 France's lower-income Frenchmen are angry at the steady upward creep of consumer prices . Government employees from postmen to customs inspectors are striking in France for the first time .
 France has 30% more cars on the road this year than last, and the longabused French franc continues to gain strength in relation to gold and the dollar . The new prosperity fostered by Charles de Gaulle has not trickled down to the lowest-paid classes .
 Even conservative newspapers concede that the pay of government employees is disgracefully low . Even conservative papers concede that government employees' pay is disgraceful .
 Only 14% earn $200 a month, while more than a fourth receive under Sroo . More than a fifth of those who earn under the tax system receive $200 .
 De Gaulle had hoped to combat the rising cost of living by an overhaul of France's antiquated food distribution system . Nearly every vegetable or farm animal produced in France must be shipped to Paris’ Les Halles market for sale or reshipment to the provinces .
 The reform has been put off because of the cost of prosecuting the Algerian war . But the reform was put off due to the costs of prosecution of the war in Algeria .
 At week's end 10,000 marching strikers tied Parisian auto traffic in angry knots . At week-end Parisian traffic was tied up in angry traffic . The strike is the latest in a long line of strikes in the city .
 At first, Argentina protested just as a matter of form . At first it was just a form of form. Argentina protested . Israel is now a sovereign nation .
 Trae Correspondent Piero Saporiti had reported that Nazi Adolf Eichmann had been run down by Israeli agents in Buenos Aires and whisked away in an Israeli plane .
 Israel's Premier Ben-Gurion replied with one of the most undiplomatic notes in diplomatic history . The Argentines wished they had not asked .
 Ben-Gurion admitted that Eichmann had indeed been tracked down in Argentina and surreptitiously taken to Israel . Eichman was taken to the country by the Israeli government in 1961 .
 Israeli Premier then proceeded to add some flagrantly unbelievable details . Israeli Prime Minister Yossi Obeidallah made the admission .
 Eichmann's captors were merely “volunteers,” with no official status, he said . He now insists that the Nazi’s captors are merely ‘volunteer’ He said they were Israeli security services, not Israeli security .
 When volunteers found Eichmann, he had ‘spontaneously” agreed to go to Israel to stand trial, Israeli note says . Eichman agreed to take his case to Israel, it says . He was found by volunteers in Israel and will stand trial there .
 Argentines get the feeling that not only had their sovereignty been flouted in the eyes of the world, but that Israel was treating them like gullible fools . Argentina's sovereignty was flouted, but Israel treated them like 'goupless fools'
 Israeli note mentions "numerous Nazis" living in Argentina . Ex-Dictator Juan Perén had granted asylum to many Nazis . Present government does not enjoy being reminded of the sins of its predecessors .
 Once Israel returns Eichmann, Argentina would consider a formal request for his extradition . Argentina would only consider extradition from West Germany or some international tribunal .
 Israeli feeling against the Nazi murder expert runs so high that Ben-Gurion would scarcely dare to return him . But Eichmann would probably not go back, even if he wanted to . Israeli feeling is so high against the former murder expert .
 Argentina promises to hale Israel before the United Nations . Argentina has plenty of support from other Latinand Africanbloc nations . If he does not, Argentina will have to go to the U.N. to get the vote .
 Great Britain hosts thousands of African rebels from their homelands . Thousands of Africans travel to the capital from their home countries .
 They live in bleak, crowded rooming houses in Notting Hill and Paddington . They find their entertainment in smoky cellar nightclubs that are loud with West Indian steel bands, bongo drums and maracas .
 The Jumbles object to the noise and the dawn revelry . They are genuinely puzzled when the Jumbles objects to noise and revelry.
 London has another meaning for Africans than just a place to work and play . London is a place for Africans to live and work in Africa .
 It is the city where Mazzini plotted the independence of a unified Italy, Karl Marx labored through 34 years to create Communism, where Sun Yat-sen planned the death of the Manchu Empire and the birth of the Chinese Republic .
 Historically, London has always given asylum to political exiles and revolutionaries . The Africans are no exceptions, even though much of their plotting is in effect against Britain itself .
 Two basement rooms in Gower Street are headquarters for the Committee of African Organizations . The Committee was founded in 1960 .
 Each African concentrates on his job regardless of the surrounding conversation, loud argument and clatter of machines . Working at tiny desks surrounded by trestle tables loaded with duplicating machine, proofs and pamphlets .
 Southern Rhodesian Congress Committee Abroad. At headquarters one morning last week were representatives of Southern Rhodesians . The Southern Rhodes African National Congress.
 West Africans, who number about 7,000 in London, center on the dreary red brick building of the West African Students Union in Warrington Crescent . West Africans number about seven,000 people in London .
 East Africans throng the tall, modern Georgian building near Marble Arch called East Africa House . The building is a combination university hostel and West End club .
 East Africa House is subsidized by the individual colonial governments, but members also pay an annual subscription . The different nationalities generally group together .
 In the pleasant bar, Moslem Somalis sit in one corner drinking Coca-Cola . Kenyans sip martinis, Tanganyikans have their whiskies, and a Uganda engineer drinks beer by himself .
 All the talk is of politics, both international and domestic . A majority held that Khrushchev was right and Eisenhower wrong on the U-2 question .
 The political talk is largely left-wing, and nationalism is still the main subject of discussion . Nationalistism is still a main concern in the United States .
 South Africans sound off like a series of rockets on every aspect of South African life . Privately, and to British friends they can trust, they sound off . They sound off as much as possible on everything in South Africa as possible .
 Family members band together to send the brilliant one to London to study and improve himself . Family members send him to study in London .
 TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 the day. I'm in a lawyer's chamber in Middle Temple in TIME, in TIME . I’m in a . lawyer's . chamber in . Middle Temple .
 Adumah has made several visits to Communist Czechoslovakia, where he has been warmly entertained by his Red hosts . The Ghanaian has been in the Czech Republic since 1989 .
 He contrasts those visits with life in London, where he has lived for six years, with London . He contrasts that with those who have lived in London with his family .
 Dozens of British do-good organizations dabble at improving race relations . Individuals give their time to help run ALGERIA Boom Town Amidst Rebellion .
 A continuous ribbon of new and half-finished apartment houses, new factories, assembly plants and used-car lots flanks the 13-mile road between the airport and town . The road is 13 miles long and includes factories, factories and used car lots .
 Hotel space is at such a premium that many a visiting industrialist is glad to find a cot in the bathroom of any rooming house .
 Algiers was once chiefly celebrated in romantic French novels for its hauntingly mysterious Casbah and flyspecked poverty . The city is now a tourist destination for the first time since the fall of communism .
 Labor's Sir Leslie Plummer introduced a bill making it an offense to discriminate against colored people . The bill was introduced before Parliament rose .
 Most London Africans share either the bonedeep bitterness of Adumah or the puzzled frustration of the girl from Nigeria . London Africans who will one day be members of the ruling class in their native lands share the same frustration .
 The real thing that will solve these problems of prejudice is the independence and progress of our African countries. But the real thing is that African countries are independent and progress is the progress of their countries.
 Only by our achievements as free nations will we earn your respect and friendship,” says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . “Only by . our achievements in . metropolitan France can match. in metropolitan France’s. can match that of France”
 France increased its Algerian army first to 200,000, then to 500,000 men to fight the F.L.N. rebels . The first whiff of prosperity came when the French increased its Algeria army to fight rebels .
 Most of the new troops were reservists drawing far higher pay than the ordinary conscript rate . The new troops produced unheard-of business for Algiers’ bars, restaurants and shops .
 Farmers, vintners and purveyors of a hundred-and-one small items of supply started piling up fortunes .
 At the same time, wildcatters made the first major oil strikes in the Sz hara . The Szara hara is the largest island in the world .
 The big oil companies landed in Algiers, soon followed by dozens of smaller repair shops, equipped specialists and transport firms . The oil industry is now a major source of growth in Algeria .
 So many new jobs opened up that any skilled workman among the Moslem could pick and choose from two or three openings . Moslemans were able to pick and pick from two to three openings, says the author .
 Vane, Nt, FRR ay ae aie aie gen o er Agi. month started asking—and getting—$7o a month. month .
 In some parts of the city, rents went up 4soo% in some areas . The spending splurge was part of the spending spluge .
 Simca auto sales jumped from 3,000 in 1954 to 14,500 in 1959 . Simca sales jumped to 20,000 a year in 1960, will hit 20,500 a year later .
 Monoprix, France’s largest five-and-ten store, expanded from two to nine stores . Monopix is France's largest five and ten store, with nine stores in total .
 The number of stores selling radios, refrigerators, household equipment has increased fivefold in recent years . Radio stores are selling radios and refrigerators .
 What started as a war and oil boom is gradually changing into something more permanent . What started what was known as the oil and war boom is now a permanent boom .
 Dozens of new industries have moved across the Mediterranean to Algiers to take advantage of low government loans (3% interest on up to 40% of the required capital ), a ten-year tax exemption, and cash payments for every new job created .
 Government officials worry about overcrowding in the city . Michelin, Renault, Unilever have made the journey so many that government officials worry that overcrowding is growing .
 Frenchmen have the feeling that Algiers will grow increasingly French . But it is safer and more pleasant in Algier than out in the sticks, says Frenchman .
 Algiers still has its beggars, and seven out of every ten Casbah residents have tuberculosis . Seven out of 10 Casbah inhabitants have tuberculosis, according to the city's mayor .
 What makes the city bustle is its newly moneyed middle class, mostly of French, Corsican, Italian or Spanish descent . Many Arabs have done well too, with many Arabs also doing well .
 Algiers’ one luxury nightclub is half empty on week nights . But there is little of the raffish night life of the typical boom town . The city has a reputation for being a tourist hotspot .
 Indonesia’s President Sukarno finally returned to his country of customary turmoil last week . After junketing around the world for 64 days, he finally returned last week to Indonesia . Indonesia's president has been in a state of crisis since December 1968 .
 Rebel and bandit fighting continued in Java, Sumatra, the Celebes and Borneo . Rebels continued to fight in Java and Sumatra .
 The monetary reform so am26 is a John Titchen—Honolulu Star-Bulletin Hostess An You & SUKARNO . Nine decorations, five degrees, two girls. bitiously decreed last year .
 In central Java only 50 sugar mills were operating (v. prewar), and some 200,000 mill workers were unemployed . Commerce had slowed to a near standstill; in central Java, only 50 were operating .
 Some 30% of a 100,000-ton Swedish shipment of cement turned to rock because no one thought to bring it in out of the rain . Shiny new Czech tractors proved useless in the flooded rice fields .
 Sukarno has always been able to push ahead as he liked with his “guided democracy,” because his opponents were hopelessly fragmented among some 27 different parties . Sukarnos has always pushed ahead because of his "guided democracy" Sukarnas has always seen his opponents
 Sukarno came home to find many of his old opponents united for the first time . The former president of Indonesia won the World Cup in 1968 . Sukarnos won the title in 1966, but his team lost it to the Soviet Union .
 In three months the league has mushroomed into 60 chapters throughout the archipelago . Plans to present Sukarno with a petition of several hundred thousand signatures demanding reinstatement of the elected Parliament .
 General Abdul Haris Nasution, 41, is the army's strongman army chief of staff . The league will be a force for the army, which has a strong military presence .
 General Nasution has consistently supported Sukarno . One of the league's charter parties is the Indonesian Independence Upholders Union .
 Military commanders in most areas have allowed the league to recruit members and hold meetings . Significantly, military commanders have allowed them to recruit .
 Sukarno concedes that the new Parliament needs “some improvements” before it is installed later this month . The new Parliament will be installed in Indonesia later this year .
 Indonesian president leaves Jakarta for a sojourn at the government guest house at Tampaksiring in Bali . He describes himself as “the voice of the Indonesian people”
 Prince Norodom Sihanouk, 37, runs Cambodia . Whatever title he chooses to hold, he runs the country's government . Cambodia is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 His father died two months ago and he was Premier Premier for the sixth time . Then he served as Premier, but gave up when his father died .
 Cambodians voted last week on whether they liked him and his policy of neutrality in foreign affairs . Just now he holds no official position at all, but nobody questioned his neutrality .
 The first bore the prince’s picture; the second bore a picture of a rival leader now living in exile in Thailand . The third was printed in red to signify approval of Communism; the fourth was marked with a question mark to indicate no opinion .
 Cambodia invited journalists from Southeast Asia and everywhere else to show that the vote would be free . Cambodia has invited journalists in Southeast Asia to take part in the vote . Cambodia's vote will be held in Cambodia's capital, Phnomathoria .
 Of Cambodia's often quarrelsome neighbors, the South Vietnamese and the Thailanders refused politely . The Laotians declined because they have no foreign correspondents .
 Phnong tribesmen rode their elephants down from the hills . Babytoting women in sarongs streamed into dusty towns . saffron-robed Buddhist monks padded through the silent ruins of Angkor Wat .
 Prince Sihanouk announced that he was off to Paris for a much needed rest in a nursing home, and probably to decide whether to become King, Premier, or perhaps both .
 Warm spring thunderstorms flicked lightning across the sky, crackled, then poured soft rain on Havana’s tree-shaded streets . The Marxist neighbor is Cuba's Marxist neighbor . Mitt Romney's 2012 election victory was a surprise victory in Cuba .
 Sea birds screech and lovers run to cover from concrete sea wall along Malecén drive . Malecen drive is a popular tourist attraction in the city .
 Most of the prostitutes and pimps that used to degrade the city were gone, cleaned out by Fidel Castro's moralistic revolution . The city was cleaned out of prostitution by the Castro regime .
 In eastern Santiago, teen-agers danced in the streets to the latest Afro-Cuban rhythm, the pachance . Cuba's outward tranquillity was being synthetically inflamed by Fidel Castro, who was crying that the United States planned to do him harm .
 Most Cubans thought a United States attack to be a live possibility . President Obama seemed to be trying to taunt the U.S. into intervening .
 The United States protested Castro’s “slander’ —specifically a propaganda pamphlet charging the United States with blowing up a munitions ship in Havana harbor last week . At week's end Castro seized the Hotel Nacional (managed by a subsidiary of Pan American World Airways
 The hotels have been losing $100,000 a month since U.S. tourists began staying away . United States tourists have been staying away from hotels .
 Castro accused American management of not doing enough to stir up U.S. tourist trade . Castro accused the American management . Castro also accused the U.N. of not stirring up United States tourist trade.
 Castro grew ever friendlier to Russia . Castro waxed more frantic against Yankee imperialists,’ he grew ever . friendlier with Russia .
 Khrushchev's henchman Antonio Nuifez Jiménez presented a Castro Minitra at DriLe . Behind a clearly pro-Soviet line, seething 30 Cuban flag to the top Russian of them all, and soon Nikita .
 The jargon in Castro's speeches and his captive press these days is increasingly Marxist . Castro's jargon in his speeches and in his captivity press are increasingly Marxist, he says . Castro has a history of using Marxist jargon to make his point .
 Major Ernesto Guevara, 32, is the man most responsible for Castro's assassination . The Argentine physician is Castro's best field commander, and a Red .
 One big part of what has happened is brainwashing, sometimes subtle, oftener crude . "Brainwashing" is often subtle, often crude, sometimes crude, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Bohemia frequently plays up historical, deadpan articles on the NaziSoviet pact and the Khrushchev butchery in Hungary . Bohemia is not free to criticize home-grown Communists .
 Combate is currently charging that the Chilean earthquakes were caused by U.S. underground nuclear explosions . The daily Combate also claims that the earthquakes are caused by the United States underground nuclear blasts .
 The government crowd is herding Cubans into mass institutions, including unions, cooperatives, youth groups, and labor unions . Under the pretext of preparing for an invasion by U.S. Marines and “gangsters” from “that decadent democracy,” the
 Che Guevara, head of the National Bank, is in charge of collectivizing the country's economy . The man in charge is Che Che, the leader of the Communist Party .
 A slender asthmatic with an unLatin habit of curtness, he mastered the complexities of banking in a few months on the job . Is all the more feared by antiCommunists for his efficiency .
 Guevara has concluded a twelve-year trade treaty with Russia calling for $100 million in Soviet aid . He has sold a million long tons of sugar to Russia, 130,000 to Communist China, 60,000 tons to East Germany and 150,000 ton to Poland .
 Esso, Texaco and Shell to start processing 900,000 tons of Soviet petroleum arriving regularly aboard Russian tankers . Esso and Texaco were ordered to do so in response to the request .
 Cuba owes $60 million for previous shipments of oil from Venezuela . Castro threatened last week to nationalize the oil companies . The oil companies refused, and Castro threatened to nationalise them .
 Che has built up his exchange reserves to $196 million . Che ignored foreign obligations that now total $125 million . By ignoring foreign obligations, Che has amassed $196million .
 Che's money has gone largely to finance the National Institute of Agrarian Reform . It now owns 13,246,800 acres out of Cuba's 28 million acres .
 Last week 605,333 head of contiscated INRA cattle grazed on 2,091,600 acres of confiscated pasturelands . In total, there were more than 6,000,000 cows in the last week .
 Air Force space studies aimed at cracking military problems also reveal potential civilian benefits . Progress in space research is so rapid that consideration must now be given to projects you’d have scoffed at a few years ago .
 Development of a nuclear rocket could drop that it would be economically worthwhile to import rare materials from other planets . For instance, it could be economically worth importing rare material from Earth .
 Douglas-built Thor boosts another payload into space . Development of nuclear power, utilized in space ships lik Douglas concept, will speec day when man will travel in outer space .
 Census Bureau uses Census Bureau book to classify people . Census Bureau says it categorizes people based on race, gender, age, gender and ethnicity .
 Business Week has its own definitions of management and technical executives . Business Week defines management as management, technical executive .
 A snake charmer, no matter how charming, is still a snake chmer to us . A snake charming person is still a charmer to us .
 You'll never find Business Week in your bird doctor's waiting room . Business Week is a weekly feature on CNN.com's iReport .
 Last year, we politely refused subscriptions to nearly 11,000 people . It was an astonishing practice in the publishing business. Last year it was a shocking practice .
 BW is going to people who really can use its contents in business in business . But it means it's going to be used by people who want to use it in business.
 INRA is running 1,392 collective farms, 2,000 ‘people’s stores, 1,215 new schools, 15 fishing coops, 80 sewing schools . In Havana's 19-story Havana headquarters, complete with piped music and two offices for Fidel Castro .
 INRA’s work, spearheaded by idealistic young army officers, zealous female social workers and, as of last week, at least 70 Russian technicians, is having a deep effect . INRA's work is being led by idealists young army .
 Party headquarters displays not a portrait of Lenin but one of Fidel Castro . Party headquarters display portrait of Castro as leader of Cuba .
 A rash of opposition groups have | Sprung up, all taking anti-Communism as their theme . The opposition groups are taking on both sides of the aisle .
 Nine small guerrilla bands are operating in Cuba’s mountains . A government patrol last week claimed the capture of ex-Castro Captain Manuel Beaton .
 The rebels expect Castro’s headlong reform to collapse, bringing the regime down with it . The rebels are encouraged by a Catholic pastoral warning of Communism “within the gates”
 The United States apparently will just have to get along with, without giving in to, the truculent neigh| bor who now presides over a people the U.S. once thought its good friend . It is a remote prospect .
 Voters in two Andean countries last week brought back a pair of ex-Presidents to office . Voters in the Andean nations have a history of bringing in ex-presidents .
 José Maria Velasco Ibarra, 67, was the only one of Ecuador’s four candidates who correctly sensed the sharply heightened appeal of learning, land, and a thicker slice of the national economy in an agricultural nation .
 Bolivia has no treasury reserves, is almost wholly dependent on the U.S., whose $150 million subsidy has kept the country going for the past seven years . Bolivia is almost entirely dependent on its $150million subsidy from the United States . Bolivia's $1.2 billion dollar dollar
 Per capita annual income has fallen 10% since 1956 . Paz Estenssoro nationalized in 1952 are now losing Bolivia $9,000,000 a year . They cannot fill their quotas under the international tin agreement .
 Lebanese-descended onetime auto salesman who bosses the miners’ union will stand squarely in his way . Juan Lechin opposes firing unnecessary workers or demanding more production .
 Sooner or later, if he is to achieve his aims, Paz Estensoro will presumably have to clash with Lechin . Lechin has behind him the miners’ militia, the country’s best armed force .
 Strawberries grow rich and ripe in the sunshine . But they do need spe cial care .
 Berries that touch the earth can develop ground rot, and the sun itself bakes moisture from the soil .
 Farmers often use black polyethylene film from Union Carbide to solve problems . The film is often used in the garden of many farmers .
 Acres of plastic film are being used on the farm in many other ways . Sheets of vinyl, another Union Carbide plastic, serve as a lining in ponds and irrigation ditches to prevent seepage .
 Silos of polyethylene film can be set up right in the field as a convenient way to preserve animal feed . Silos can also be used to store animal feed in the fields .
 Anyone can use transparent polyethylene, stretched over a wood frame, to make a low-cost, do-it-self greenhouse .
 BAKELITE and VISQUEEN brand plastics are helping to bring you a better supply of food . They have sprung up from a constant search for new and unusual materials .
 Uni arbide Canada Limited, Toronte The term AKELIT nd VISQuE are registered trade marks of Unior roe Corporation UNION CARBide .
 Even with the windows closed, the air you breathe is changed over two times a minute . The air enters through a windshield-high grille where it’s fresher and freer of fumes . The city's air is changed two times every minute .
 MagicMirror Finish Sound Barrier Build + Vista-Panoramic Windshield Safety Plate Glass All Around . Vault-Solid Doors Contour-Molded Carpets and Mats . Contour Molded Carpet and Mats and Mats. Magic Mirror Finish .
 Her Majesty, 60, winged in from her Polynesian archipelago to Sydney, Australia, to have a historical ball in that city’s famed Cape Mitchell Library .
 She pored over papers dating back to 1797, examined the journals of Circumnavigator James Cook, who first saw Tonga in 1773, and noted that Explorer Abel Tasman, discoverer of Tasmania, had paid a visit to Tonga way back in 1643 .
 The Queen is now undecided as to whether the royal treasury would be strained more by microfilming the records in Australia or by dispatching a scholar to Sydney for a year’s work .
 Cuba’s ousted Dictator Fulgencio Batista put up $82,500 in 1957 for a large pink stucco hacienda in Daytona Beach, Florida . Many of the locals began speculating about what sort of effect he might have, as a neighbor
 After Batista fled Cuba on New Year's Day, 1959, he wound up in the Madeira Islands, where most of his household has since joined him . Most of his family has since moved to the island .
 Batista has apparently given up hopes of taking up exile in the U.S. soon . Batista had hoped to be exiled to the United States soon .
 Helen Keller's teacher held her hand under a flowing pump spout and manually spelled out the word “water’s” on the palm of blind, deaf Helen Keller . Helen Keller was blind and deaf when she was 11 .
 Herb Elliott, world’s fastest miler, flew back Down Under and got his first haircut since he had left the U.S.
 Aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, 54, wanted to be the first to travel at twice the speed of sound . The first woman to fly at the speeds of sound was the first female to do so .
 Jackie expressed a hankering to ride in an A3-] Vigilante, a Navy fighter-bomber now being tested . Jackie visited a North American Aviation Inc. plant in Columbus, Ohio in April .
 She soon learned that the line of would-be passengers, including several admirals, formed to the right . She learned that she was invited to board .
 Last week, after turning her persuasive talents on some top Pentagon brass, Jackie climbed into the rear cockpit of a Vigilante, was off for a 57-minute run . The plane hit a speed of Mach 2.2 .
 Owens lent the medals to a Harlem exposition celebrating the Negroes’ advancement in the U.S. Owens never saw them again; they were either lost or stolen in the return mail, uninsured . Owens' four gold medals were either stolen or lost .
 Owens mentioned his loss to an American Olympic Committee member, who wrote to Karl Ritter von Halt, head of the German National Olympic Committee . Owens is now a 46-year-old grandfather .
 Von Halt had four exact duplicate medals struck off, had them relayed to Owens in Chicago . Owens refused to hear of being reimbursed for the medals . He refused to be reimbursed . Owens was awarded four duplicate medals .
 All the chaps I met there were warm, happy, fit, fit and well in the picture . All of them were warm and happy, and well-in the picture.
 I promised the Devil that I would tell everybody what a good show Hell was. I promised to do it, he says . I promised him that he would tell the Devil what Hell was, he said .
 Harry Guggenheim also was born rich; heir to a mining and minerals fortune . He headed two of his family’s multimillion-dollar foundations . He also served as United States Ambassador to Cuba .
 In 1939, Harry and Alicia were married and set up light housekeeping in a 30-room Norman chateau at Sands Point, Long Island . The couple lived in the chateaux at the end of the war .
 Alicia’s new paper was Newsday, and Editor Patterson was born for her job . Alicia's new paper is Newsday .
 Newsday a paper for all Long Island, a lively and irreverent daily that could always find a local angle to apply to the news of the nation and the world .
 The owner of Cain Hoy Stables, one of the U.S.’s top moneywinning horse barns, spends much of his time following his thoroughbreds .
 Newsday President Harry Guggenheim and Newsday Editor Alicia Patterson part editorial company . They are joined by Newsday's President and Editor-in-Chief of the Daily News .
 Newsday was only a few months old when its co-owners split politically for the first time in 1940 . Newsday co-owned the paper for more than a decade before the split .
 Alicia published an endorsement of Franklin Roosevelt . Harry, a deep-dyed Republican, countered with his own announcement in support of Wendell Willkie . Alicia published her own endorsement of FDR .
 The Guggenheims were agreed in favoring Republicans Thomas E Dewey in 1948 and Dwight Eisenhower in 1952 . Dewey and Eisenhower were both Republicans .
 Harry good-naturedly kept his peace in 1956, when Alicia switched to Adlai Stevenson .
 In Election Year 1960, the Guggenheims are again airing their political differences . In 1960, they are campaigning for President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Editor Patterson again announced her support of Adlai, whom she has admired for more than 30 years . She accompanied him on his 1957 tour of Africa, which she accompanied on .
 Last week Guggenheim replied in a signed announcement opposite Newsday’s editorial page .
 In explaining his difference of opinion with Alicia, Guggenheim was amiable enough . In explaining the differences, he said, "I'm not sure what's going on here."
 Alicia Patterson tries to tell Co-Owner Harry Guggenheim how to vote . Husband Harry can be counted on to put in extra two per cent’s worth .
 In one hand he carried a battered 13-year-old briefcase bulging with the blueprints of a big deal . Deal in Denver's mile-high sunshine last week .
 Newhouse is a publisher who has devoted himself less to the profession of journalism than to the buying of newspapers as business properties . Newhouse: "I have devoted himself to the purchase of newspapers in business properties"
 The Staten Island Advance began in 1922 . He has spent 38 years and $50 million building an empire of 14 papers with a circulation of 2,000,000 .
 Newhouse has collected these newspaper properties as another man might collect sculpture . Newhouse collected the properties as he might collect artworks .
 In 1939 he paid $1,900,000 for two Syracuse papers after a single telephone call from a broker . In 1939, he bought two papers in a single phone call to broker .
 Newhouse paid $5,250,000—cash —for the Portland Oregonian without ever seeing the plant . Newhouse never saw the plant and paid the newspaper cash .
 Last year he bought a $5,000,000 controlling interest in Condé Nast Publications, which publishes Vogue and five other magazines, as a surprise anniversary present for his wife Mitzi .
 Once having purchased a paper, Newhouse is interested mainly in making it pay . 12 of the 14 Newhouse papers do. 12 of those papers do .
 Editorial policy and the practice of journalism are matters he leaves to his editors, who do not even have to carry his name on the masthead and are free to endorse any cause .
 The Birmingham News is rabidly segregationist; in Syracuse, the Democrat-leaning Herald-Journal and the Republican PostStandard carry on a constant editorial feud . The PostStandard and the Birmingham News have editorial differences .
 Machlett Laboratories, a subsidiary of Raytheon, has developed two new developments to study the action of the heart over and over on film . Machlett Labs' new developments enable your doctor to study heart action over and on film. Machlett: Your doctor will be able to watch
 He can consult with other doctors, even in distant hospitals, via closed circuit television . He can also consult with others via closed-circuit television .
 Machlett devices are x-ray tubes that eliminate unwanted radiation without affecting the diagnostic quality of the exposure . Machlett's x-rays can be used to remove unwanted radiation from a patient's room without affecting diagnostic quality .
 This x-ray tube, combined with a new “image amplifier” tube, reduces exposure to harmful radiation by 90% for both patient and doctor . The tube is combined with the new ‘image amplifier’ tube, which reduces exposure by 90 per cent .
 The result can often be an earlier and more accurate diagnosis of heart disease than was previously possible .
 Raytheon’s continued leadership in electronics continues to lead in electronics . Medicine is one of many fields of activity that progress through the company's continued electronics .
 Industry’s need for increasing quantities of the two basic acetyl chemicals—acetic acid and acetaldehyde —is being met here at the Celanese complex .
 Acetic acid is an important raw material for many products such as cellulose acetate, vinyl acetate and acrylate esters . The acid acid is a key raw material in many products, such as vinyl acetates, acrylated esters and celluloseacetate .
 These are basic ingredients from which fibers, chemical intermediates, and plastics are produced . These, in turn, are the basic ingredients for fibers, chemicals and plastics .
 acetic acid is made from petroleum gases by a unique Celanese oxidation process . It is widely used in pharmaceuticals, polyurethane foamed plastics, synthetic lubricants, paints and coatings .
 Supplying the growing demands for acetic acid is one of the many ways in which Celanese, through its expanding chemical programs, is serving industry . The company is expanding its chemical programs to meet growing demand for the chemical industry .
 Sam Newhouse picked up a slice of a famed newspaper . Be that as it may, Newhouse has picked up some of the world's most famous newspapers .
 The Denver Post was a struggling trontier-town daily until 1895, when it was bought by Harry Tammen, a onetime Denver bartender, and Frederick G Bonfils, who reaped an $800,000 fortune by fleecing Kansans in a lottery .
 Despite an impressive contingent of crack newsmen, the paper read like a circus flyer . Damon Runyon, Courtney Ryley Cooper, Burns Mantle and Gene Fowler were the paper's top newsmen .
 Tammen and Bonfils raked up so much scandal that they kept a loaded shotgun in their office to discourage reader complaints . For an editorial page, they substituted invective, raking up scandal . Tammen: "For a good deal of it true, it's true
 As the Post grew in power and prosperity, its proprietors branched into other fields . The Post became the first and last U.S. daily ever to own a circus and sell coal .
 After Bonfils’ death in 1933, the Post began to resort to the all-too-imitable . The Post began using the Post’s all-time-imagine .
 In 1946, Bonfils’ heirs hired a new editor Edwin Palmer Hoyt, from the Portland Oregonian, where he had risen in twelve years from the copy desk to publisher . Hoyt was the editor of the Oregonian for 12 years, rising from copy desks to publisher
 Hoyt gave the Post its first real editorial page . Hoyt completed the Post’ conversion into a sober, dependable and stodgy newspaper . Sweeping out vestigial traces of the circus makeup, Hoyt .
 Bonfils and Tammen had scattered their estates among a handful of bank-administered trusts . The two daughters, Helen and May, were among those left behind by the couple .
 Lacking effective leadership, the Post, which had netted more than $1,000,000 a year under Tammen and Bonfils, fell on lean times . Of late it has been paying stockholders a 3% return .
 Low yield, diversified ownership is just the situation that Newhouse likes to exploit . This combination of low yield and diversifying ownership is a perfect fit for Newhouse .
 He has had an eye on the Post for five years, but paid his first visit to Denver only two weeks ago . He has also had a eye on Denver Post since 2009 .
 He offered $24 1 share 1 total of $3,600,0c00—for the 15% block held by Bonfils’ daughter May . May, now Mrs. May, is the daughter of the late actor and director of the film series .
 Stanton and her husband, a Denver interior decorator, found irresistible . Stanton and his husband found irresistible. Stanton and their husband, an interior decorating expert, are now married . Stanton: "It's a life of fun"
 Other Post stockholders leagued to announce that Newhouse’s 15% invasion was as far as he would be allowed to go . Newhouse: "I’m not allowed to buy the Post"
 St. Louis last week set down stringent new requirements for Catholic attendance at non-Catholic colleges and universities . The requirement is aimed at Catholic students attending non-Catholics college and university campuses .
 Archbishop Ritter declared that no Catholic student may attend a non-Catholic institution unless written permission was obtained from the archdiocese . Ritter: "No Catholic student must attend an institution without written permission"
 Students promise to enroll in college Catholic activity and discussion groups . Such permission will be granted only “for just and serious reasons,””
 Archbishop Ritter sternly warned that no Catholic student under circumstances is exempt f colleges, from the provisions of his pastoral letter . Catholics are bound to this edict only as “a matter of conscience,” in deference to the spiritual authority of the archbishopric . Catholics
 A Catholic student at St. Louis. universities in the U.S. is an automatic guarantee that a Catholic student’s faith will be strengthened . Catholic students in the United States are expected to attend college .
 Harvard: ‘Sooner or later, boys are going to have to face the challenge of the unbelieving modern world.’
 Thomas Aquinas stated that an inadequate argument for religion invites the derision of nonbelievers . Thomas said that a sufficient argument for a religion invites derision .
 If a boy at a Catholic college has the impression that his religious problems are not being honestly faced, then he might conceivably be in a worse position than in an atmosphere of true inquiry .
 The Catholic Church has always claimed that she has nothing to fear from the truth . The Catholic church has always said that there is nothing to worry about .
 At Highland Park, both were presidents of their senior class and members of the National Honor Society . Both were recipients of the top award given by the national Honor Society for all-round and extracurricular activities .
 Ensign Thompson and 2nd Lieut. Lieutut. Thompson went off to relax on post-graduation leaves .
 Each commanded his academy's undergraduate battalions . each was graduating class preseach led his both academically and in military standing . Each was a member of the graduating class .
 U.S. colleges continued to honor a variety of professions and accomplishments . Kudos United States colleges continue to honor the profession .
 America’s fourth largest national park, Glacier will be host in June to governors of the 50 states who will meet for their annual conference . America's fourth largest park will host the governors of all 50 states .
 Great Northern Railway had an important role in the establishment of Glacier National Park . The railway had a major role in establishing the park .
 Glacier 50 years Park is celebrating its 50th anniversary this year . There's a lot of fun in store for you, too, in Glacier 50 .
 Just match the needle, focus through the big rangefinder-viewfinder ... and 42 Sao covers the full range from | to 1/500 sec. plus Bulb. plus .
 You get perfect results with this great shutter, using any kind of flash . You get great results using any type of flash. Use the shutter to take photos of your subjects .
 Anscoset GQ’s automatic setting of all exposure controls shoot. shoot.” automatic setting . Automatic setting of the exposure controls . Automatic shooting mode .
 Ring-set flash control makes great flash pictures easy as reading your watch . Ring set flash control lets you control your camera with a ring-set camera .
 Vauxhall is a family-size small car loaded with big-car features . The car fits a one-car family with ease .
 The Vauxhall is, in ‘every way, a family car . Its four big doors open onto stretch-out room for stretch out luggage . In the rear there's vacation-size luggage five, including bouney kids .
 Unlike most small cars, imported 4 or domestic, Vauxhall is austere only in economy . Unlike most cars, it's austere in economy only in the interior .
 Vauxhall is a fine small car with big car ideas . So if you’re thinking of a small car, think of the Vauxhalls .
 A new car is sheer excitement on wheels —a nice new break from the old routine . Even sitting in the driveway it does something for you. Even sitting . in the . driveway .
 All the ’60 models will liven your life—though, frankly, we feel our own GM cars for ‘60 offer more zest than the rest found on Inte Royale .
 There are so many outstanding features in the GM line of fine cars that will add zest to your summer vacation . The GM line-of-the-range cars will be a great summer vacation destination for many .
 Best of all, you're sure to find the car that meets your family’s requirements . Best of the car is sure to be a family-friendly car .
 Spacious station wagons, high-styled sedans, eyecatching convertibles are available in sizes of car sizes available .
 General Motors dealer can quickly it is to own one . Nothing you vill return so much over so long a time as endly endly GM dealer can .
 The Beechcraft can get to a lot more places in a Beachcraft than with any other trans portation available .
 A money-making flying office that can pay for itself over and over . Get the facts now about low-cost Beech financing and leasing plans 4, 2 ym. Beech leasing plans are now available .
 New bigger, roomier Travel Air cabin is 19 inches longer for 1960, now seats 5 in luxuriously comfortable individual reclining chairs . New bigger and more comfortable Travel Air .
 The idea of a stolid German at a jam session seems at first glance as unlikely as an Irishman at a temperance meeting or a Laplander in the bull ring . Write for free booklet, “The Dollars and Sense of Business Flying, to Public Relations Dept., Be
 Jazz has come to Germany in such a big way that the Germans are now recognized by many as Europe's most frenzied buffs . Nevertheless, jazz is still a big thing in Germany .
 The most popular groups at both festivals bore nostalgic, New Orleansstyled names .
 The winning band at Berlin was called “Papa Kos Jazzin’ Babies . The Riverboat Seven of Munich, the Diisseldorf Feetwarmers, Berlin's Spree City Stompers .
 They belted out meticulous imitations of the legendary New Orleans bands of King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton, Johnny Dodds . The band was inspired by the legendary bands of the New Orleans area .
 Frankfurt’s Barrel House Jazzband aped the disk of Dippermouth Blues with such studious care that they even mastered the ascending intonation of the famous cry, “Oh, play that thing.” near the record's end .
 Inge Brandenburg., belted out her numbers with a phrasing and intonation that made her a dead ringer for Billie Holiday . Brandenburg was a jazz singer in the 1930s .
 Although milder American pop music was played in Germany even during the Nazi years, jazz as such was suppressed by the Nazis as “artfremder Niggerjazz” In Frankfurt a few musicians used to rent boats and row back into the swampland along the
 Postwar jazz in Germany was fostered by United States Army bands and Armed Forces Network . There are now about 1,000 amateur jazz bands, many of them on high school and college campuses .
 Other amateurs play in abandoned bomb shelters or in "jazz-houses" erected by German cities to keep youngsters off streets .
 In some respects, jazz merely reflects the Germans’ traditional musicality through a new prism . In some respect, jazz reflects the German musicality in some respects .
 Germans are inveterate collectors and joiners, and jazz gives them a whole new field to operate in . Germans are also invetersiators and collectors .
 Perhaps the biggest appeal of jazz is to the German Griindlichkeit, or pedantic thoroughness . Time of jazz in 1960: "The biggest appeal is to jazz," says the band .
 Cologne Conservatory now offers a two-year jazz course . The course is partly conducted by a critic who writes under the name Dr. Dr. Jules .
 German jazz buffs will write a dissertation at the drop of a flatted fifth . German jazz fans will be able to find out more about the band .
 The pedantic approach has so far stifled any real originality, but it has produced perhaps the most enthusiastic jazz audience in the world . It has produced some of the world's best jazz audience .
 British Cinemactress Dors is best known as a platinum-haired prowline . In her first album she demonstrates surprisingly that she is also a singer .
 She works her way with equal ease through ballads and rhythm songs (Come By Sunday) Equipped with a clear, flexible voice and a natural knack for phrasing .
 With Singer Peterson bleating expressively through his tears, the record looks uncomfortably like a top seller . The record is set to go on sale at least once .
 Bandleader Sagle has a lot of fun with timbales, tamtams, glockenspiels, marimbas, etc., in a record .
 The band crackles with a kind of auditory wit that suggests Spike Jones gone highbrow . For the most part, the fun is more in the studio than in the speaker .
 Brubeck and men, in warm and witty mood, return to the folk materials they have examined so successfully before . The audience is in a warm mood, and the band returns to the work .
 Brubeck contributes some quietly capering chorues to When ZJt's Sleepy Time Down South and Jeannie's With the Light Brown Hair .
 Alto Saxophonist Paul Desmond offers a fine, wistful solo in Southern Scene . The whole group swings with a loose, happy-holiday feeling .
 Composer ArrangerPianist Previn offers some familiar thoughts (Love /s Here to Stay, | Wish I Were in Love Again) wrapped in a cobwebby basket of strings .
 The best thing about the record is Previn’s own piano playing, which comes across dry, witty, and with a feeling for mood and invention never falters .
 All about a chippie named Cathy named Cathy who treats her rejected suitor so scurvily that he feels like a $50-a-week circus performer . Cathy is a chippy woman who loves her rejected suitors .
 The delivery of the Brothers Everly is, if possible, more adenoidal than ever, but their righteous bleats have placed Cathy well ahead of Elvis at the top of the charts . Cathy's new album is set to be released in September .
 The brothers are providing one of the most durable hits to come along in many a month . The answer is they are right there in the jukeboxes .
 The sound on this teary disk suggests nothing so much as four spooks whispering in a sarcophagus . The sound is the sound of a four-person recording of a ghost .
 Alto Saxophonist Carter and Pianist Schaefer romp exuberantly, with the aid of assorted sidemen, through / Love Paris, Anything Goes, You're the Top .
 Actors Equity meeting had convened to ratify a settlement of Broadway's week-long theater blackout . Broadway's theater blackout was the result of a week of theater blackouts .
 Prominent in arranging the settlement was manicured Moss Hart, who treated the combatants like the petulant children they were . Moss Hart treated the pair like they were like petulants children .
 PlaywrightDirector Hart herded negotiating teams into separate rooms at the Fifth Avenue Hotel . The producers had airconditioning and a view of the street .
 Terms of the Moss-backed compromise @ A weekly minimum pay raise of $7.50 for actors in the first year of a four-year contract, increasing $14 by Equity had demanded an immediate $11.50 boost . Equity wanted a $14 increase in pay, Moss-
 Minimum rehearsal pay was raised from $75 to $82.50 a week, will reach $97.50 by q . A six-year pension plan, with producers contributing 1% of the actors’ payroll in the first year, 3% by the third .
 VuUTs in Flor Go, aN OutLaw & Crivit War, discuss costs in lowa and cc fears by suggesting that increased costs could be absorbed in current budgets without hiking already exorbitant ticket prices .
 This week, as theater marquees flashed on, ticket offices were swamped with orders . Ticket offices were once again as scarce as Sunday matinees . Elder Statesman Hart was strikingly pessimistic.
 Customers can cross the Rockies in an ore bucket, cruise the Great Lakes in a stern-wheeler, crouch in a bunker at Cape Canaveral and watch the missile gap narrow with a perfect shot every six minutes . In less than an hour, customers can cross Rockies in a ore bucket
 Freedomland is expected to attract at least §,000,000 visitors a year . Expecting at least $1.5 million a year, Freedomland will ring with coin .
 "Half the West Side bursts into flame every 20 minutes and who is it but Mrs. Mrs. Half-West Side bursts out of flame?" she asks .
 Spectators are called upon to help firemen squirt the blaze from a hand-pump engine . O'Leary there comes out of the heat with an actual cow trained to moo at crowds .
 A cool operator in a fireproof booth turns up the hidden gas jets, then slowly turns them down as the fire subsides, leaving on view the pre-charred timbers of skeleton buildings . Meanwhile, a cool operator slowly turns the jets down, leaving the charred timbers on
 Like newsmen in the 1860s, passengers ride to the battle lines in white, horse-drawn wagons, get caught in a blistering crossfire . Passengers ride in white wagons .
 Plastic corpses litter the battlefield, farmhouses burn and cannon balls seem to plop within inches of the customers . Plastic corpses—eight in grey, eight in blue—litter the battlefield .
 In an elaborately built, indoor San Francisco, passengers ride cable cars through quiet, hilly streets . The city's cable cars can be seen on the streets of San Francisco .
 The earth rumbles, hinged buildings sway and shake, a house—built like a Venetian blind crumbles while-u-wait, a tall monument topples, a high-rise building topples . Suddenly the earth is stopped just short of clobbering spectators
 Riding a trapper’s bullboat through boiling rapids, tourists woofed at by bears, screamed at by wild (less correspondents’ favorite are cats) bellowed at by a bull moose that was shot in British Columbia, stuffed in Denver and wired in
 A peaceful drive through farmland suddenly turns into a daymare as the customer gets what he’s paid for . The video shows a man being chased by a police officer .
 Caught in the core of a twister he to barn bodies toilet seats, privy doors, cows, etc., whirling about his head in the howl and whoosh rhe illusion is com looks up see doors wind machine . The drum spins 75 revolutions per minute .
 Three staunchly anticapitalist visitors were impressed; they were reporters from the Soviet Union's Tass news agency .
 Kremlin announced plans for a Moscow amusement park built on relief map of Russia . The park will be called Wonderland or Pioneer Republic .
 She's the nicest girl Sinatra’s ever gone with . Nicer than Ava, Candy, Kitty, Sally, Shirley, Terri, Patti, Marta, Milly, Lana, and Lady Beatty .
 The tribute is echoed in various forms by many long-memoried observers all over Hollywood . Lauren, Kim, Kyle, Lauren, Kyle and Kim Kardashian all took to the stage .
 Bardot starred in Fox's Can-Can and starred with Elvis Presley in a film now in production .
 Blues, Juliet writhed and swiveled through a German nightclub jazz dance in a flesh-colored skirt . The skirt sliced in panels from hem to hips .
 At ringside table, a fat cat with slowly inflating eyes made an impassioned grab and caught the center panel, pulling her toward his lap . The cat was pulled toward the center of the ring, pulling the panel to his lap.
 Elvis Presley also swiveled off-camera during the interview . “He would make a damn good dancer,” says Juliet .
 Presley couldn’t so much as polish Juliet’s Thunderbird, for many good reasons, not the least of which is that Frankie got there first . Off the lot, Presley .
 She was “terrified of him, but soon she fell for the bony build, dimpled chin, those big blue wisecracks . She was "terrified" of him but soon fell for him .
 Khrushchev was entranced by her can-can, and must have got ideas when she slid sensually down from the branches of the Tree of Life, dressed in blue-green moltable snakeskin, a big red apple in her hand . He, in turn,
 Juliet keeps her private life to herself, yet openly refers to her evening drives to Sinatra’s Coldwater Canyon home . Juliet is a discreet girl with wisdom apparently beyond her 23 years .
 As ‘the baby’ of Johannesburg's Festival Ballet Company, she appeared at 14 in the corps of Swan Lake, Coppélia and Les Sylphides . Two years later she was the Queen of the Wilis in Giselle .
 Juliet played Princess Samaris in the London preduction of Kismet . She also starred in the musical theater . Juliet has also appeared in a Broadway musical .
 A motor-scooter accident prevented her from appearing at La Nouvelle Eve in Paris . Later, she moved on to an engagement at Paris’ La Nouvele Eve, a nightclub distinguished for dancers, but was injured in an accident .
 Juliet met Sergio Fadini in Italy, working in a sort of roving revue . Juliet met a quiet, handsome dancer named Sergio . The film is based on a book about the life of a young dancer in Italy .
 They fell in love, teamed up and toured the European nightclub circuit . They fell out of love and toured Europe together .
 Fadini helped polish Juliet’s acting, her fine singing voice and her sinuous dancing . Ambitious for her, she was ambitious for her to succeed in the role .
 Choreographer Hermes Pan was looking for dancers to take back to Hollywood for Can-Can . They were in Spain last year when Fadini heard that Pan was also there, looking to hire dancers .
 Asbestos-covered electrodes had to be used to weld joints that, all too often, were erratic and of sub-standard quality . Costly, asbestos-covered electrode electrodes were used in welds .
 Smith turned the temperamental technique into what is today the world's most useful metalworking method . Smith turned and shaped this temperamental . technique into the world’s most useful . method .
 Electric welding is a simple idea to take the vagaries and the high cost out of electric welding . The company hopes to use the technology to reduce the need for electric welding in the future .
 Smith progress is continuing to make things happen in welding for the future . Smith progress will continue to be made in welding .
 With the world at war, it became impossible for our country to import the asbestos-covered electrodes that were, at that time, considered essential in the welding of aerial bombs . Pppe pee iit iit The BEGINNING, 1917 .
 Electrode electrodes wrapped in sodium silicate treated paper . Smith came up with a solution to the problem .
 Smith's invention of the extruded electrode ushered in the modern era of mass-production welding . Smith invented the electrode in the 1930s . He invented the first welded electrode which was used in mass production .
 Smith’s continued development of a truly practical arc-welding electrode has grown an industry impossible to estimate in cash values . Smith's continued development has grown the industry .
 Wide-spanning bridges, tall-reaching buildings and low-contoured cars all reflect this progress . welded components provide strength where it is needed, with welds providing strength .
 Science on the threshold of establishing a self-sustained fusion reaction to produce electrical power . The STELLARWELD becomes a Ic al next step .
 The proposed fuel could be deu terium, the heavy isotope of hydrogen found in ordinary v . With the tremendous energy release potential of a fu reaction, the problem is not one of gaining sufficient f § + ity, but rather one of scaling down this energy pote )
 Smith Corporation finds the "better way" in scores of products for industry, government, farm and home . Smith Corporation, finding the “better way’s” for industry and government, is a global brand of products .
 7,000 graduates will don academic hoods and receive the degree of Medicinae Doctor . United States Medical Education Is Lagging N 80 medical schools this month . The U.S. Medical Education is Lagging in the United States .
 The vast majority will be licensed to practice as physicians, swelling the nation’s total to almost 250,000 . After internship, the vast majority of the nation's total will be practicing as physicians . After internships, the majority will become licensed as doctors .
 If the proportion of doctors in the community is to be kept from slipping dangerously during the population growth of the next ten to 20 years, the output must be upped by more than 40%—to 10,000 a year .
 The United States is facing a crisis in both the quantity and quality of its medical care . The U.S. is facing an urgent need to improve the quality of medical care, experts say .
 The twin problems are a shortage of manpower and a drop in its caliber, say officials . "The twin problems" are manpower and the caliber, they say .
 The Association of American Medical Colleges gave a subcommittee data on shortages in manpower and money . It offered a partial solution .
 The goal of 10,000 a year by 1975 would require adding the equivalent of 30 new schools . With the annual output of new M.D.s averaging 90 per school, the goal would require 30 more schools .
 The gap is being narrowed by expansion of existing schools . Half a dozen entirely new schools are in the building or planning stages .
 The remaining shortage is equal to the capacity of 20 more schools, which as yet are not even a gleam in the eye of medical educators . But as yet, medical educators say there is no shortage of medical professionals .
 The Fogarty bill also proposes a $2 billion program to build 20 or more new schools . The Government will put up two-thirds of the cost of the bill . The bill would also propose $2billion for 20 new schools in NSW .
 It takes at least three years to plan, build and staff a medical school . There is still a lag of five more years before its first graduates can hang out their shingles .
 80 schools in the continental U.S. producing M.Ds this year . Four “junior colleges’ teach basic medical sciences for two years, then send their graduates to four-year schools as juniors .
 Most dropouts, averaging 10% (but ranging as high as 19%), are in the first two years . This is a vital and valuable service to the four-year schools, most of their dropouts are in first two .
 There were ten two-year schools before World War II, but several have become four-year-olds . Several of the schools have been four years old .
 West Virginia’s (Morgantown) graduates itself this year, will admit its first juniors in the fall . Morgantown graduates itself .
 Dean George Packer Berry invites all Dartmouth's two-year men to apply for admission to Harvard as juniors . Recent classes have averaged 24 students, recent classes averaged 24 .
 Dartmouth has become so secure in its role as primary supplier that it is undertaking expansion program . Dartmouth plans to double its enrollment to about 50 a year . Dartmouth is putting up a new $3,200,000 building, plans to doubled its enrollment .
 Two-year schools offer the U.S. a bargain in medical education, advocates say . Advocates say they offer the United States a bargain .
 They can be put up for $7,000,000 to $8,000k, or less than one-third the average cost of a four-year school .
 If there were enough of them, they could fill nearly all of the upper class vacancies . If there are enough, they would fill many of them .
 The idea of cutting more physicians’ training into two-year bites at two schools raises controversy . The nation’s population is growing not only in numbers but in sophistication about medical matters, and is willing to pay increasing sums .
 The U.S. went through a similar soul-searching in the early 1900s, after the A.M.A. launched a crusade to put cheapjack, quick-quack medical-diploma mills out of business .
 By chance, emergence of Hopkins as the model, backed by Rockefeller millions, coincided with the rise of modern scientifke medicine .
 Applicants for the medical school had to have some years of college, including such ‘pre-med’ courses as biology, physics and chemistry . Applicants must have some pre-med courses such as biology and physics in college .
 Such fundamental subjects as anatomy and physiology were taught in big, solid blocks in the first year, and pathology in the second year .
 Not until two years or more after he had dissected his first cadaver did the student get to see a breathing patient, and edge slowly toward the bedside . Not until after two years after dissecting, the student got to see his first patient .
 With minor variations, the Hopkins white coat became a straitjacket in nearly all the most prestigious U.S. medical schools . Virtually all the deans and heads of departments now in office were mentally corseted in it .
 The Hopkins plan helped to saddle the United States with at least two generations of physicians and surgeons to whom the practice of medicine was more a science than an art . For all its virtues and its undeniably great superiority over what had gone before, the Hopkins plan .
 The quality of medical care came to be judged by the number and complexity (and often the cost) of the batteries of laboratory tests that the doctor ordered . In the past, the quality of care was judged on the complexity and complexity of the tests .
 A first-year Western Reserve student gets the anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of, say, the stomach, in a single block of time . He starts seeing gastritis patients at once . Western Reserve students learn the anatomy of gastritis in a block of hours .
 He is also assigned to a family; through his four years, it is his duty to be in the clinic or at the bedside whenever any member of that family needs care . He also has a duty of duty to care for any family he has .
 Western Reserve finds it virtually impossible to take replacements from two-year schools for its upper classes, says its new dean, Psychiatrist Douglas D Bond . The upper classes have been taught horizontally stratified basic medical sciences .
 Bond insists medical education in the future is going to be nearly vertical . Bond insists that medical education will be more nearly vertical in future . Bond: 'I want to be able to teach my students that they need to learn how to deal with it'
 If he is right, the vast majority of U.S. deans and professors who serve as department heads have not got the word. If he's right, he says, it's not surprising that the majority of deans are not getting the word .
 Last week, one after another dismissed Western Reserve's experiment as too radical . The experiment is now under way in Washington state .
 Some said they could not afford to try it if they wanted to—which they did not . Others said they would not be able to afford to do it .
 The Western Reserve plan was “far more extreme than necessary” as the product of Harvard professors, Berry said . The plan was created by Harvard's top pre-med students .
 Western Reserve now gets 1,100 students, “attracted by its exciting new curriculum,” for 80 places . Western Reserve gets 80 places, ‘attracted’ by its new curriculum .
 The quality of the student and faculty is far more important than the curriculum, the author says . But the quality of students and faculty should be more important, he says .
 A second, and almost universal, complaint has to do with academic achievement . The complaint is that academic achievement isn't enough for students .
 Each year, to fill 8,000 freshman places, more than 15,000 men and women make out 60,000 applications . The University of California students fill out an application each year . The school hopes to attract more than 80,000 applicants each year to its freshman class .
 As recently as 1951, applications included 40% straight-A students, 43% B and 17% C averages . Applications included 43% straight A students, 17% B averages and 40% B students .
 In most of the U.S., and among most social groups, the medical profession and the physician himself have lost much of their old glamour . The medical profession has lost its glamour in the United States, and among social groups .
 The family doctor used to be an authoritarian but friendly figure, dispensing medicine that was more art than science . It had (in its hieroglyphic prescriptions for compounding herbals) an important element of magic .
 Today, though most Americans have a high regard for their own family doctor, the magic is gone . The magic of the family doctor is gone, though, most Americans still have a good relationship with their doctor .
 They see the doctor more as a technician, making his diagnosis on the basis of lab tests, and prescribing a single wonder drug which they think they know all about . The druggist merely counts from a big bottle into a little bottle .
 According to polls, the public sees the profession as still authoritarian, but less friendly and more aloof . Polls also show that the public is less interested in making house calls than in the past .
 Educators find that youngsters are influenced deeply by current cultural heroes . Educators also find that young people are influenced by current culture heroes .
 There has been a drop in applicants to medical schools since rocketeers and nuclear physicists have held the spotlight . There has also been an increase in applicants for medical schools .
 Other major factors dimming the attractiveness of a medical career are economic factors, such as economic .
 Doctors' incomes used to be relatively better than they are today, when men in other professions can earn as much and with a far shorter education . Doctors’ incomes . are now much lower than those of other professions, with shorter education.
 At least 75% of all U.S. physicians go through four years of undergraduate college, four years med school, plus at least a year's internship, before they can make a nickel . At the time of the 1960s, most doctors were in college or medical school .
 To specialize, they need a hospital residency of two to five years, still with little chance to earn money . To specialize they need to be in a hospital for two or five years .
 At best they are nearing 30 before they can support themselves and a family . At best, they will have to wait until they're nearing 30 to be able to support themselves .
 Physical sciences students can make a fair financial showing by age 25 . Big business unabashedly uses this bait to hook promising high school and college students .
 Overall, med schools report that an increasing proportion of students are from the better-heeled social strata . 43% of med students come from the best-off 11% of the population, med school says .
 This varies widely between states and between different med schools . But this varies widely from state to state and school levels .
 Sixty percent do some outside work all year round . 10% work a full 40-hour week on top of a crushing schedule of classes .
 Virtually all state-supported schools enroll 90% of their classes from residents of the state . Virtually every school in the U.S. enrolls 90% from residents .
 Such foreseeable additions to the nation’s plants for producing physicians won’t be enough, says Dr. John Sutter . Such additions will not be enough .
 Thousands of doctors have given up practice, or are in fulltime jobs in drug and insurance companies, administration, or concentrating so heavily on research or teaching that they never treat a patient . This is a crude statistic, because thousands of doctors are full-time jobs .
 U.S. medical care is generally rated as good as any in the world and often proclaimed as the best . The United States is considered one of the world's best countries .
 Experts say doctor-patient and G.P.-family ratios will not hold this rating if doctor-patients and family ratios fall further .
 One plan for which he has high hopes is to develop the practice of ‘family medicine” itself into a specialty .
 Pilot programs are beginning, with A.M.A. backing, at Johns Hopkins, Indiana, Kansas and Northwestern universities .
 The question is not one of increasing the number of either specialists or “generalists” at the expense of the other, Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter: “I’m not going to get more ‘specialists’ at the
 None of the panaceas proposed by self-appointed healers of the medical profession offer much hope . None of these panacesas offers much hope, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Mechanization and automation with punch cards and computer diagnoses might help a physician to treat more patients, but not the way they want to be treated .
 Wimbledon final is the most serious that medical education has faced since the Flexner Report, says Darley Darley . Darley: "This is the biggest serious issue in the history of medical education" Wimbledon is the first grand slam to be held in the men's history .
 The British girls beat the Americans 4-3 in the Wightman Cup at Wimbledon . The excitement began building with the very first match . Both teams produced a caliber of tennis unmatched in years for sustained drama .
 Karen Hantze, 17, was within one game of upsetting Ann Haydon when she began overhitting in her eagerness . She eventually lost 2-6, 11-9, 6-1, 2-2 .
 Darlene Hard, a power-hitting ex-waitress from Montebello, Calif., came from behind for a 4-6, 6-3 6-4 victory over Britain’s 6-ft.6-6 . Hard . Hard won 6-2,
 Darlene and Karen needed just 45 minutes to humiliate Ann Haydon and Angela Mortimer in the doubles . The United States seemed well in command of play in the U.S.
 Janet Hopps took the first set 8-6 from Angela Mortimer, led 4-2 in the second set . The U.S. led 3-2 on the final day, with the United States leading 3-1 .
 Angela ran off nine games in a row to win 6-8 6-4, 6-1, to tie the score at 3-3 . Janet Hopps and Dorothy Head Knode for the United States and Christine Truman and Shirley Bloomer Brasher for Britain .
 The British girls fought back to take six in a row and the set, 6-4 . The Americans rippled off four quick games; the British fought back . The U.S. beat the British girls in straight sets .
 The Americans won the first three games in the second set, only to have the British rally again to take the lead . They got tougher under pressure and took the lead in the third set .
 The final shot gave the British the set, 9-7, the match and the Wightman Cup . The rose-filled gewgaw was tethered by a rope on a windswept sideline during the two days of struggle .
 Jockey Bill Hartack's Celtic Ash was full of running at the start of the race . The jockey said that no horse could be as good as his Celtic Ash .
 The horse that was coming—and coming fast, was not Disperse but Celtic Ash . Celtic Ash is coming, but the horse that is coming is coming -- and coming fast -- .
 Hartack took Celtic Ash to the outside, and then simply let him go . Hartack moved Celtic Ash into the stretch, taking him out of the box .
 Celtic Ash ran the legs off both Venetian Way and Tompion to win by 54 lengths . Celtic Ash won the race 54 lengths in a 54-length victory .
 By now he must be close to 80, but he will not admit it . Old Man of the Sierra must have been close to that age .
 Norman Clyde still has a face that is unlined and a handclasp that can crumple knuckles . Norman Clyde is best known for his role in the World War II drama "The Great White House"
 The giant wall of granite links Nevada and California with some of the most rugged peaks on the continent . And he still knows more than any other man alive about the wilds and wonders of the Sierra Nevada .
 The First National Bank of Miami was one of our nation’s leading banks . The bank is one of the most remarkable banks in the world .
 Burroughs Electronic Accounting Machines are busy producing results like these in banks and businesses across the nation . The machines are being used by banks, businesses and government agencies across the country .
 The most comprehensive machines of their kind, Burroughs they're part of our advanced data processing line, ranging from accounting machines to complete computer systems . The most complete machines of its kind are part of the advanced data processor line .
 Jaguar's expression of pride in craftsmanship that might well be compromised on a typical assembly line . Meticulous attention to every detail is Jaguar's . Jaguar is proud of its craftsmanship .
 The Mark IX SEDAN was designed in the tradition of specialized coach builders to please the uncompromising connoisseur . It is the first of its kind to be built in the world of coach cars .
 The Mark IX Sedan is a truly prized automobile for the owner who will accept nothing but the best . Painstaking craftsmanship in the graceful low body; hand-finished cabinet walnut and British glove leather interior .
 Power steering, automatic transmission and 4-wheel disc brakes are fitted as standard equipment . Power steering and automatic transmission are also standard equipment fitted .
 The remarkable 5-passenger sedan behaves like a sports car to bring fun and adventure back to family driving . SEDAN .
 Racebred XK engine delivers phenomenal acceleration . Uses only a minimum of its power-packed potential at normal highway speeds . Uses just a minimal amount of power to reach a maximum of its potential .
 Other features include 4wheel disc brakes, level-ride suspension and Power steering . Power steering and automatic transmission available as optional extras .
 He works as a guide only long enough to finance his own expeditions . He can exist in the Sierra for months at a stretch in the mountains .
 The book includes a three-quarter ax, shoe nails and a cobbler’s hammer . It also contains breading mix for frying fish and copies of Cervantes in Spanish and Moliére .
 Clyde is a self-trained naturalist who contributes scientific reports to the California Academy of Sciences . He is also a pathfinder who has saved stranded motorists by skiing through blizzards with food strapped to his back .
 He rarely has to resort to his .22-cal. pistol to kill small game . He is so accurate with a slingshot that he rarely needs to use it to kill .
 Clyde usually hunts by himself, preferring to rely on his own knowledge of his mountains . When search parties set out after a lost climber, Clyde often hunts alone .
 In the early ‘30s, he started after a lost lawyer by guessing that he would have headed for the highest minaret in the area . In the 1930s he started looking for a lawyer who had lost his job .
 Clyde found fresh grass underneath a pile of rocks in a creek bed . Clyde was hiking in the area when he discovered fresh grass beneath the rocks . Clyde found the grass underneath the rocks, which are used as trail markers . Clyde says he hopes to find fresh grass under the rocks in the
 Clyde reasoned that the missing lawyer had recently built the pile, had probably already climbed and descended the highest minaret . Clyde thought that the lawyer had likely already climbed the high minaret. Clyde reasoned he had probably climbed the pile .
 A swarm of blueflies appeared to be a swarm of insects . The swarm was the first of its kind to appear in the U.S.
 Mountain Man Clyde took the long way around getting to be top climber in the Sierra . Clyde took a long way through getting to the top of the mountain .
 Son of a Presbyterian minister in Philadelphia, he graduated as a classics scholar from Pennsylvania’s Geneva College . In 1909 he moved to California by the writings of Naturalist John Muir .
 Clyde put in a dozen restless years teaching school, then quit and took to the Sierra for good . Clyde spent a decade teaching school then moved to Sierra . Clyde is now a national treasure .
 Norman Clyde was getting ready to leave his winter base in a rundown ranch house outside Big Pine, Calif. and head once again for the uplands . Clyde: "It's a good time to go back to the mountains. It's a great time to get back in the mountains"
 Despite his years, he plans to roam the Sierra Williom Blanchard . He accepts the idea that some day he may fall .
 Manager Billy Jurges was ordered by doctors to take an extended rest, then fired by the last-place Boston Red Sox . Reviled by home-town sportswriters and nerve weary with defeat, he was ordered to take a rest by doctors .
 Pinky Higgins managed the Red Sox from 1955 until last July, when he was yanked off the club . The Tigers were last in last place in the Major League Baseball standings .
 California's 57-year-old John Dawson took his third straight title with a two-round total of 141 . Dawson, 57, won the tournament by two rounds of 141 in all three . Dawson won the event by two holes in the final round .
 Landlord Joao Francisco da Silva was locked up for nonpayment of property taxes on the city jailhouse . He owns the jailhouse, which he owns .
 Policeman Robert Vaillancourt pigeonholed the complaint when he that the dog was toothless . A motorcyclist complained that a dog had bitten his tire .
 In Charleston, S.C. after finding no money in the cashbox of the Southern Seat Cover Co., a thief made off with five checks . The checks had been returned because they were uncollectable .
 Hamilton wheeled into a guard rail ft. ft. embankment, suffered in a local shopping center, Clayton St. in Hamilton, Ontario . Go-Scooter Vice President was demonstrating safety features of the Go-scooter .
 St. Louis of Go-Scooters Association fell down a 12two broken legs We Wuz Robbed . Go-scooters Association member fell down 12 broken legs .
 The visiting Fort Knox nine was told by Deputy Warden Porter Lady, “A lock doesn't much to some of our boys’s .” mean , its . Ve THE FOREMOST NAME IN SAWMILL EQUIPMENT FOR OVER 90 YEARS .
 With Wo tr’s HEAD, you get smoother engine operation . Add less oil between drains and less oil in your car . Add the head to your engine .
 Tri-Ex refined three important extra steps . . . and scientifically fortified for superior premium quality . Tri-ex refined three . important extra . steps . The tri-Ex product is now available in the U.S. and Canada .
 WoLr’s Heap is tough . . . long-lasting . gives you more miles of complete protection per quart . WoLR’S Heap provides you with more miles per gallon .
 It is inevitable that none of us will always agree with, or like, all that magazines have to say . It's inevitable that no one agrees with all the magazine's opinions .
 Over the years, magazines have provided new ideas, brought fresh insight into old problems, shed light on new ones . They have served to inspire and advance our understanding and knowledge on many subjects .
 Hartford's 34,000 agents are your guarantee of prompt e Hartford's service to you through its service .
 Hartford Group services include insurance agents and insurance brokers . For more information, call your Hartford Agent or insurance broker .
 Much of the ‘new art form’ is a bewildering jumble of horrors; tortured junk and bric-a-brac, flattened tin cans and old clothes, or simply an old chair with its innards ripped out .
 According to the more uninhibited of the new media boys, there is not much future any more to using only such oldfashioned tools as brush, chisel or paint . The new media boy says there is no more to use such old fashioned tools .
 The burlapbag “paintings’ of Italy's Alberto Burri, the childlike deformations of France's Jean Dubuffet, and the once shocking collages of Germany’s late Kurt Schwitters. They find their tradition in the burlapbags �
 Just as Rauschenberg lets his “paintings” grow into environment, the newcomers seem to be trying to suck the environment in .
 George Brecht, 30, of Greenwich Village, has produced a Medicine Chest . The viewer can rearrange and sniff at will, thus in theory entering into the artist's special world .
 Irving Kriesberg’s Lovers XI 1957 is a double frame of moving panels that the viewer can change and thereby create “paintings” of his own . The viewer can also change the panels in the frame .
 To make Grandmaw's Boy, Allan Kaprow, 32, produced a collage of worn pieces of cloth that were glued next to a fading photograph of a boy .
 The old cloth and the dated colors that a grandmother might well have picked for a slipcover or dress evoke the proper mood, even though they may puzzle the mind . The original slipcover and dress evoke a proper mood .
 The ingredients of art are supposed to lie anywhere, if only the eye is gifted enough to see . The new project is based in the UK and aims to use the country's rubbish heaps and beaches to make art .
 A favorite smock that has become too worn to wear can be dipped in glue and hurled against a door . Red paint mixed with bucket, cans and surgical gauze produces a grizzly montage called Cape Canaveral .
 A 24-year-old Englishman named Anthony Magar has used burned and stained wood, stitched canvas and pounded metal to create a big picture . Magar's work is as pleasing as an autumn landscape seen from the sky .
 In the last decade scholars have become increasingly even toys as well as dolls on wheels . Whatever their artistic merits, “paintings” made out of coffee grounds, torn nylons and bits of paper are automatically stamped—PeRISHABLE .
 Remojadas near the modern seaport of Veracruz. No people little animals whistles legends and gods, or entranced by the people .
 Archaeologists use the phrase “the smiling-face complex” for almost every clay figure that is unearthed adds to a growing gallery of grins, chortles and laughs .
 Like their neighbors, they worshiped the great god Quetzalcoatl, “Precious Serpent,’ the lord of wind and sky . The Aztec people worshipped the great gods of Quetzalacoatl .
 They created in red clay their share of legendary jaguars, frogs, and frogs . They have ever seemed quite so determined to record themselves .
 Even a venerable magistrate, his robes of office wrapped about him, cannot suppress his mirth . The small figures gather at carnivals, dance through the night, says the author .
 A girl smiles with obvious pleasure, perhaps because of a new and unusual spit curl . The girl smiles and laughs as she tries to brush up her hair .
 A boy swings wide his arms in innocent merriment, while another brings a tiny hand to his lips as if trying to hush his own irrepressible giggles . Another boy brings his hand to the lips to try and hush the giggles of his own .
 With the slow decline of the great Mayan Empire, the lesser kingdoms of ancient Mexico were free to begin fighting in earnest among themselves .
 Remojadas were conquered or became tribute payers to a succession of aggressors . No one knows what happened to the people of Remojada .
 Contaflex Super, a world-famous 35mm precision instrument, made in Europe's greatest camera factory, sights through the Zeiss f/2 lens for brilliant full color image . Zeiss lens is world's most versatile 35mm Precision instrument .
 Omaha 2, Nebr the nicest things happen to people who carry > First NATIONAL CITY BANK TRAVELERS CHECKS TIME world-wide circulation . is now Specially cut for PIPE SMOKING only EVELATIO SMAKING MIXTURE
 The bushy-bearded Beat Generation is a collective hair farm that the average solid citizen does not dig . The Beat Generation's bushy bearded hair farm is a hair farm .
 Producer Arthur Freed attempts to sell the beatniks back to the mass culture they are desperately and often comically trying to escape .
 The story is set in San Francisco, the holy city of hip, and describes how a young cube lives with his ever-loving mother and writes nothing novels .
 In the book she is a pretty Negro, but in the film she I want every bit of life,” he announces. “In the book . In the film, she was pretty Negro. In the movie she is pretty Negro . But in the movie, she's a
 The pair make a scene at her pad and drive her over to see her analyst . "They really make the scene, and in the morning he drives her over," she says .
 He flobs off to somebody else's pad, but he wants to write . Soon they are sharing the same toothbrush, but they want to write, and one night they do it .
 She flips but good, and goes ankling down the main drag with nothing on but her epidermis . She flips good, but good. She flips and goes to the ground .
 In the end, she announces that she is pregnant, and he promises to marry her, get a job, straighten up and fly right back to bourgeois respectability . The end of the movie is when he tells her he is pregnant .
 In short the film is basically just a remake of La Bohéme with a happy ending and bop instead of Puccini . Not “THE”
 The Mountain Road (William Goetz; Columbia) explores the proposition that power not only corrupts, but embarrasses, confuses and dismays . James Stewart, as a U.S. Army major* wrestling with his first command, to explore the proposition .
 Stewart has grown wealthy by registering embarrassment, confusion and dismay on the screen . The casting is logical, since durable Actor Stewart has become wealthy by relentlessly registering embarrassment .
 Seven-man demolition team is the last garrison of an airfield in southeast China . It is 1944, the Japanese are advancing 40 miles away from the Japanese .
 Radioed orders pass the buck; the major may withdraw his men by plane, or blow up the airfield and retreat west by truck, destroying the area’s only road behind him . The major could withdraw his troops by plane .
 Aviation is clearly the better part of valor, but Stewart chooses the hard way . Stewart chose the wrong way, opting for the safety of the sport .
 The demolition unit touches off the field and moves out with four trucks, a quantity of dynamite and a beautiful Chinese refugee girl . Combat veterans will relish the realism here, with a beautiful refugee girl.
 Stewart shambles, stammers, scuffs his feet and advises the girl (played by Lisa Lu) that he finds China baffling . As they rumble through menacing mountain country (ably portrayed by a forbidding chunk of Arizona)
 In real life Brigadier U.S.A.F, Reserve Stewart, SUBTERRANEANS” so hairy but just as dull. “Subterraneans” are so hairy that they’re not so dull. The General is a Brigadier
 At first, although the character of Chinese remains as egg yung to him, the major handles his command well enough . The major's command is handled well enough, says the film's author .
 When a bridge must be blown up, he blows it, although the action strands thousands of refugees . The action strands many of the refugees, but it is not the first time the action has happened .
 In an overexplicit curtain speech, Stewart says contritely that he has learned the bitter lesson of power . Stewart: "I'm not afraid to be afraid, but I'm glad to be able to do this again"
 Theodore White's novel of the same name is waterlogged, if not drowned, by too much hokum and handwringing . What psychological sense tains from the the the opaque as foo | the film re-Theodore White novel is too opaque as well as
 In this $3,000,000 musical based on her boff of 1956, Judy Holliday employs her limited vocal resources with showmanly style . Director Vincente Minnelli manages to jog and jazz and jigger a merely midBroadway dling book and some fairly forget
 Judy plays a switchboard spinster who works for an outfit called Susanswerphone . She lives by listening in and sometimes horning in on the lives of the company's clients .
 Judy listens to the troubles (and the tunes) of a desperate dentist who aspires to be a songwriter . She composes (“I love your sunny teeth’) on his air hose . Judy is the star of the show .
 Plaza oh double four double three double three , a playboy playwright . Plaza is a playwright who wrote a play for a play about a play .
 Operator Holliday eventually makes a person-to-person connection . After several sorts of trouble with the vice squad, he manages to deliver the message .
 The beauty of Judy Holliday’s talent lies not least in her meticulous control of it . Holliday has been married for more than 20 years .
 She knows her type to a tee-hee, and she is never for an instant out of character, she says . The actress is always always on top of her own .
 She plays both parts brilliantly in Bells, especially in the brief blackout that describes a disastrous blind date .
 Judy bends the young man’s cigarette to a limp parabola, splatters his drink on his lap, butts him with her head . Finally, as she brushes by a blazing dish of crepes suzette, she goes up in flames .
 It sparkles with plenty of overseas allure, but it’s unmistakably American in advanced design, gendary Japanese thoroughness . Each Datsun is p.g. $1695,o.e.
 Honolu verton Motors, 5967 Lankershim Blyvc 1501 Clay St., Houston, Tex.A., or write nearest dist distributor . At franchised dealers throughout U.S.A.
 A slight, dark Italian prelate arrived in Manhattan without publicity, journeyed to South Bend, Ind. to receive an honorary LL.D. from Notre Dame . Then visited Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia and Washington last week before taking off for Brazil .
 The cardinal's reception ranged from Boston's outdoor banners and hi-fied hymns to a dinner given for him in Washington . Everywhere he met United States cardinals and top members of the hierarchy .
 Giovanni Battista Cardinal Montini is one of the most influential cardinals in the world . The trip was partly connected with the United States elections .
 Among Montini's tasks in the U.S., went the Vatican talk, was to reassure the United States hierarchy that the recent editorial in L’Osservatore Romano did not really apply to the country . Marxism is not an election issue, the Vatican said .
 Vatican satisfaction with Roman Catholicism’s growth of influence and acceptance in the U.S. seems to have been dampened by the possibility that Catholic Jack Kennedy’�s candidacy might provoke anti-Catholic sentiments . The Vatican says it is pleased with the growth of Roman Catholicism in
 Apostolic Delegate Vagnozzi’s dinner was a significant omission from the guest list . The Apostolic delegate was in attendance at the dinner . The guest list was not included .
 Democratic Senators Thomas Dodd and John Pastore, as well as Democratic Representatives Peter Rodino Jr. and John Rooney, were absent . Senator John F Kennedy was absent .
 The tough, bulletheaded little atheist calls on God to witness that his hands are clean and his heart is pure .
 Khrushchev recruited renegade churchmen instead of party hacks to wean Russians away from religion . Khrushchchev was a more flexible kind of anti-Christian than Stalin . He put new life into Russian atheism .
 In major cities the priests earn between 4,000 and 6,000 rubles a month . The pay is equal to the pay of a university lecturer .
 Moscow’s Patriarch Alexei has far more leverage against the government than most Westerners realize . The Patriarch has been seen as a key figure in the Russian government .
 The Moscow Patriarchate had its hand strengthened in the U.S. last week by a unanimous Supreme Court decision . Manhattan's Orthodox St. Orthodox St. Peter the Apostle was denied entry to the United States last week .
 Nicholas Cathedral, completed in 1903, should be returned to the control of the Russian hierarchy . It was completed as the seat of Russian Orthodoxy in North America . The cathedral is located in New York .
 The heart of any gasoline-powered product is its engine . The engine is a source of power and stamina . The heart is the engine .
 Outboard Marine has the right engine for the job each of its products must do and the conditions under which it must perform . The water isn’t always fine Take the waters of the Far North .
 Arctic water taken in for cooling the engine did its work too well . Arctic water was taken in to cool the engine in the Arctic .
 Outboard Marine developed thermostats to control water temperature . Outboard water temperature controls can be controlled by water temperature thermostat .
 Outboard Marine motors found themselves at work in milehigh mountain lakes and streams . Outboard motors found work in mountain lakes, streams .
 Outboard Marine developed its own carburetors that function efficiently on the thinner air of high altitudes, as well as at sea level . The company says it has developed the carbureterors to function efficiently at sea levels .
 Outboard Marine made each component part be tough enough to stand the impact of hitting a log at a speed of 35p.h.h .
 Outboard Marine put a lot of muscle and stamina underneath the handsome styling . All the best reasons why Outboard Marines put a ton of muscle under the styling .
 There's no coddling in a lumber camp . Lumberjacks are a tough and rugged breed, and their tools have to match them .
 Outboard Marine’s Pioneer® Chain Saw needs the best in carburetion . The Pioneer Chain Saw is no stranger to icy Northern winters or steaming jungle forests .
 Chain saw is unique in that it operates far from service facilities . The chain saw is a chain saw that operates far away from the service facility .
 Loggers and pulpwood cutters get their pay based on the feet of their feet of lumber cut . A trip to a repair shop can cut seriously into their earnings .
 You can field strip a Pioneer Chain Saw with just a screwdriver and a simple wrench . So, you can strip it with just the screwdriver .
 Now, add the need to operate when held at an angle, or even upside down, to the device .
 Pioneer Chain Saw has to be a compact lightweight gasoline engine tailored to the conditions it must face . The Pioneer chain saw can be powered by a single engine . It can be driven by a small, lightweight, compact engine .
 Outboard Marine spent years testing the Pioneer Chain Saw before putting it on the market . The company spent time testing the chain saw in the big woods country .
 Outboard Marine’s Lawn-Boy Division mowers can be attached to the arms power mowers . Then attach the arms to the lawn-boy mowers to the mower .
 Lawn-Boy engineers put their power mowers through their paces . Lawn Boy mowers have been put through the paces by engineers at the company's headquarters .
 Lawn-Boy® engines must be able to operate uphill and down dale, over flat and uneven terrain, and through stands of grass of varying thicknesses . Engine must also operate uphill, down dales, and over flat terrain .
 Power must flow to the cutting blade so that it cuts at exactly the right p.m. The blade must be cut at the precise point of power flow .
 All of this calls for an engine tailored to power mowing, rather than one plucked from a shelf . The engine is designed to be tailored for mowing purposes .
 The harder they are to please, the more Outboard Marine products improve . The harder it is to please customers, the better they will buy .
 Small gasoline engines have made work and play easier for millions of Americans . Their restlessness has resulted in small gasoline engines that are tougher and better .
 To a shoe manufacturer, it’s enough foot-miles per year to walk from here to Mars and back . The shoe manufacturer says it's enough foot miles per year .
 To utilities expert, it’s a population expanding so fast it needs the equivalent of several Hoover Dams each year to meet the additional power requirements . The population is growing so fast that it needs to be able to meet additional power needs .
 To meet this pyramiding demand, America’s power lines are weaving an ever-increasing network of lifegiving electricity across the face of our nation . To meet the growing demand, the power lines will need to be more reliable and reliable .
 New power source for America's lifelines is on the way...the Peaceful Atom . Today the electrical power that courses through them is derived from coal, oil and water power . The Atom is a new source of electricity for the U.S.
 One of the first companies to collaborate with the Atomic Energy Commission in the development of the peaceful atom was the Atomics International Division of North American Aviation .
 Today a reactor of each type is being installed in a central power station under AEC programs . The reactor is being fitted to central power stations in the UK .
 500 KW unit is for Piqua, Ohio . Sodium ORGANIC POWER REACTOR developed by NAA offers guaranteed performance using existing familiar materials .
 NUCLEAR POWERED SHIP was a study project at NAA for Atomic Energy Commission . NUClear powered powered ship was study project .
 Graphite Reactor producing 75,000 KW is being installed at Hallam, Nebraska . Reactor produces 75,00 KW . Graphite reaction reactor being built in Hallam .
 Organic Power Reactor of 12,500 KW capacity is being built in Piqua, Ohio . Reactor will be built in the state of Ohio .
 These are true atomic power plants — among the first large-scale applications of the peaceful atom for the benefit of mankind . The plants are among the most powerful applications of peaceful atom in the world .
 It is a reliable, low-pressure system economically favorable for large or small power requirements . It's a reliable and low-pressured system that is economically favorable . It is available for small or large power needs .
 Meanwhile A.I. is developing a third type of reactor known as the Advanced Epithermal Thorium Reactor . The reactor is being developed by the company .
 This project was undertaken for a group of private utilities, the Southwest Atomic Energy Associates, intent on making advances in atomic field .
 It is becoming apparent to utility companies everywhere that their ability to meet tomorrow’s power requirements depends on the steps they are taking today in the nuclear field . Indeed, it is becoming . becoming apparent that utility companies . everywhere .
 As the Age of Electrical Living continues to unfold, it is evident that nuclear energy is mankind's next great power source . A.I. is constantly at work to make sure that this power is available when needed .
 SODIUM GRAPHITE REACTOR for 75,000 KW station at Hallam, Nebr., is another NAA concept proved by successful pilot plant in California . SODium GRAPHite Reactor for 75KW station is another .
 The stock market last week made the biggest one-week rally in its history, rolling up a spectacular gain of 25.90 on the Dow-Jones industrial average . At work in the future through these SIX DIVISIONS .
 The market advanced steadily through the week, was turned back slightly at week's end by profit taking after the sixth successive rise . The market has advanced steadily throughout the week .
 It ended the week at 654.88 on the industrial average, highest since Jan. 2012 . It added nearly $10 billion to the value of stocks on the exchange . The industrial average added nearly 10 billion to its value .
 Wall Street's psychological mood had obviously changed, and the bulls roamed the Street with little resistance . The business picture had changed little, but Wall Street had changed .
 All this was embarrassing to Dow theorists and others who had been predicting a big bear market . Dow theorists were embarrassed to the Dow theorists . Others who had predicted a bear market were disappointed .
 Industrial average in February broke through its previous low and followed by the rails breaking through their lows, the theorists’ signal for a bear market . They had based their predictions on the fact that the industrial average had broken through previous low .
 Chartists are ready to concede that the present “bear’s’ market is over . If they break through, the chartists will be ready to admit that the . present ‘bear'
 The big institutions and mutual funds were coming back into the market in force, giving the hitherto neglected blue chips a handsome advance, along with the glamour stocks .
 30 stocks in the DowJones average did not accurately reflect the fate of many depressed stocks that are still down . But not all stocks were going up, and the Dow Jones average does not reflect that .
 Even during last week there was a sizable number of new lows for the year . Even last week, there were new lows in the charts for 2014 .
 Many traders believe that before the market can sustain its advance, more stocks will have to participate in the rise . New highs must have to outnumber new lows by a bigger margin, traders say .
 Eastern Air Lines pilot called in one day last week to say that the plumbing in his house was leaking and he had to stay home to fix it . Eastern Airlines pilot calls in to say he can't fly because of the leak .
 Another rang up to say that his garage door was jammed and he could not get to work . Another said that he was unable to work because of the jammed garage door .
 Eastern Air Lines pilots crippled the nation’s third largest airline last week . Whatever their expressed reasons for not going to work, they crippled the airline .
 President Clarence N Sayen of the Air Line Pilots Association against Federal Aviation Agency Boss Elwood Quesada . Sayen is the president of the Association of Pilots .
 Quesada has cracked down on sloppy flying, particularly in jets . He has told inspectors in planes to keep a sharp eye out for violators .
 FAA funds earmarked for inspector training shifted to other uses . FAA inspector training is a key part of the agency's budget .
 Directly behind the captain’s seat in the cockpits of DC-8s and Boeing 707s is the forward observer's seat . The forward observer is the captain's seat on the plane's forward observer .
 FAA maintains inspectors must use this seat in order to observe the crew properly . FAA maintains that this seat must be used by inspectors to observe crew .
 Last year after bitter wrangling with airlines, A.L.P.A. got the right to have a third pilot sit in this seat on American, TWA, Eastern and Pan American jet planes . It was the union's way of ensuring that jobs for pilots do not decrease
 A.L.A. does not want to see the third pilot replaced even temporarily by an inspector, for fear it might weaken the union’s argument that a third pilot is essential to the safe operation of the jetliners .
 FAA believes that two pilots are sufficient for safe operation . FAA: Two pilots are required to fly a plane over the United States . FAA says it is not required to require two pilots to fly over the country .
 The first flare-up in the latest round started at Miami International Airport .
 Hudgins refused to take off from the plane . Hudgins was ordered to fly back to New York City .
 FAA inQuesada, stung by what he termed A.L.P.A.’s “arrogant defiance of the Government” Eastern went to a federal court in Miami, got a temporary restraining order requiring pilots to give the forward observer's seat
 New Mercury will be built on a Ford body shell but have its own styling . New Mercury is based on the body shell of a Ford car but will have own styling styling .
 Dodge Dart, built on a Plymouth chassis, is now Chrysler's best-selling car . Ford follows lead of Dodge Dart which is built on Plymouth chassis . Dodge Dart built on Chrysler's Plymouth chassis is now the best-seller car .
 United States will spend $2.2 billion in road building during fiscal year starting July 1 . $173 million more than last year owing to increased revenues from federal gasoline tax . U.S. will spend more than $2 billion on road building this fiscal year .
 Military mail between Europe and United States will be made from Military Air Transport Service to American commercial airlines . Military mail will be transferred to commercial airlines in the U.S.
 Move will bring lines about $4.4 million more annually . Move is first in planned series to turn more of MATS business over to civilian carriers . Move will be first in series of planned series .
 United States GOLD LOSS, which at one time reached $2.2 billion a year, is down to trickle . United States Gold Loss is now down to a trickle . U.S. Gold LOSS was once $2 billion per year .
 In first quarter nation lost only $50 million, lowest since drain started in 1958, as exports rose and foreigners invested cash in U.S. in high-interest government notes .
 VolkSWAGEN SALES in first quarter were 68% higher than same period last year . Volkswagen sales in first Q1 were 68 per cent higher than last year's .
 West German-made car now accounts for 29% of total foreign-car sales in United States . $250 million over next four years planned by Anaconda and Kenneck copper companies .
 The money will aid in restoring Chile’s earthquake-damaged economy . Since copper production helps finance government's expenses, the money will help in restoring the country's economy .
 For pilots who balk, Old Pilot Quesada laid down the penalty that hurts most—suspension of a pilot’s license .
 Eastern pilots effectively grounded the flights by not showing up to the court order and the new FAA regulation . Rather than disobey a court order, Eastern pilots essentially grounded flights .
 TWA, American and Pan American pilots will not fly this week if FAA inspector demands forward observer's seat . A.L.P.A. has refused to withdraw A.A.'s advice to pilots on TWA and American .
 Employment, the most worrisome statistic of the U.S. economy, is showing marked improvement . State of Business Through the Barrier: Employment is improving .
 In May, 1,049,000 found jobs, a better-than-seasonal rise that brought total employment to 67,208,000 . The Labor Department says total employment now stands at a record-high of 67,207,000.
 Unemployment dropped seasonally by 201,000—to 3,459,000, pushing the number of unemployed in the United States work force below the 5% barrier for the first time in a year . The U.S. work force now sits at 5% .
 Unemployment fell 300,000 to about 900,000 in May . Nearly half of those now seeking work have been out of jobs less than five weeks . Those jobless for 15 weeks or more unemployment fell to a record low in May.
 Industry was scheduling outlays for plant and equipment at close to the high level predicted three months ago . Despite the continuance of worried talk about the future among businessmen, industry was booking outlays .
 Government now expects 1960 plant and equipment expenditures to total $36.850,000,000 . That figure would be 14% above last year and close to 1957's alltime record of $37 billion .
 Retail sales were an unexpected drop in retail sales in the U.S. economy . Retail sales have been a big factor in the retail slump in recent months .
 Retail sales in May fell 3% from their April record of $19. billion, a larger-than-usual drop for the month . The Commerce Department reported that retail sales were down 3% . Retail sales fell from $19 billion in April .
 The decline hit most major goods, including autos, though it took little of the gas out of Detroit’s spring upsurge . Detroit's spring surge was fueled by auto sales, but it was not enough .
 May sales of more than 565,000 cars were nearly 7% above May of last year . May sales represented the best daily-average selling rate since September 1955 .
 Within the next fortnight, the U.S. auto industry expects to turn out its millionth compact compact of 1960 .
 The industry last week scheduled a rise in production from 60.6% to 62.3% of capacity . The increase is the first increase in seven weeks and the biggest one-week gain since December . The industry has scheduled an increase in production .
 Four trumpeters of Her Majesty’s Royal Horse Guards blew a fourfold fanfare . The Princely Sales Pitch was conducted by the Royal Households .
 Prince Philip walked past unicorns draped in silks and tartans in New York's Coliseum . Prince Philip was greeted by unicorns and unicorns in the Coliseum in Manhattan’s Coliseum .
 Never before has Great BritRotts-Royce Jet Encrne At British EXHIBITION staged such a large show abroad .
 A replica of a 17th century cofiee house, where Lloyd's of London first began writing ship insurance, and an English pub, are on display . The exhibition has on display machinery and merchandise worth at least $200 million .
 Britain's exports last year reached a_ record $9,676.800,000 $6,317.000,000 in 1950 . Britain's economy is booming and exports are booming, but exports are still struggling .
 Great Britain has opened a drive to increase sales to the U.S. to avert a return to unpopular import restrictions . Great Britain wants to avoid return of unpopular restrictions on imports to the United States .
 To boost sales in the U.S., which last year passed the $1 billion mark, Britain is depending principally on the tried and tested .
 Rolls-Royce Conway by-pass jet engine is already powering newer models of both the DC-8 and Boeing 707 . The Conway engine is the latest in a long line of engines to be developed by the company .
 Sales of nonelectrical machinery jumped last year to $125 million, replacing Scotch as Britain’s second largest export item to the United States . Machinery manufacturers, trying harder than ever, were showing an extremely wide range of machines at the Coliseum .
 London Silversmith Gerald Benney, designer of the ciborium for Coventry’s new 73 N the burgeoning missile industry, dominated by oldtime planemakers .
 Martin found plenty of trouble at Martin . But he did know how to deal with trouble . Martin was a tough guy, but he found trouble at home .
 The company had lost $22 million in 1952, and its future looked even darker . The company was in danger of losing even more money .
 Last January, Bunker moved his headquarters from Baltimore to Denver . He took over personal direction of the project . The Titan had had so many failures that its future was in doubt .
 This week, after twelve Titan shots without a failure, the Air Force put its stamp of approval on the job Bunker did . Bunker's first Titan shot was the first to hit a Titan Titan without a fail .
 The new Titan II will eventually bring the company another half billion in defense contracts . It is ready to give Martin its first contract for a new Titan I-16 .
 It will be the first U.S. ICBM to use storable liquid fuel . Most important, it will be first to use liquid fuel instead of fuel .
 The Titan program had grown so huge that it had no strong central guidance . But the fact is that the Titan program has grown so large that it has no central guidance, it had to be changed .
 Bunker consolidated three divisions into one, switched executives around, tightened up missile checking procedures . Bunker consolidates three divisions, switches executives around and tightens up missile checks procedures .
 He got an engineering degree from M.I.T. during the Depression, took his first job with Campbell Soup Co. at 38¢ an hour, switched to 74¢ . He got first job at Wilson meat-packing company as an engineer in 1934 .
 In 1948 took over as president of Trailmobile. Kearney Co., a management engineering firm, moved on to become manufacturing vice president for Cincinnati’s Kroger Co. in 1948 .
 In two years, Trailmobile’s sales to $52 million, boosted the stock value 400%, sold the company to Pullman Inc. Trailmobile.com .
 Glenn L Martin Co. is the oldest U.S. plane manufacturer . Bunker took over from Founder Glenn Martin . Bunker has been in charge of the company since 1983 .
 UNKER’s biggest contribution to Martin was his early recognition that there was little future in planemaking, especially for Martin, which lagged well behind .
 He began to shift Martin into missiles and electronics ahead of most of the industry . Martin's focus was on electronics and missiles . He has been in the aerospace industry for more than 30 years .
 He got a name around Washington as a man who knew how to land a contract—and the name was not always admiring .
 Hebert congressional subcommittee investigating undue influence on Pentagon officials took a critical look at his methods . Pentagon brass had gone on vacations to a plush Eleuthera Island resort in the Caribbean .
 Martin also came under heavy criticism for the early failures of the Vanguard missile, but has since put the three highest U.S. satellites into orbit . Martin has been criticized for the failure of Vanguard missile .
 Bunker still flies back to Washington once or twice a month to keep up contacts, mingles with VIPs over golf . Bunker still keeps a home in Washington, still keeps up contacts .
 He personally owns 73.741 shares of Martin stock worth $3,281,475, the largest individually held block of stock .
 Harry Hall Ltd. has the latest foxhunting outfit for men, including riding whip, for $163 . The outfit includes riding whip and riding whip .
 Wedgwood sells a five-piece setting of bone china for $13.75 .
 Autos, Britain’s chief export item to the U.S., accounted for sales of $275 million last year . Autos are being hard hit by the United States compacts, which hit Britain hard .
 Some British automakers are concentrating on small vans that can be outfitted as land cruisers . To help offset the competition, some automakers are focusing on smaller vans .
 Rootes Motors’ Commer Caravan is a station wagon with stove, sink, bed that sleeps four, and a roof that pushes up to give 6 ft. of head room . Price: $3,655.
 Southern store owners often fear that they will be boycotted by the Negroes if they do not integrate . Store owners fear that integration will lead to boycotts if they don't integrate .
 Interracial group formed to promote better race relations seeks to calm fears . Southern Regional Council report sought to calm at least one of their fears .
 Merchants in eight Southern cities have desegregated lunch counters . Eight Southern cities that have had lunch counters in desegregation .
 Americans have always dreamed of the great frontier, where the wind blows free— and land is cheap . Brazil's Wild West is the place to explore . Brazil is the most populous country in the world and has a reputation for its hard work ethic .
 Last week many a landhungry U.S. citizen thought that he had found a frontier where land prices were so cheap that a few cents buys an acre .
 The new frontier is in Brazil, where a giant land development push is rivaling the rough days of the American West . Land development push rivals the hard times of the U.S. West in Brazil .
 Hundreds of U.S. investors have bought cattle and coffee ranches in Brazil . They have speculated heavily in still-uncleared jungle lands along the route of projected highways and railroads . Along with Brazilians, Japanese and Germans, hundreds of United States have bought ranches, cattle
 15 U.S. companies are peddling land in Brazil . Spurred by Brazil's great push to develop its interior, 15 companies are selling land .
 A Georgia square-dance caller who wanted a plot of land wrote directly to U.S. Ambassador John M. Butler Brothers is the sole supplier of merchandise to Ben Franklin and Scott Variety Stores .
 Orders pour in daily to Butler warehouses for widely varied quantities and assortments . Butler warehouses are filled with orders from all over the world .
 For each order, identical information must be written on a multiplicity of forms . Shipping labels, bills of lading, statement lists and other records must be identical .
 Each ‘customer impression’ must be accurate and highly legible, to avoid errors in shipping and billing . Each “customer impressions’s” must be . accurate and legible .
 Butler Brothers has found Addressograph Methods ideal for this repetitive writing job . Butler Brothers have found Addressographs Methods perfect for repetitive writing jobs .
 All documents for each order are speedily imprinted accurately imprinted from Addressograph plates in one low-cost operation . Cutting costs is our business. All documents were speedily ond accurately imprinting .
 Customers are favorably impressed by the speed and accuracy of the system . And, most importantly, customers are pleased with the accuracy and speed of the technology .
 Addressograph Methods save time, cut costs and insure accuracy in business operations . Addressograph methods are just one of many ways to save time and ensure accuracy in operations .
 Addressograph office demonstrates how they can do the same for your business, large or small . Ask your nearby Addressograph offices to demonstrate how to use Addressograph technology to help your business .
 Ben Franklin Store in Geneva, Ohio, has been dealing with Butler Bros. for over 21 years . Swenson, owner of the Ben Franklin store, says he has been with Butler Brothers for over two decades .
 Butler Brothers’ efficient system creates a typical customer impression created by Butler Brothers' efficient system . Butler Brothers say it's an efficient way to communicate with customers and customers .
 The Bostitch B12 Standard Standard Stapler is a desk accessory with an eye to looks as well as function . Addressogr ph-Multigraph is a computerized version of the original version of this article .
 The Brazilian boom has attracted its share of swindlers and shady companies . Like any great speculation, the Brazilian boom is attracting swindler and shady people .
 Convicted Texas Swindler BenJack Cage has sold nearly 200,000 acres to Americans for more than $1,000,000 . Cage once promoted a land development company that is now in more reputable hands .
 Singer Mary Martin and her husband Richard Halliday have a 1,200acre ranch where they raise coffee, sugar and chickens . The ranch is only 50 miles from the new $500 million inland capital, Brasilia .
 Many United States buyers have already done well on their Brazilian land speculations . Many U.S. buyers already do well in Brazil .
 Pan American Airways Vice President Humphrey Toomey bought 1os5 acres just outside Brasilia for $1,800 six months ago . He bought the acreage for just $1.800 .
 Mike Borman bought 36,000 acres northeast of Brasilia for $15,000 two years ago . He is now selling it off in 25-acre “Texas Ranches” for $10 down and $10 per month .
 The impetus for the boom is the recent opening of Brasilia and the continued growth of railways and highways in the interior . Brazil's hurry-up President Juscelino Kubitschek is behind the boom .
 Paved highways have increased from 6,000 to 10,000 miles in the past four years . Paved highway miles have increased by more than a mile in the last four years, according to state officials .
 One speculator complained to the U.S. embassy in Rio that he bought 2,000 eroded acres that proved to be a dirt road instead of a highway, and had a dry gulch in the middle .
 Brazil has low capital-gains and inheritance taxes . For those willing to take the risk, rewards can be sizable, since there are low capital gains .
 A change to Bostitch may result in delivering your product to your customers in better condition, saving the annoyance of arrival damage, too .
 Look up “Bostitch’s” in your phone book and call your Bostitch Economy Man. Look up "Bostitches" in the phone book .
 Live fish are packed in stapled liners and containers three times faster than with former method . 65-pound ejector pumps travel safely in cartons made up and sealed with Bostitch staples .
 Gas heaters are shipped in stapleclosed cartons, saves 40 per cent in labor costs over glue and tape . Staple closed cartons are used to ship gas heaters in the US .
 Grouped separately you'll find your bonds listed first, then preferreds, if you own any, then each of your common stocks classified according to industry . You'll find bonds listed before preferreds and common stocks listed .
 The Schedule shows just which securities you own, the current value of your individual holdings at recent prices, and the income in dollars you can expect them to pay . The Schedule also shows just how much each individual holding is expected to earn .
 The Schedule ends with a breakdown summary showing just what percentage of your assets are in stocks, bonds, savings, and available cash . The Schedule includes a breakdown of assets in stocks and bonds .
 If your own investment program seems muddled a bit in your own mind, just ask for a portfolio review . If over the years you've bought a little of this, little of that—and you're not quite sure what it all adds up to now, just look at your portfolio
 Schedule I is well worth keeping as a matter of record alone . Whether you're a customer or not, there’s no charge, no obligation, and we think you’ll find it .
 Suggestions Research can make to improve the performance of your present portfolio . But only if they're really called for . Beyond that, you'll probably get something called Schedule I .
 Only if they're supported by what seem to be sound and sufficient reasons thoroughly spelled out, they will be . Only if there are reasons for them to be supported, they should be .
 Last year Byington sold $1,000,000 worth of 60-acre sites for coffee farms at $35 per acre . Last year the company sold the sites for $35 each .
 In the northern Mato Grosso lands of Gleba Arinos (named for the adjoining river), a German-Brazilian family is developing 750,000 acres, selling guaranteed titles for $2 per acre .
 In the past five years United States private investments in Brazil have doubled to more than $1.2 billion . Private investment in Brazil has doubled in the last five years to $1 billion .
 Land values have risen faster than the cruzeiro has depreciated . Land prices are rising faster than they are depreciating in Brazil . Land values in Brazil have risen much faster than inflation .
 A major roadblock to the nation's private atomic power program was raised last week by the U.S. Court of Appeals . The case was heard by the United States Court of Appeal .
 The Atomic Energy Commission must suspend a “provisional” construction permit for an $83 million, 100,000-kw. nuclear power plant near Monroe, Mich. The court ruled that “it has not been positively established” that the plant can be operated safely
 The AEC license to the Power Reactor Development Co. was challenged by a group of Detroit Edison Co., 17 other utilities and seven manufacturing firms . The group was led by Walter Reunion’s .
 While they raised the issue of safety, their more important aim was to push the cause of public atomic power . They raised the safety of the atomic bomb, but more important was pushing the cause .
 Private-powermen say the unions want to force the plant to be shifted to a remoter area, where industry could not afford to build it, thus the Government to do so .
 The plant, on which AEC is spending only $4,500,000 of the cost, has been under construction since 1956 . It is scheduled to be the first big U.S. plant with a fast-spending plant to be completed this fall .
 No matter what you ship call the nearest Santa Fe Traffic Office and let the longest railroad in the U.S.A. go to work for you . It would be the type most likely to or two pants suits . The better way is Santa Fe .
 TIME, JUNE 20, 1960, perches high above glittering, sprawling Los Angeles . This is a bold home of tomorrow, with a bold new look .
 It is a metropolis rapidly growing more cohesive and now expected to accommodate six million people in the next 20 years . The city is expected to grow to accommodate an increase of 6 million people .
 Copyflex, you reproduce all documents in systematized paperwork from one original translucent form . Copyflex is a way to reproduce paperwork from a translucent form to one original form . It can be used to print, print, sell, sell and sell, print and sell .
 Copyflex flexibility lets you add, block out, or change information on the original form whenever desired . Make copies of the revised or changed form or any part of it as desired . Copyflex allows you to add or block out information on an original form .
 The plant could produce competitively cheap atomic power, since it produces more atom fuel than it consumes . At AEC hearings, top scientists testified that the plant could be operated without undue risk to the public .
 AEC is expected to appeal the decision to a nine-man court of appeals or the U.S. Supreme Court . AEC will appeal the three-man decision .
 Texans in Hong Kong bid to build a new government building . The bidding session was tense and sweaty at Hong Kong’s New Government Building .
 Suspense mounted until the 110th bid was made . Then, while groups huddled together to see if they should raise their bids, the gavel banged down decisively .
 Leo Corrigan, who flew to Hong Kong to oversee the bidding, is his own boss . Complete authorization means he is now the boss of the company .
 He has built up a real estate empire worth more than $sco million by buying up choice pieces of real estate and holding on to them . He has also built up an empire worth millions of dollars .
 He rarely takes on partners , will take complete charge of the Hong Kong property . Wynne will give Wynne half the profits . Wynne rarely takes partners with partners .
 On the site of the old Hong Kong parade ground, Corrigan and Wynne plan to build a luxurious, $12 million, 25-story hotel . The hotel will take advantage of Hong Kong’s shortage of hotel space .
 The hotel will have 1,040 air-conditioned rooms, elevators and escalators, a shopping center and bazaar, a permanent exhibition hall, and an all-glass roof under which diners and dancers can gaze out .
 Texas partners hope to get back their investment in three to five years . The Texas partners say they hope to earn back their money in three or five years. The partners say the investment is worth $1 billion .
 Leo Corrigan built his fortune by getting back his investments from property, then putting them back to work again . Corrigan has built a fortune by putting his investments back in the bank .
 St. Louis native got into real estate when he was 28 by buying a drug store . He soon began building neighborhood stores, paying off his mortgages with the rent . After the fifth grade to help with the family finances, he moved to real estate .
 Corrigan found that his tenants liked the shopping convenience, ever since has tried to build shopping centers into every development . Corrigan: "Ever since I started shopping centers in every development, I want to build more shopping centers"
 By steadily acquiring more property with the help of long-term loans (“Longterm credit never hurt anyone.” Long term credit never hurts anyone. “By steadily acquiring . more property,’s owners will be able to buy more and more property .
 Corrigan rode the countrywide real estate boom. It’s shortterm credit that breaks people”), Corrigan says .
 Among his properties are the Emerald Beach Hotel in the Bahamas, the 1,660-room Biltmore Hotel in Los Angeles, the Adolphus Hotel in Dallas and the Bank of Georgia Building now under construction .
 Some Texans feel that Leo Corrigan moves too fast . A prominent banker confided to him that every year for 15 years he had been predicting that Corrigan would go broke within the next twelve months .
 He points out that he has so many blue-chip tenants that “if they should go, everything would go, including the mortgage companies,” he says . “If they were to go, they would be gone, including mortgage companies.”
 If you're looking for extra money, here’s an idea that might help you collar some extra coin .
 Consolidated, as the world’s largest enamel printing paper specialist, offers finest quality for less . Consolidated is world's biggest enamel printer paper specialist .
 Specifying Consolidated Enamels for booklets and other printed material can save him money without sacrificing quality .
 This is published on behalf of only such of the undersigned as are registered dealers in securities in the respective States .
 A Wall Street Journal Subscriber's experience . A $10,000 mistake has paid off . Subscribing to the Journal has been a huge success .
 The reports in The Journal come to me daily, I get the facts in time to protect my interests or seize a profit . Last year I earned $5,000 more than the previous year. The reports come to him daily .
 Trial Subscription: 3 months for 3 months at $7.99 .
 Anna Maria Mussolini, 30, the late Duce’s fifth and youngest child, has been partially crippled from polio since childhood . Giuseppe Negri, 24, is a $192-per-month pensioner who has been paralyzed since childhood in Italy .
 Yaltah Menuhin, 38, and Joel Ryce, 27, also a concert pianist; she for the third time, he for the first; in Sterling, Ill. She is sister of Violinist Yehudi and Pianist Hephzibah
 Walter Linse, 50, was a West Berlin lawyer and official of the Investigating Committee of Free Jurists, private intelligence organization, who was kidnaped by East German agents in 1952 . Linse died of an unexplained cause in a Soviet prison on Dec., 1953 .
 Miron Semenovich Vovsi, 62, one of 15 Russian-Jewish physicians charged in 1953 with the ‘doctors’ plot’ against Soviet leaders . He was cleared after Stalin’s death and rehabilitated in 1957 when he received the Order of Lenin
 Robert Whitehead, 62, for 18 years a member of Virginia's House of Delegates and an articulate liberal critic of the conservative Byrd organization, died of a heart attack . He stayed out of the 1957 Democratic gubernatorial race in order to avoid a bitter party split .
 Tommy Touhy, 67, once boasted that his more notorious brother, Roger, “got the blame for a lot of things I did’’; of cancer . Roger, who once boasted of his brother’s death, said his brother was responsible for his death
 Joshua Ringle, 69, roofing contractor for Manhattan’s Hayden Planetarium, St. Louis County, New York . Ringle is a roofer for the Hayden planetarium in New York City .
 In 1953, after three losing campaigns against the Democratic Hague machine, he became one of the first members of his party to be elected to the Jersey City Commission; after a long illness; in Jersey City . He was a New Jersey Republican leader who in 1953—after three losing . campaigns
 Lawrence, Willa Cather and Mabel Dodge Luhan; | of bronchial pneumonia; in Albuquerque, New Mexico; in 1960 . For the newest of the new see your plumbing contractor .
 He knows how to plan for the needs of your family .. . to provide ample space for storage, and plenty of room to groom . He also provides ample room for storage .
 He knows the newest and best fixtures and accessories for smart, modern beauty and functional performance .
 Universal-Rundle is the world’s finest bathroom fixtures . The company is known for its quality, style and quality .
 Universal-Rundle is happy to salute the oe Universal 4 Rundle nation’s plumbing contractors on the occasion of the Annual Convention of the . Annual Convention . National Assoc iation of Plumbing ConGeneral Offices, New Castle, Pennsylvania .
 This is a three-generation novel in which the generation is ceaseless, the dialogue deathless, and the drink strong at all times . This is the work of three generations, says the author . The novel is set in New York City, New York, and is published by
 Novelist Robinson populates his pages with gamblers, gypsies, whores, cutpurses, counterfeiters, country maidens, Mafia men, Harvard professors, necrophiles, lesbians, and good-honest Indiana farmers .
 He afflicts them variously with lust, greed, chronic childbirth, madness, madness and death by water, gunshot, prolonged beating and Addison’s disease . They also suffer from Addison's disease .
 Robinson acquaints his readers along the way with the history and techniques of the U.S. whisky industry from 1840 till Prohibition .
 The heroes—one for each generation make corn squeezings .
 Artists operate pot stills as if it were a pipe organ . They mix corn and small grain with water, adding yeast, and adding yeast from this wash . This is what is called the mash .
 Redistilled to remove foul-tasting fusel oil, aged for color and character in charred oak casks, the alcohol becomes whisky . The alcohol is then aged and aged to remove the oil from charred casks .
 Robinson is so explicit that an attentive reader with no fear of federal agents could try it himself . Robinson's explicit sexual content is so clear that readers could try to read it themselves . Robinson is the author of the novel, which is published in New York City .
 The real villains of the novel are the unscrupulous distillers, who add prune juice to grain neutral spirits . The temperance wowiuthor writes of malefactors with great eloquence and contempt accusing the mankind for profit .
 The land he de scribes contains no skinny women or frail all sexual union is of seismic sity . Heroines rise to wealth and power but men intenpay with fearsome personal tragedy . Heroine's love of the land he scribes .
 Robinson's book is entertaining enough, but it's not much easier to swallow than Moliére’s convention that all husbands are cuckolds or Homer's that all heroes above the rank of lieutenant colonel enjoy godly guidance .
 Author wrote a muchadmired exegesis of Finnegans Wake (with Joseph Campbell) as well as bestseller tbout a clerical Organization Man called The Cardinal .
 Unlike Taylor Caldwell. who writes the same sort of novel with more earnestness and less skill, he stops every few chapters and snickers at himself with a pun or a Dos Passosian aside . Unlike Caldwell. for instance .
 The English are said to dearly love a lord, and the second Lord Redesdale is there to prove that they dote on a dotty peer . He has six daughters, mostly zany, mostly blonde, mostly white .
 An impressive photograph of the six Honorable Misses Freeman-Mitford, in their ironclad British tweeds, appears in this autobiography by one of them .
 Unity Valkyrie Freeman-Mitford is usually described in the tabloids as Hitler's girl friend . She is usually seen as the one glowering on the left would be Unity Valkyrie, Unity Valkyrie .
 Her hands are clasped just below her midriff . That would explain why she is standing, as Hitler did when he was not saluting, with her hands .
 Next, Deborah, scowling prettily in jodhpurs, would be the Mitford who married a duke . Not just any duke, but the Duke of Devonshire who still swings a lot of weight .
 The next one emerges from her tweeds with a less sympathetic expression . The next time she emerges is the next one with a sympathetic expression.
 Diana married one of Britain’s mighty brewers —Bryan Guinness, stout feller— but got divorced and married English Fascist Sir Oswald Mosley . Diana got divorced from Guinness and Mosley and got married to Mosley.
 Jessica married a Red, Esmond Romilly, but then, he was a nephew of Sir Tue Mirrorp Grr_s & Brotu . Her Tom read Karl Marx .
 Pamela Mitford was so fond of horses she married a sometime jockey . The Mitford on the far right, Pamela, married a jockey. Pamela's husband was also a horse trainer .
 The one with the dog married (and divorced) Peter Murray Rennell Rodd, whose business she described as “sailing small boats” today she is the most famous member of the family .
 Nancy writes novels and biographies . She invented the U-game, by which it can be determined who is out of, and who is not out of the top drawer .
 The dim male figure smiling uneasily in the midst of these splendid figures is a male Mitford of whom nobody has ever heard . Nobody has heard of the Mitford, but nobody has heard him .
 Daughters and Rebels is Jessica's sprightly chronicle of the family . Readers may find any residual curiosity about the family amply answered .
 David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, second Baron Redesdale, had the reputation of being a slightly gaga aristocrat . Even before this and other events in his daughters’ lives had given him cause .
 Hitler took Hitler seriously as a Fascist sympathizer, but few others took him seriously on anything . Hitler took his views seriously, but many others did not .
 Unseen molecular structures make an all-important difference in quality and value . You can't see the difference but your jeweler can tell. Unseen molecules make all the important difference .
 Ordinary Motor Oil or RomILty TENDING Bar . The witches turned out to be real. The witches were real .
 He was against it—on the grounds that the proposals struck at the foundations of Christianity . The proposal was rejected by Pope Francis, who died in 1953 .
 Even the Conservative press laughed at his views, as did his six daughters . Even his daughters also laughed at him .
 As a parsimonious peer bringing up six daughters in a diminishing series of houses where plumbing had not been much improved since the Black Death, his lordship knew how inconvenient females can be .
 The reader who feels at this stage that he has wandered into an early Evelyn Waugh novel will not be far wrong . The book is a collection of works by Waugh, with some of the world's most famous writers .
 Waugh might indeed have written another Decline and Fall based on Jessica’s chronicle, There is even a Waughlike Mitford uncle who was the author of one book, a privately printed volume of his letters to the London Times .
 The madcap Mitford story charts some of the more alarming symptoms of a class in deep trouble with history and itself . But more than the shortage of sheep droppings is needed to explain the anemia of English society .
 They even had a private language, examples of which are mercilessly given . They were mercilessly mocked for their language, including the use of private language .
 Nature's MIRACLE MOLECULE in Pennsylvania motor oils assures superior lubrication . Nature's "miracle molycule" in Pennsylvania lubrication assures superior motor oils .
 WIGISIS SIMMONS created a mattress after consulting a group of doctors . Simmons created the mattress with back-to-back care with a built-in bed .
 Doctors knew that no mattress can cure a backache due to injury or spinal ailment . The doctors knew that . no mattress . can cure . No mattress can . cure a . backache .
 Simmons could do something about backache caused by mattress that sags . But they figured Simmons could help alleviate it .
 Back Care With Built-in Bedboard is Back Care with Built-In Bedboard . Back Care has been approved by doctors for more than 30 years . The Back Care mattress has built-in bed boards .
 The board, made of impregnated natural fibers, is in the middle of the mattress and runs the entire length . The board is made of natural fibers . The mattress is made from a mattress made of a board made of fibers .
 Even the hardest mattress can develop sag, and the bedboard is ineffective under a sagging mattress . Bedboard boards are ineffective under sagging mattresses .
 Boud took to scratching swastikas on the window (she had a diamond, of course) Decca just naturally scratched hammer-andsickles over them .
 There is something magnificently arrogant about the way Boud and Decca extracted the last yard of mileage out of their hyphens as they joined forces . Fascist and Communist—dedicated to the destruction of aristocracy, Boud is arrogant .
 Boud, before she met Hitler, insisted on taking her pet rat to debutante balls . Boud insisted on going with her pet to debutantes balls . Hitler met Hitler in 1938 .
 Decca raided Eton College chapel and decamped with a carload of top hats . With Philip Toynbee, Decca raided the chapel with a top hat . Decca also raided the chapel of Eton in the 1960s .
 Esmond Romilly ran away from school to publish Out of Bounds, an anti-prefect, proCommunist magazine . The magazine reached a circulation of 3,000 largely in Britain's most exclusive schools .
 Have him she did, for a fringe existence in proletarian Rotherhithe (a tough Thameside district of London)
 Jessica's autobiography is really a more touching story than its surface goofiness would suggest . Jessica's memoir is a touching story that's more than just a joke .
 The Romillys were guests of the “liberal” rich, pets of the left-wing intelligentsia . Soon after the baby died in 1938, they moved to the U.S. where the same pattern continued .
 After a worried interval while he decided whether the imperialists would really fight against Fascism, he volunteered in Canada and was killed in action in 1941 .
 His widow leaves the story at that point, but there are a couple of footnotes . The widow of the writer dies .
 Jessica, married to Hungarian-born Lawyer Robert Treuhaft of Oakland, Calif., had called their son Tito, but renamed him for Lenin after Yugoslavia was expelled from Cominform .
 Christopher Robin is reading Karl Marx . Christopher Robin reads Karl Marx. Christopher Robin, the son of Christopher Robin. The Marxist .
 It's hard to see why some publisher has not established a Graves-of-the-Month Club . The club is a club dedicated to Graves of the Month .
 The British man of letters can produce a book of high quality in the time it takes an ordinary author to write a letter asking his publisher for an advance .
 The new book is a translation of a tragicomic roth century Spanish tale of high deeds, broken hearts and bloody deaths .
 Graves, both as translator and author of the introduction, is an effective guide to the modern reader . Graves is the translator for the novel, but Graves is a good guide .
 Pedro Antonio de Alarcén lived from 1833 to 1891 . He was a crusading young liberal editor and atheist, an unsuccessful playwright, a successful politician and a conservative author .
 Alarcon wrote The Jnfant with the Globe as a bantering, ironic commentary on his own youth . Alarcén’s hero is an impossibly noble, handsome and athletic young caballero named Manuel .
 Shylock, whose exactions drove Manuel's father to his death, blocks Manuel's marriage and informs him that part of his father’s huge debt is still unpaid . This pinch-souled Shylocks drives Manuel to his father's death, not only .
 In the best Andalusian tradition, Manuel leaves town to seek his fortune, vowing to return, pay the debt, marry Soledad . He vows to throttle any man who has looked at her .
 Manuel returns seven years later rich as Cortes, but Soledad, to escape a nun’s life, has married . Cortes returns to Cortes' life seven years after he returns rich but has married a nun .
 At first the village priest persuades the blighted lover to set vengeance aside, but at last Manuel forces an ending so bloody—and romantic—as to put Carmen to shame . The film is based on the novel "Carmen" by Carmen's friend, Manuel .
 This is more than melodrama, Translator Graves easily persuades the reader . Graves easily persuaded the reader of the book, Graves says .
 His gentle irony is aimed partly at the lofty aspirations of youth, and also, less obviously, at the easy compromises of age .
 The author's characters, particularly those that are, part of, self-caricatures, are drawn with accuracy and wit .
 Novelist Pierce’s skilled hands make the novel almost new . The variation on the theme is how in shoring up the fragments she found a little of herself as well .
 For “Miss Ellen” Gray, the well-bred widow who is the wispy heroine of Pierce’s story, self-discovery is not easy . For ‘Miss Ellen,’ Gray, a well-known widow, it's not easy to
 She spent her prewar life in an indolent dreamworld as soft and sheltered as a cotton boll, with endless maids and mammies tending every want that a dutiful husband and son could not fulfill .
 The war killed both, and drove Miss Ellen from the family plantation to live with relatives in Raleigh . Even then, even then, her gentility was scarcely damaged .
 In June 1865 she returns home with her widowed daughter-in-law, “Miss Lucy,” and her grandson Garrett . It is as if the March through Georgia had been no more than some annoyingly loud parade .
 Miss Ellen finds it hard to understand why her plantation fields are untilled and weed-crested . Her mansion ransacked, her retainers gone or too old to work .
 Under Miss Lucy’s direction the house begins to live again, but Miss Ellen withdraws to the calm solace of memories .
 Miss Lucy learns that a widowed war veteran has helped Miss Lucy hire labor for the field, that the estate may have to be sold for taxes . In time she learns that the widowed veteran's widow has helped hire labor .
 Miss Lucy has rejected the man’s proposal of marriage . She learns, too, that for her sake Miss Lucy rejects the proposal .
 At novel's end, in the one great loving act of her sheltered life, Miss Ellen prepares for a visit to Raleigh from which she will never return, setting Miss Lucy free . Miss Lucy is freed by Miss Ellen and Miss Ellen's mother .
 Author Pierce’s impressive first novel, On a Lonesome Porch, suffers from literary jerry-building . Compared with The Plantation (Time March 2, 1953)
 What saves it is its flexible prose, which can gallop in tense, comma-strewn sentences when Northern cavalry slashes through Carolinas .
 When Pierce softly traces Miss Ellen’s genteel footsteps, he enlivens in a rare, vivid way the mind of the Old South . Pierce's book is set in New York and London .
 Autocar’s ‘A’ series models cut up to 25 % off chassis weight while retaining every ounce of strength and “go” power . reefer operators are getting aboard the 'A' series models . The ‘‘A'’
 The A7564T diesel is virtually an all-aluminum structure from frame to roof of cab . Yet it's rugged yet it’s rugged . The A764T is virtually all- aluminum .
 Each Autocar is custom-engineered for its job and built for trouble-free performance . Hauling perishables or anything else, each Autoccar is custom built for its purpose .
 A Lesson in Love, Smiles of a Summer Night, is Bergman's latest film . In it, the female is a far more cunning and vigorous specimen than the male .
 The film traces the rise of an organization man (Jack Lemmon) who turns his Manhattan apartment into a walk-up tourist cabin for his lecherous bosses . It packs a sharp moral without stooping to moralizing .
 The camera eye follows a Los Angeles divorcee’s futile quest for love, savagely exposes her mind's myths but forgets to respond to her heart .
 Love redeems even the horror of acres of charred and moaning humanity in this New Wave . New Wave is a New Wave that rises with atomic power and breaks with poetic beauty .
 Thurber’s The Cathird Seat is transposed into a grand piece of sustained nonsense . Funnyman Peter Sellers as the bookkeeper with a double-entry personality .
 Sellers again as a union shop steward who will make a speech at the drop of an aitch . Film that takes a cracking good satirical look at labor-management relations in England .
 A program of American folk songs from colonial times to the ‘30s includes a thorough anthology of the blues; talkin’, big-city, and barrelhouse .
 End of the Line is a title worthy of the program's narrator, Edward Roscoe Murrow . The program airs on PBS at 8.30 p.m. ET on Monday .
 Murrow examines the 15-year history of West Berlin . Includes interviews with West Germany’s Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and West Berlin's Mayor Willy Brandt . Murrow: West Berlin was West Berlin in the 1960s .
 Rod Serling’s The Mighty Casey tries hard not to strike out, features a mechanical robot who pitches for the Hoboken Zephyrs .
 NBC's cameras watch over the 16th, 17th and 18th holes at Denver's Cherry Hills Country Club . NBC cameras will be on the course at the end of the round .
 Fight Fan James Cagney interviews the two heavyweights on the eve of their return bout . Film of Johansson’s earlier victory over Patterson is technically analyzed by Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney .
 Shelley Berman is seen again in the episode about a nightclub comic who hires Gunn to protect him from his wife . Shelley Berman appears again in a new episode of the series .
 The TV cousins of Hollywood's Oscars are presented in a package that salves both losers and viewers with guest entertainment by Comedians Bob Newhart, Elaine May and Mike Nichols . The show airs on NBC at 8 p.m. ET on Sunday .
 Japan’s classical, all-male acting company is performing in the U.S. for the first time in history . The company provides a rich—if necessarily academic—experience for American audiences .
 Jack Gelber makes a devastating assault on theatrical illusion, presents a pad full of junkies in a formless, utterly naturalistic play that has sporadic distinction . Off Broadway The Connection .
 Lee Pockriss’ engaging music grafts smoothly onto Oscar Wilde's The Importance of Being Earnest . The adaptation is careful not to shatter the original's cut-glass dialogue .
 The most phenomenal off-Broadway success since The Threepenny Opera . The farce parodies the sugarglazed operettas of yesteryear’s Kerns and Frimls .
 The flamboyant French airman wrote Wind, Sand and Stars and The Little Prince . The book is flawed by grandiloquence, but is worth reading about in this biography .
 The author gives a detailed and fascinating solution to one of the least urgent problems of the century —how to bring up a lion as a pet .
 For Humanist Kazantzakis, God was, essentially, the search for God . This book of aphorisms shows the intense spiritual longing of modern Greece’s most noted writer .
 A Saroyanesque merry-go-round, spinning to music not always merry, about Italian immigrants in West Hoboken . The scene of the author's famed first novel, Christ in Concrete, was the scene of his first novel . The book is set in New York City
 At 53 the poet is still shrewd, amusing, and prodigiously talented . There may be nothing very new in this collection of Auden's recent poems .
 With torrents of prose, marvelously antic characters and more than enough plot, author follows the capricious hero of two earlier novels .
 The author later found it advisable to become a docile party-liner, but in the 1920s, when he wrote the short fiction pieces in this paperback collection, he was one of Communism's most caustic satirists .
 The poet's wryly cantankerous wit and charm remain the same . Although his form ranges from essay to lecture to story, the poet's wit remains the same.
 Trustee from the Toolroom, Shute The Constant Image, Davenport Ahwh— 6.6.5.5 . Trustee of the Tool Room is Shute Shute the Constant Image . Shute is a former member of the Shute family .
 Canadian Club is “The Best In The House” 1. Hollywood Rajah, Crowther * Position on last week's list was last week’s top spot .
 I got set for the crash, Then | saw the I'd never reach the surface again and | began to skipper waiting at the rail to intercept me . I got ready to crash, then saw the . I'd . never reached the . surface again .
 Canadian Club has a flavor so distinctive, they all. What’s more, Canadian Club is lightest of Canadian Club . What's more than Canadian Club can be the lightest .
 Of the world’s great whisin cocktails before dinner, highballs kies. the lightest are Scotch and Canadian . aller, Try it tonight.