 When Kennedy took office, he faced the spread of communism abroad and the threat of nuclear war . Kennedy faced the Cold War when he took office in 1961 . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 He led the nation through the Cuban missile crisis, negotiated the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, and helped the U.S. win the space race . He also negotiated the nuclear test ban Treaty .
 Kennedy’s domestic agenda called for equality and educational and economic opportunities for all . Kennedy's domestic agenda was based on equality and economic opportunity for all.
 He initiated programs to defeat poverty and extend Social Security benefits . Though a conservative Congress stalled many of his proposals, he initiated some programs .
 President Johnson carried out Kennedy’s legacy — and created his own — through the programs of the Great Society . Johnson's Great Society was one of the programs he created .
 While Johnson was President, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act and the 1964 Economic Opportunity Act . Medicare and Medicaid were created during his presidency .
 TheThe Kennedy and Cold War Johnson Years Begins Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 Objectives • Explain the steps Kennedy took to change American foreign policy .
 When Kennedy took office, he faced the spread of communism abroad and the threat of nuclear war . Kennedy faced a series of challenges, including the threat to nuclear war in the U.S. He faced a wide range of challenges .
 His enthusiasm and commitment to change offered hope that the challenges of the Cold War could be met . His enthusiasm offered hope to meet the challenges he faced, he said .
 John F Kennedy won a close presidential election in 1960, defeating Richard M Nixon . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 .
 Kennedy launched a new Cold War strategy . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War . Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 .
 Peace Corps sent American volunteers to developing nations to assist with such services as education and healthcare . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Begins .
 The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Begins . The sudden threat of Castro and Communism in nearby Cuba led to two major confrontations . The Cold War began in the 1950s .
 In April, 1961 the United States invaded Cuba’s Bay of Pigs . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 .
 The invasion involved Cuban exiles who had fled Castro’s rule and settled in the United States . Conceived by the CIA to overthrow Fidel Castro, the invasion involved exiles .
 The President said he would Kennedy took responsibility continue to resist efforts . by the communists to control other countries in . Western Hemisphere .
 The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Begins . The missiles at these Cuban sites threatened major cities in the United States. The missiles also threatened major U.S. cities .
 To resolve the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy worked In Public Behind the Scenes . Kennedy told the Soviets that Kennedy blamed Khrushchev the United States would for reckless action that removed United States missiles .
 Turkey and Italy if the Soviets Kennedy initiated a U.S. removed their missiles from naval blockade of Cuba . Kennedy initiated the move to remove missiles from Cuba .
 The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War begins . After six tense days, the Soviets backed off. The Soviets back off.
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to honor the blockade and removed the missiles . The blockade was lifted and the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union territory .
 Washington, D.C. and Moscow set up hot line to improve communication . Hot line was set up between Washington and Moscow to improve communications .
 In 1963 the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, signed the first Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . This treaty ended and thirty-six above-ground other countries nuclear testing . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Begins .
 Disagreement over Berlin led to the building of the Berlin Wall . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 .
 Khrushchev insisted the U.S. end its military presence in West Berlin . Kennedy refused to end his military presence there . Kennedy's refusal to end military presence led to the end of the military presence .
 Khrushchev ordered the building of the Berlin Wall separating East and West Berlin . The Wall was built between the two sides of the divided Berlin wall .
 In response to Khrushchev’s actions, Kennedy requested a large increase in military spending . The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War .
 The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 . The Berlin Wall became a symbol of the gulf between the democratic West the andcommunist the communist East East .
 He succeeded in making some domestic policy changes regarding poverty and racial discrimination . The space race spurred interest in the space race .
 President Kennedy had a special style that made him seem different from other politicians . The Cold War Begins .
 Kennedy promised America a New Frontier . The Cold War begins .
 Some of President Kennedy’s New Frontier proposals succeeded . The Cold War Begins. The Cold Cold War begins .
 Kennedy’s economic initiatives led to tremendous economic growth in the late 1960s . The Cold War began in the Cold War .
 Kennedy introduced a civil rights bill in 1963 . Civil rights marches and demonstrations took place all across the country . The Cold War begins .
 He proposed to strengthen civil rights in response to the violence in the South . He also proposed strengthening civil rights .
 Kennedy recognized the need for the U.S. to beat the Soviet Union in the space race . The Cold War Begins .
 Congress gave generous funding to NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . NASA is the largest government agency in the world .
 In July, 1969, an American flag flew on the moon . The ColdKennedy’s War Begins. The Cold War Begins .
 In November, 1963, while riding in a motorcade in Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was assassinated . The ColdKennedy’s War Begins .
 After Kennedy’s death, Vice President Johnson was sworn in as the new President . The Cold War begins after Kennedy's death .
 The nation moved to resolve the economic and equality issues Kennedy had identified . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy's assassination was the first major national tragedy since his assassination .
 Johnson also appointed the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination of President Kennedy . The Warren Commission was appointed by President Johnson in 1964 .
 The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 1 Objectives • Evaluate Johnson's policies up to his victory in the 1964 presidential election .
 After Vice President Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as President, he worked for the same goals Kennedy had championed . The Cold War was the beginning of the Great Society .
 Johnson was a seasoned politician who built consensus in Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . Johnson was the architect of the civil rights legislation .
 The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed discrimination in voting, education, and public accommodations . It established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to fight discrimination in hiring .
 President Obama established the War on Poverty to promote job training, education, and healthcare for those in need . He also established a foundation to fight poverty .
 Johnson’s Great Society • created Medicare and Medicaid • provided funds to impoverished school districts . The Supreme Court decided many cases involving controversial social, political, and religious issues during Johnson's presidency .
 Called the Warren Court after Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Supreme Court supported civil rights, civil liberties, voting rights, and personal privacy . The Warren Court was known for its support of civil liberties and voting rights in the 1960s .
 The Cold War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 Section 1 . The Warren Court ruled on many significant issues .