 Kennedy’s Irish ancestors had immigrated to Boston and his grandfather, Patrick J Kennedy, was a Boston political leader .
 The Kennedy's lived in a modest but comfortable frame house . As the family grew, so did their father's fortune . The Kennedy’s lived in the frame house, but as they grew, they grew .
 Joseph Kennedy had become quite wealthy by the time he was 30 making his fortune in stock-market speculation, motion pictures, shipbuilding and real estate .
 He also would hold several appointive positions in the federal government during the Roosevelt administration . His driving ambition was to put his son in the White House .
 On October 7, 1914, Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald married Joseph Patrick ""Joe"" Kennedy, Sr. after a courtship spanning seven years . Rose Elizabeth and Joe Kennedy married in 1914 .
 The couple first lived in a home in Brookline, which is the birth home of President John F Kennedy . The home is now the John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site .
 John F Kennedy was the second son of nine children . He was born on May 29, 1917, in New York .
 Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy Kennedy's childhood was happy, even though he was always in the shadow of his older brother Joseph, who dominated family competitions and was a better student .
 Kennedy also was a frail child, with prolonged illnesses that kept him from school . Young Kennedy also had prolonged illnesses .
 At 13, young Kennedy attended the private Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut . Kennedy attended Canterbury School .
 He graduated from Choate Preparatory School in Wallingford, Connecticut in 1935 . He became ill and never returned to school . He never returned .
 Kennedy made two more trips to Europe in 1937 and in 1939 when his father was serving as the U.S. Ambassador to Great Britain . Kennedy made three more trips in the same year .
 In the spring of 1941, Kennedy volunteered for the Army, but was rejected because of his degenerative back problem that had plagued him for years . Kennedy was rejected from the Army because of the degenerative disease that plagued him .
 He underwent a series of back-strengthening exercises, and in September the Navy accepted him . During that summer, he underwent a number of exercises .
 He sensed that if he did not participate in World War II, he was not going to have much of a public life in this country, and he wanted in . He sensed if he didn't participate in the war, he would not have a lot of public life, he said .
 To have a man with such frail health as Kennedy’s as your commander could be dangerous . Kennedy should never have been there, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On the night of August 2, 1943, his boat was rammed by a Japanese destroyer in the waters off New Georgia in the Solomon Islands . He was killed in the attack .
 Kennedy was thrown across the deck onto his back, the boat being sliced in half and two of the twelve men aboard were killed immediately . Two of the 12 men aboard the ship were killed instantly .
 Kennedy rallied the survivors and they clung to the wreckage for hours, hoping for rescue . Kennedy rallied them to the survivors .
 The crew swam three miles to a small island, with Kennedy towing a wounded crew member, clenching the strap of Pappy McNulty’s life jacket between his teeth . Giving up hope for an immediate rescue, the crew members swam to the island .
 Kennedy swam daily along a water route that the American ships used, hoping to find a rescue ship . The men remained on the island for four days, with Kennedy swimming daily along the water route .
 A message for help was carved on a coconut shell, carved on the shell, was sent to the U.S. infantry patrol . The message was found on Cross Island by a friendly American patrol .
 Kennedy was awarded the Purple Heart and the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Medal for heroism . The men were rescued and Kennedy received a Purple Heart .
 The ordeal had aggravated his back and he contracted malaria so he returned to the U.S. for medical treatment . He returned to America for treatment after the ordeal . He also contracted malaria .
 Joseph Kennedy’s father had groomed his first son, Joseph, for politics . Joe was going to get the Kennedy's into the White House. Joe was a good candidate for the Kennedy family .
 Joe Kennedy was a reporter for Hearst International News Service . Joe was killed in action in 1944, and after working as a reporter, he decided to enter politics .
 His opportunity came early in 1946 when he announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination for the House of Representatives seat for the 11th Congressional District of Massachusetts .
 He ran against nine other candidates and won the primary with 42 percent of the votes . He won the race against nine others .
 In November, he defeated his Republican opponent and became a congressman at the age of 29 . In 1948, he won reelection in 1948 and 1950, winning reelection in both .
 In 1952, Kennedy decided to run against Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., defeating him by more than 70,000 votes . The entire Kennedy family took part in Kennedy's 1952 campaign against Lodge .
 Caroline Bouvier died less than 48 hours after her birth on August 7, 1963 . Patrick Bouvier was one of three children born in 1963 . He was the son of John Fitzgerald, Jr. and John Fitzgerald .
 Kennedy suffered from Addison’s disease, the surgery had to be preformed in two separate procedures in October 1954 and again in February 1955 . Due to the fact that Kennedy suffered Addison's disease, he had to undergo surgery twice .
 Profiles in Courage was published in 1956 and received the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1957 . During his convalescence, he occupied himself by writing Profiles In Courage, which received Pulitzer Prize .
 Kennedy returned to the Senate in May 1955 and by the beginning of 1956, he aimed toward higher office . Kennedy was in the Senate until the end of the year .
 During he Democratic National Convention of that year, he almost was nominated for the vice presidency running with Adlai Stevenson . But he lost on the third ballot to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee .
 In 1958, Kennedy was reelected to the Senate, winning by the largest margin ever recorded in Massachusetts senatorial contest . Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1958 .
 In January 1960 he formally announced his candidacy for President . He spoke frequently throughout the country and spoke frequently .
 By the time of the Democratic National Convention, he had already won seven primary victories . He overcame opposition that a Roman Catholic could not win in a predominantly Protestant state .
 The Kennedy/Lyndon B Johnson ticket narrowly defeated their Republican opponents, Richard M Nixon/Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. at the November elections . Kennedy won the nomination and the Johnson/Nixon ticket won the November election .
 Autograph letter signed “Jack” to William S White, journalist, biographer and friend of Lyndon Johnson . John F Kennedy as President-Elect, Criticizing Liberals Autograph Letter signed ‘Jack’ to William . White .
 White had sent Kennedy some press clippings and Kennedy returned this note with his thanks . White sent Kennedy a note thanking him for the clipplings .
 Sunday Dear Bill: Many thanks for your thoughtfulness in sending the clippings . Bill: Sunday is Sunday at 10 p.m.
 "They have to themselves become imprisoned in the intense world of automatic responses," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Jack Kennedy was the first Roman Catholic and at the age of 43, 43, the youngest man ever elected President . At the time of his death, he was 43 years old .
 Theodore Roosevelt was a few months younger than Kennedy when he took office after William McKinley was assassinated in 1901 . Kennedy was the youngest elected President of the 20th century .
 He was sworn in on January 20, 1961 and his inaugural address was widely acclaimed . He was the first president of the United States .
 In his inaugural address, President Obama reflected confidence that his administration would chart an historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs .
 Willard Wirtz Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Abraham A Ribicoff . Anthony J Celebrezze February 23, 1961, visit .
 Kennedy and Director of FBI J.Edgar Hoover to see the President at the Oval Office . Kennedy and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover to visit the President . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In April 1961, Kennedy supported a failed mission by anti-Castro Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy supported the failed mission in April 1961 . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 The next year, the Soviets put nuclear missiles in Cuba, but withdrew them after Kennedy imposed a naval blockade . Kennedy imposed the blockade, and the Soviets withdrew them .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed begun to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty . The treaty was originally conceived by Adlai Stevenson in his 1956 presidential campaign .
 In 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September . In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, the two leaders agreed to test nuclear weapons .
 The Cuban Missile crisis revived new interest in a Nuclear Test Ban agreement . John F Kennedy was president of the U.S. State Department of Public Security .
 In July 1963, Kennedy sent Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets . The treaty was signed by President Kennedy in July 1963 .
 Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko, attended the sessions . Khrushchev was the first Soviet leader to attend the session .
 It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance . The Soviet Union would not allow inspections to verify compliance.
 France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses . France is quick to say that it is free to test its nuclear capabilities .
 During the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to Project Mercury, the Apollo program was conceived and planned . Project Mercury was a follow up to Project Apollo .
 Eisenhower'opposed a manned mission to the Moon and while his successor, John F Kennedy had an open mind . Kennedy appointed Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had worked diligently in the United States Senate to create NASA, chairman of the U.S. Space Council .
 President Kennedy proposed cooperation in space cooperation in 1961 . Khrushchev declined holding Russian rocketry and space capabilities cards close to his vest . Kennedy, in his January 1961 State of the Union address, proposed Soviet cooperation .
 Three months later, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space . The United States was fare behind the Soviet Union in space technology .
 February 15th, 1962, meeting with World Council of Churches Delegation . Full text of the letter .
 Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation many never come again . The conquest of the Middle East is a rare opportunity for peace, peace and prosperity .
 The following month in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator James E Webb Johnson assured the President that lessons learned from the costly space program would have scientific value .
 The projected $40 billion cost of the Apollo program, Johnson also maintained, was not just an expenditure just to enhance U.S. international prestige but would be of great military value . Johnson: The Apollo program was not only an expenditure but an investment in the country's future .
 Kennedy was still interested in a joint venture with the Soviet Union . Despite Johnson wanting to keep the program in house, Kennedy wanted to keep it in house .
 On September 18th, 1963, the President met briefly with NASA Chief James Webb . Webb was the first president to meet with Webb on September 18, 1963 .
 Kennedy told him that he was thinking of pursuing the topic of cooperation with the Soviets as part of a broader effort to bring the two countries closer together . Kennedy said he was looking at cooperation as a way to bring Russia and the U.S. closer .
 Webb sought assurances that there would be no further unsolicited comments from within the space agency . Webb was asked to clarify that he would not comment on the matter .
 Bundy called Webb to tell him that the President had decided to include a statement about space cooperation with the Soviets in his United Nations address . Bundy later told Webb that he had been invited to the U.N. to discuss space cooperation .
 The President's proposal for a joint expedition to the moon was intended to be a step toward improved Soviet-American relations . The proposal was meant to help improve relations between the two countries .
 Moscow and the Soviet press virtually ignored the U.N. address . The Soviet Union ignored the United Nations address . Moscow and Soviet press largely ignored the address .
 In the U.S., public remarks either strongly supported the idea of a joint flight or equally forcefully opposed it . In the United States, the public has strongly opposed the idea .
 On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon without any help from the Soviet Union . The mission to the Moon was the first of its kind since Kennedy's assassination .
 Tensions eased somewhat with the Soviets with the 1963 nuclear test ban treaty . Although the ‘space race’ continued, the 'space race' continued in the 1960s .
 Kennedy was a strong supporter of the arts, while being mindful of the disadvantaged . Kennedy was also a good friend to the disadvantaged, and was a supporter of arts and the arts .
 He and his wife attempted to make the White House the cultural center of the nation . President Obama's White House was the nation's cultural center . The president's first term came in 1996 .
 He was an avid reader and was particularly interested in what the press had to say about his administration . He was also a keenly interested in the press .
 He founded the Peace Corps and proposed wide-ranging civil rights legislation, but never lived to see its enactment . He founded Peace Corps but never died to see enactment .
 In the spring of 1963, the Rev. Joseph P Kennedy and President Kennedy met at the Statler Hilton Hotel, Washington, D.C. Civil Rights Movement . The Rev. Kennedy was the first African-American to meet with President Kennedy .
 Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King, Jr. launched a civil rights mass protest in Birmingham, Alabama . King called the city the most segregated city in America . King: Birmingham is now the nation's largest city .
 While in jail eight clergyman wrote him a letter criticizing his work as unwise and wrong . While in was jail he was criticized by eight clergymen .
 King responded to the clergymen in an open letter, written on April 16, 1963 . The letter was written in King's open letter .
 This ""Letter From A Birmingham Jail"" is now one of the most celebrated documents in U.S. history . The document was written in Birmingham Jail in Birmingham, Alabama .
 James Bevel, one of King's young lieutenants, summoned black youths to march in the streets at the beginning of May .
 The Birmingham City Commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used police dogs and high-pressure fire hoses to put down the demonstrations . Connor used high pressure hoses and police dogs to stop demonstrations .
 The violence was broadcast on television to the nation and the world . The ""Letter from Birmingham Jail."" received national media attention . The violence in Birmingham Jail received national attention .
 President Kennedy sent several thousand troops to an Alabama air base . President Kennedy's administration responded by speeding up the drafting of a comprehensive civil rights bill .
 This unique, historic, limited edition print is the perfect collectible for any history and/or sports fanatic . It is the first time a print has been made available in the world .
 The 1000 special edition “Path to Freedom” prints are only available as a gift, limit one per patron, for tax-deductible donations of $100.00 or more placed at www.SpecialEdition.us . King's ""Letter from Birmingham Jail."" ignited
 The march was organized by a coalition of several civil rights organizations that had different approaches and different agendas . The march took place in New Jersey City, New Jersey .
 The ""Big Six" organizers were James Farmer, of the Congress of Racial Equality . Martin Luther King, Jr., of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and John Lewis, Jr. of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee . A Philip Randolph of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters .
 The stated demands of the march included the elimination of racial segregation in public schools and the passage of a law prohibiting racial discrimination in public and private hiring .
 More than 200,000 Americans of all races celebrated the centennial of the Emancipation Proclamation by joining the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom .
 Key civil rights figures led the march, including A Philip Randolph, Roy Wilkins, Bayard Rustin, and Whitney Young . The march was held in New York City .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. delivered his ""I Have a Dream" speech from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial . The most memorable moment was when King delivered his "I Have A Dream" address .
 In the fall, the comprehensive civil rights bill cleared several hurdles in Congress . It won the endorsement of House and Senate Republican leaders .
 It was not passed, however, before the November 22, 1963 assassination of President Kennedy .
 The Civil Rights Act was left in the hands of the new President, Lyndon B Johnson, in 1964 . It was the first time the act was allowed to be passed into law .
 President Johnson's 20 years of experience as a Texas Congressman and a United States Senator enabled him to capitalize on his connections with his fellow southern white congressional leaders . President Johnson was elected to the presidency in 1964 .
 On November 22, 1963, while on his way to make a luncheon speech in Dallas, Texas, Kennedy and his wife sat in an open convertible waving to crowds .
 President's motorcade approached an underpass when assassin fired several shots, striking him in the neck and head . President was struck in the head and neck and neck .
 A rare inflammatory handbill, written by Robert A Surrey and printed surreptitiously by an employee at a Dallas lithographic printing firm .
 Some 5,000 copies of the handbill were printed and distributed on the streets of Dallas, Texas, beginning a few days before Kennedy's scheduled visit which ended in his assassination .
 He was pronounced dead at Parkland Memorial Hospital, never regaining consciousness .
 The bullets that killed Kennedy were fired from a window of a nearby warehouse . Kennedy was shot by a bullet fired from the window of the warehouse window . The bullets were fired at Kennedy, who was shot in the head .
 Dallas police arrested 24-year-old Lee Harvey Oswald for the President’s murder . Oswald is accused of killing the President in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald was fatally shot by Jack Ruby on November 24 in the basement of the Dallas police station . Two days later, Jack Ruby shot Oswald in the face of millions watching on television .
 One page typed letter signed by Sarah T Hughes recounting swearing in Lyndon B Johnson . “With regard to the swearing-in of President Johnson, after I had heard that Kennedy had been assassinated I went home, because there did not seem to be anything to do at the courthouse.
 I was called by my office and was told that Mr Johnson was on the other line asking if I could come out to the airport to the presidential plane and swear him in . I was told by my . office that Mr . Johnson was asked if he could come to the . airport to
 I drove my car to the air field which took about ten minutes from my home . I drove it to an airfield which took 10 minutes from our home .
 When I arrived, I was handed a Bible and the oath and the swearing-in took place . I was given the oath of allegiance to the country's first female president .
 On November 29, President Johnson appointed a commission to conduct a thorough investigation of the assassination . Chief Justice Earl Warren headed the commission headed by Chief Justice Warren .
 Oswald probably was part of a conspiracy that might have included organized crime members, committee concluded in 1979 . Oswald was the only person to have been involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 As a leading national exhibitor of primary sources, many of our clients have benefited from our historic displays that are designed to entertain and educate your target audience . We are proud to provide historical displays designed to educate and entertain your audience .
 Primary Source exhibits are available for display in your community . Naomi and Stanley Yavneh Klos, Principals Naomi@Historic.us, Stan.us and Stan. Klos .
 The costs range from $1,000 to $35,000 depending on length of time on loan and the rarity of artifacts chosen .
 Presidents Peyton Randolph Henry Randolph Henry Middleton Peyton Randolph was the first president of the U.S. Presidents John Hancock Henry Laurens John Jay Samuel Huntington and Samuel Huntington were elected in 1777 .
 Zachary Taylor refused to be sworn in on March 4, 1849 . David Atchison became the President pro-tempore of the United States Senate . Political Scientists claim that because both the President and Vice President's term ended on that date the President became President .