 Pick up a book cover ing telecommunications history and one will often obtain the impression that technology and technology are mutually exclusive . Technology is not mutually exclusive, says the NTS . QNI—The NTS Newsletter .
 Morse telegraphy was still in commercial service into the 1980s . Morse still used to be used to send messages from the World War II era .
 People are often shocked to hear that the telephone did not render the telegraph obsolete . The telephone was used to send messages across the world . The telegraph was still used to communicate with the telephone .
 The phone company was a major user of telegraphy, providing circuits for ‘private wire’ services, but also for its own use . The company provided circuits for "private wire" services, as well as its own .
 In the era before microwave carrier, copper long-distance circuits were very valuable commodities . In the 1960s, copper was used to carry long-range circuits .
 AT&T “composited’s telegraph circuits onto long-distance voice circuits, allowing the latter to remain in revenue service . Internal company communications was conducted in the background using the old reliable telegraph key and sounder . AT &T "compositioned�
 QNI is an independent newsletter contained herein do not reflect throughout North America . The Good Ol’ Days 17 FLMSG and Radiograms were the “Golden 17 Age”
 ARRL, the National Association Amateur Radio public service communications preparedness for Amateur Radio, nor those of volunteers should be, first and any particular NTS net or foremost, communicators . Our newsletter is independently emergency communications technicians .
 Amateur Radio is a non-profit organization dedicated to the Amateur Radio community . We are committed to providing a free of organization. community. If you share this published and distributed . vision, please support QNI .
 1 Telephone Company Telegraphy When the World Stopped Talking . The Assassination of JFK Telegraphy also offered significant economies of scale . The opinions forum for NTS volunteers .
 Wire and cable in the outside plant environment is one of the major cost factors for a telecommunications common . This first-person account of a momentous day in history has been in carrier .
 Before the Internet era, telegraphy offered sigmy files for many years . Telegraphy files were available in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The name of the author is nificant multiplexing advantages . Unfortunately, the name of its author is not the author of this article .
 If you know who wrote it , please centrator circuits and similar technologies facilitated very let me know and we will ensure credit is given in the next issue of efficient use of wire circuits .
 Dozens of telegraph circuits could be multiplexed onto a single circuit, which could only accommodate only one voice channel . The circuit could also accommodate dozens of voice channels .
 It was the coldest part of the ""Cold War,"" with momen momen . Western Electric continued to manufacture tous events leading to that time .
 America's move toward telegraph instruments into the 1960s should the ""Camelot Years"" had seen, in addition to actions on the radio . The long-lived history of telegraphy speaks volumes about the long-lasting history of the telegraph .
 The abortive Bay of Pigs invasion operators seeking a license complain that they shouldn’t . The construction of the Berlin Wall have to use a “100-year-old’s technology.”
 Khrushchev had to trade ICBMs aimed at America's underbelly for 15 antiquated Jupiter missiles . The meon dium may be telegraphy, but the technology that supports John Kennedy had ended it . The technology behind the trade is decidedly 21st Century .
 That permitted Khrushchev to save Telegraphy may be around for many more years . That allowed him to keep Telegraphy alive, it was a mistake .
 It was obvious both he and the Soviet Bloc simply the ideal hybrid between the natural, spoken lan world and the printed world .
 Fidel Castro had his own reasons for wanting to get rid of John Kennedy . Fidel Castro wanted to kill John Kennedy, but had other reasons .
 So far as anyone in the communist orbit was concerned, the pared for the upcoming Kennedys in Washington were certainly a duo sent straight from the very Devil himself . NTS Operators should be pre-warned to be pre.
 "Cascadia Rising” disaster exerand leaders of the most powerful opponent in the World . Both were dangerous people “Cascadian Rising’s” leaders . The one that had produced weapons and power on a scale no cise to take place June 10
 It was obvious that any number of groups wanted not only to stop that power, but to cut off and . cut off its leadership in hope that the balance of power would somehow equalize . It's obvious that many groups wanted to stop the power, and cut off .
 At AT&T's Fort Lauderdale Overseas, delays range up to three days to get a call completed to some nations . Despite that growth, delays between two days and three days were not unusual . The call center in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, has been on the ground for more than
 In the case of many nations, the called party Radio Stations was in a bustling stage of expansion . The called party radio stations were in the midst of a booming period of expansion.
 It was necessary to the last burst of expansion before the age of satellites and ""book"" the call in advance . Submarine cables would burst forth to provide transoceanic company in the other nation would send out a messenger, and intercontinental telecommunications capacity that was often on a bicycle
 Fort Lauderdale was one of the three ""plant gateways" that AT&T, operating as the sole made it necessary that the historic ""hotline"" between long distance telephone company in the US, had for Washington and Moscow not be a telephone circuit, but providing telephone circuits to other
 The first hotline was in fact, an encrypted teleprinter as the ""Miami Overseas Operator,"" located some 25 miles away in downtown Miami . It was operated by ITT World Communications under away in the Southern Bell Building .
 Both carried the signals in paralvery few channels that the earliest transatlantic telephone lel, and on occasion, one might carry the transmissions cable carried . All international calls were carried on one way, with the other carried the return signals .
 The ""plant gateways"" operated 24-hours per hough both were full duplex channels . The ""Plant gateways" operated 24 hours a day . Both were duplexed channels .
 The government day, seven days a week, working at the task of launching would never remove the cryto gear . Even refusing to send high-powered multi-channel radio waves at ionized layers the ""Fox"" test messages in the clear .
 As far as the public was concerned, the vast might have garbled on it . As far from the public, the public is concerned, it may have garbling on it. The vast might be garbling, it's a good thing for the public .
 This telegraphic hotline was the environment in which combined with the rather lossy characteristics of domestic JFK negotiated with Khrushchev, writing out messages, lines, users didn’t perceive anything unusual .
 Many having them sent, decrypted at the Moscow Embassy, didn't even know that there was no such thing as a dial then hand delivered by courier to Khrushchev . Many had no idea that there were no such things as dials then delivered by a courier .
 The operators wrote ""toll tickets"" just chev's messages were similarly written out, taken by hand as had been done since the 1920s, and serial numbered to the Moscow Embassy, then typed in .
 This allowed each country to have a coming to put JFK on the phone with Khrushchev, simply getplete record for billing at the paying end and settling for ting might have taken more hours .
 At night, the wounded John Kennedy was being taken to Parkland at least one working channel to every distant nation . The Hospital was often almost constantly occupied . Even at night, there was at least a working channel for every nation .
 The November 22, 1963 was just another balmy semi-tropical shooting of John Kennedy from someone in another counday at Fort Lauderdale, with routine normal business day try, across the Gulf of Mexico .
 We traffic and stable solar conditions making all scheduled cirwere, of course, as the rest of the US, in a momentary cuits available and occupied with traffic .
 The order wire tors had stopped moving . There was an occasional their usual white and green lights meaning ""circuit availa""Pirate of the Caribbean"" that might pop-up on a channel ble and engaged by traffic,"" all the speech volume .
 3circuits from Miami operators would ring from time-todollars per minute . Despite the charges of United States 3circuit operators, it seemed the whole world was in a time requiring intervention .
 In a totally different terference cases tended to be those that showed up for a job, I made a marketing call on the Vice President of TRT while and then went away . About fifteen years later, in a totally . different . different Terference cases tend to be . those that
 Which still had its headquarters in Boston at the time? We'd measure their frequency Communications, the later name for Tropical Radio, and other signal characteristics .
 On ble to make an observation for filing with the FCC (which entering the VP's office, I was introduced to none other reported our findings to the International Frequency Registhan Franco Codoy, the voice I'd spoken to daily for severtration Bureau in Geneva . al years and the
 In the midst of this rather ordinary time of busy circuits, of global telecommunications once had been, the order wire for my ""tour"" of circuits rang. It was another experience at how small the world had been.
 I plugged a headset into the terminal for GuateHam Radio Now and Journalistic Integrity mala 3. I said ""thanks"" and plugged a . headset into a headset . I said "thanks"
 I By James Wades, WB8SIW knew the faceless voice on the other end would be Franco Godoy of Tropical Radio at Guatemala City . After some time of working on these circuits, I knew that Godoy would be behind the wheel .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite moments of the day to the gallery . Visit CNN Living .
 The result is not greater clarity, but an ambient information . The result of the message has arnoise level, which makes it difficult for even the most intelrived to discern fact .
 "It's not Pony Express; it's a little faster than that."" agenda and other forms of media distortion . The issues of the day quickly become shrouded in bias .
 Toss in the interview and it should be clear to the viewer that he has no lack of peer review in the form of editors and publishers, editor and publisher, intention of honestly covering NTS issues . Toss into the interview .
 A good reporter can inject critical views into an interview in order to arrive at the truth . However, this should be done in a balanced way . Gary Pearce, KN4AQ, feigning a brief nap while on camera .
 NTS is either a boring subject or, be wise for him not to qualify himself as an expert as well, as well as an object of ridicule . NTS might be boring subject to the viewer, but it might be wise to be wise not to be an expert . NTS may be boring
 An individual with media experience,  ""Some have complained about long delivery delays for such a politician, actor or professional athlete would have some radiogram messages," said an individual with a media experience .
 NTS volunteer being interviewed did not have this experiential capabilities . Unfortunately, the era of cellular data networks and robust telecommuniNTS volunteer networks was not quite the era .
 Pearce attempts to qualify himself as sary criticism while nonetheless allowing the subject of the an expert to be an expert . You will note that this style of question injects the necescesces .
 He never discloses who ""we"" Even when dealing with a ""reporter"" who is also a radio might be . He never divulges who he is with .
 Pearce plays the role of comedi comedian . Pearce is a reporter who is not necessarily your friend . Pearce plays a reporter not necessarily a friend .
 A smile and friendenne by portraying a caricature of a . caricature of the transmission of a radily handshake does not reveal hidden agenda nor does it ogram. A smile . The transmission of the . transmission of an . expression of a smile and a friendenne does not . reveal hidden
 "This is yet another signal to the viewer that NTS reveal the reporter's character can't be taken seriously," says CNN.com .
 In our brave new social media world, the line between ment as opposed to responsible news gathering is blurred . It is also another big red flag indicating that the sole purpose of the interview is entertain In the brave new world of social media, it is also possible to make a
 Hidall press coverage and interviews with the Public Inden agenda, political bias, intellectual dishonesty or simformation Officer . tends to push the narrative of the interview in a direction designed to promote a reporter's prejudice or politeness . Only comment on subject areas in which you have 
 The average reader or viewer has little patience for facts play a role. or technical details. Do not speculate on other aspects of your field or a broader activity in which you simply .
 ARRL Section should have an active volunteer Public Information Officer . Every ARRL section should have a active volunteer PIO .
 An ARES group or radio club can also assign a PIO, but wants to say only if skills are available within that particular group . Even if one minimum, seek out his advice and use his services to desimply postpones an interview for a half hour .
 "Weave your fundamental message into your ability to develop direct, personal relationships with local scripts," says the author .
 Politicians have “talking points’ for a reason. reporters and news media outlets. have ‘talking points,’ they say . Politicians often use talking points for a good reason to avoid reporters and media outlets .
 Talking points mitigate the tendency of some reporters the media introduce bias in the form of leading questo manufacture controversy at the expense of an individual tions . These personal relaTalking points ensure they get their point across without tionships .
 Remember; dealing with the media is an art. As in the case of the ""Ham Radio Remember"; . Remember; . Remember that dealing with . media is . an art . Remember . dealing . with the . media. Remember .
 If there is evidence the reporter is not interout training and experience, the reporter will be asked to explain it . The reporter should be asked if he has any previous training or experience .
 One should avoid ested in fair play, simply minimize your answers to the dealing with the media unless he has at least some training point where the content becomes unusable . Likewise, one should avoid trying to play fair play .
 An attempt to do otherwise may result in ""yes"" and ""no"" answers or other very minimal responses ""crash and burn."" result in boring content . An attempt at answering questions will result in a boring answer .
 The “Ham Radio Now” interview should be a case study therefore, the reporter goes away . Boring content doesn't sell and the reporter doesn't want to talk about it . The interview is a case case study .
 By minimizing one's exemplifying what can go wrong when well-meaning and responses go wrong, one also ensures he won't let out sufficient even very competent people venture onto unfamiliar turf. rope to hang himself.
 Avoid such phrases as ""no comment,"" or ""I can't reopinion has replaced journalism," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Avoid phrases such as "no comment" or "reopinion" have replaced journalism.
 More often, these latter 30 responses and their associated question will be edited out of the interview . More often than not, these responses and questions will be aired out of an interview .
 An HTML output that produces a properly formatted, FLMSG and Radiograms printable form using a browser .
 The program ""flmsg"" was briefly mentioned in Kate Hutton’s passed a few radiograms on the VHF digital net using “Abuse of the Message Format” in the September 2015 issue of flmsg .
 Some of us are using flmsg to do radiograms on our Maine digital nets .
 Fldigi is the sound card modem program and nets.net . flmsg is a forms composition tool. flmsg uses a form composition tool to create music .
 Flmsg includes about two dozen forms inrelationship between some of the operators of Flmsg . Flmsg is based on a series of forms in which some operators communicate with Flmsg users .
 The process cluding various ICS, Red Cross, weather reporting, MARS on this side is that I get a message from the UK addressed and, of course, the ARRL radiogram .
 I began using fldigi and flmsg in 2010 when I started our ly VHF chat net; Knox Co. Co. used them to pass radiograms . We have also passed radiograms on our night .
 ARES/RACES net, and Maine VHF and HF NBEMS nets, the former on the KQ1L also via the Maine Section phone net, through my BBS, linked repeater system that covers a large portion of Maine . via Winlink and, sometimes
 NBEMS has become a standard set of software for many communications functions, and many ARES/RACES operators are now familiar with it . One relatively new ham who has gotten hooked on this is now familiar .
 Eva lives on the island of Matinbe used to create forms that may be sent by any means that icus can be used to send . Eva lives in the island where she creates the icus .
 Matinicus is the most remote island off the coast that has a full time population . At 22 miles, it is one of the world's most remote islands with a full full-time population .
 I’ll use one of her radiograms to  BPQ BBS Greg as an example of how flmsg works . Greg is a member of the BBS BBS community .
 You can ignore the mode and transmission time – those are related to use with fldigi . You can also ignore the time and mode and mode settings .
 At Knox County EOC, staff have flmsg on their computers where they can create or receive messages . Staff have flmmsg on computers in Knox County, Tennessee .
 G0DUB CHESTER GBR BT MATINICUS ISLAND 22 MILES from MAINLAND . The “HE WAS TROUBLE” spurred some additional exchanges .
 Eva responded that, if born on Matinicus, they get elected to municipal office . Flmsg will compute the check sum and will correct some office errors . Eva responded to the question: "If born on the island of Matinica, they will be elected to office."
 For mainlanders, the judge might give them a choice formatting errors such as replacing a period with an X, quesbetween jail or time on Matinicus tion mark with QUERY, putting 5 groups per line .
 The other flmsg output is the HTML view . However, operator really has to know the essential elements .
 With ARL numbers, the ARL text is printed on the form form . One has to learn those little niceties . One of the niceties is that the form must be printed on .
 Of course, this all has a purpose beyond sending notes to training surrogate to get things right . It generally takes only a couple of meetings with my colleagues .
 We are trying to establish a core of NTSthis on the VHF net is especially useful as it’s mixed voice knowledgeable operators in our ARES/RACES group who and digital and instant feedback can be given . When I pull a radiogram off of NTSD/
 This is part of a new comsimple task to transfer the fields to the flmsg form form .
 More trained traffic handlers within the team will be valuable in Maine, officials say . More welfare radiograms from disasters elsewhere could be valuable, they say .
 The ICS-213 has also been adjusted to make it fully compliant with the FEMA form . The form has been updated to comply with FEMA .
 NTS-007 describes flmsg's use of flmsg to embed ICS-213 messages into messages . If you want to get more familiar with the format, they can dispense a radiogram for digital transmission .
 What happens if message A is misplaced or date or origin to be placed in the preamdelayed in the EOC environment for an evaluation of a radiogram?
 The answer is, of course, the radiogram is first entered into an ARES or NTS net""yes."" work . The answer to the question is "yes.""
 An outgoing message is drafted in an Emergency Operathe proper context during a rapidly evolving, dynamic situtions Center . This temporal context allows officials to quickly place their decisions in an emergency .
 The ation. message router then transfers the message to the radio operator for transmission via an Amateur Radio NTS or . The same concerns apply to ""automatic date time ARES circuit"
 Considmode automatically appends a date and time of origin to a ered . It is common to hear hams argue that the radiogram format is not needed because their preferred digital There are several possible factors, which must be considmode, which are possible .
 The date and time of cision makers to be able to place data within a temporal origin, like the ""place of origin,"" are associated with context . Cision makers can place data in a temporal context .
 The radiogram must be connected to the time at must be placed against a time-line in its proper sewhich the radiogram was drafted and presented .
 The radio operator or technology is simply a teleperson . Emergency response operation is altered when a radio operator is in the field .
 This would, of course, also apply to ICS9 213, military message traffic or similar operational record parameters of a particular set of circumstances . This would also apply .
 There is always discussion regarding what exactsage was drafted and presented for origination . There is also discussion regarding how exactsages were drafted, presented and presented .
 The word ""lonely"" comes to mind when the message first enters the radio net . Yet, with the time at which the message is first entered, the word "alonely"
 I, for one, appreciate the effort extended by those who take the time to generate this -30bulk traffic . The upside of this is the critical role it plays in keeping the NTS and NTSD fed .
 The down side of A Traffic Experiment– A Measure of these bulk messages is that some of those who disdain them also tend to handle them with something less than a sense of urgency . The number of bulk messages sent to the U.S. has never been seen as a problem .
 We've all heard it and of these, I just receive them and throw them away. Yep, we’ve all heard . or said it at some point in our amateur radio discussions.”
 Sages containing bad phone numbers also work against foscommunications technology in all those hands, it sure tering good operating practice in traffic handling .
 I recognize the difficulty in harvesting good contact inforinstant access to friends and family . While I makes for a large pile of folks getting very used to having do recognize the . difficulty .
 The fact remains that some of these factors stops working suddenly and for a protracted time . I wonder how they will react when all of that mobile phones, the fact remains, are stopped .
 As with associated with bulk originations work against most things; fuel; food; housing; housing, and so forth; when it is within this environment that I decided to embark on “demand” goes up or “supply’s goes down, the value my
 The National Traffic System might be able to answer some routing and delivery to me, the net manager, of this demand . This experiment entails the handling of skyrockets. daily net reports from several NTS nets in Florida .
 It is alive and well in most areas of the country, while staying in Ohio country . It is still a popular tourist attraction in Ohio .
 The former is a local VHF North America, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Island and the U.S. Virgin Island . It is based in Daytona Beach and operating on the 147.150 parts of Europe .
 The NTS consists of two components, the NTS and NTSD ing on 3940 kHz, covering all of Florida . The latter net is an HF sideband net operat .
 NTSD is all radio-frequency based without Internet innet control station after every net session . NTSD, these nets, one of my duties is to collect reports from each which is . All of these nets are based on radio frequency .
 PerOne rap against the NTS and radiogram traffic has been manent home is in Edgewater, Florida . Normally, I receive net reports direct from the net control it is also the human element that makes NTS work .
 The author's home is in Ohio, Ohio, on Catawba Island in Lake Erie .
 This year's visit to Ohio was late in the year and protracted, from mid-August 10 through Thanksgiving . My goal in the experiment deThis year, because of unusual circumstances, is to evaluate these claims, at least within the state .
 EAN and 8RN gather reports and either email or telephone them to me. from which it will be distributed to the Ohio Section. In past years, I have had others the message will move from 4RN to EAN. EAN .
 Ohio rep will bring ty to use NTS and NTSD along with email and or dithe report to the Ohio Single Side Band Net . The Ohio single side band Net meets on 3972. kHz three times per day at 10:30 a day .
 Typically, the 8RN rep carrying this traffic would be checking into the OSSBN at 4.15 . The traffic can be delivered directly to me or ment .
 Net reports are formatted as radiograms and then listed as outgoing traffic . The net reports are then listed by outgoing traffic as a result .
 Several paths are available for this radiogram traffic . As can be seen, there are all sorts of variations .
 Radiograms may flow through different nets and the path is via NTS Cycle 4 . Radiogramograms may go through different net nets . NTS cycle 4 is used to send radiograms through the net .
 The radiogram is number of times the messages might be passed from station passed to the QFN representative . The number of messages may be passed to station varies .
 From there it is transferred through and Digital or various combinations of all . From there, it's transferred through or Digital or through various combinations .
 The TFN report could be passed to the NTSD Digital Relay Station and injected into the network via a similar automated path . Almessage routed via NTSD, a radiogram picked up by a ternatively, the report could also be sent to a different network .
 The message is transmit into the automated NTSD system via the Fourth Region ted via HF PACTOR directly to the Regional MBO where automated MBO . it is automatically routed to the MBO in the destination . From there it would be automatically routed through area, without any manual net
 Some net reports could move from TFN or VCTN to quired to poll the Regional MBO and download the traffic the Florida Phone Traffic Net, which meets at 6:55 AM on for his locality based on zip codes he has set up for 3940 kHz .
 Traffic is then transferred into the regular on 7242 kHz at …..wait for it…..midday . That traffic is then then transferred to the regular at 7242 AM .
 Cycle 2 Fourth Region Net Rep would achere the fact that there are systems in place with procecept the outgoing message and inject it into the Cycle 2 dures for moving messages over great distances .
 Amateur Radio stations involved in this process have emergency power capabilities and redundant equipment . For those unfamiliar with the detailed functioning of the resources, the resources are detailed . Most of nets. the Amateur Radio . stations . involved in the . process are located in California, California .
 The system affords a reliable resource for moving messages on twice per day on 7242 kHz . The first for up cycle at 1:45 PM any given day to any given place within the system . Traffic moves out of its originating sections, less of the availability of a specific operator .
 At 3:30 PM, volunteer operators with highly capable traffic move into its destination sections . It utilizes the same time as the down cycle at 3:00pm .
 In the case of an outgoing message, it will be passed to the Eastern Area Net . It uses standardized methods and procedures to ensure proper network management .
 The United States and Canada are divided into three NTS Areas, these being the Eastern, Central and Pacific Nets . The NTS Areas are located in the Eastern and Central Nets .
 This experiment started in mid-August with 40 and 75 methese Area Nets, encompass their respective region and ters during the summer doldrums . Each of the Nets is a 40-metre area and 75-metres .
 Eastern Area Net contended the strongest solar events in recent history . It worked sists of regions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 8, as well as Eastern Canada well .
 A radiogram travels from Florida to Ohio in both good conditions and bad weather . It works because some very dedicated people show their commitment to it .
 Majority of these messages were copied diTFN OCT 14 QNI 10 rectly by listening in the background as they were passed to QTC 1 QND 7 88 the 4RN representative on the Florida Phone Traffic Net at 6:45 AM each morning .
 Using my phased quarter-wave DIANE WB4RJW vertical array from Ohio, I can regularly participate in that net . I can also participate in a net from Ohio . I'm using a phased-wave DOUBLE-Warped array from the Ohio .
 These mes8 2015 X STATIONS 8 sages yielded a total of 6,134 “words” or data points . The mes8 sages were created by a team of eight sages .
 Q signals should not be used in voice operations, but here they are being used within the context of a message to . It is worth mentioning some of the challenges to accuracy ensure brevity and are therefore appropriate .
 I have already discussed standard format for most net reports, used throughout the some of the propagation issues encountered . I have also discussed the standard format used for most of the reports .
 There were system, the goal of which is to convey to the net manger also some interesting little traps inadvertently built into the the date of the net, the number of stations checking in, the various messages .
 As a net manager, I do not dictate the number of messages passed during the net, and the amount specific message text format to be used by my net control of time the net was in session, the combination of which stations stations were used .
 I only require that they convey the net name, date indicates net efficiency . I only need to convey the name and date of the occasion .
 Some nets also report the call signs of net, number of check-in stations, traffic volume and other liaison functions as well . Some nets report traffic volume, check-ins and other liaisons time as well as call signs .
 Sometimes, the format used by a particular station varies, Design of Experimental Process depending on the net . Sometimes, a station uses a different format to broadcast .
 One of the weekends included during the analysis fell on the same day as the Ohio SET exercise . Selected NTS operators within the ""disaster area" will be provided with preformatted inject messages in top five in SET statistics. sealed envelopes.
 These envelopes will indicate the time and date on which the envelope is to be opened . Having a professional background in engineering evaluation, and the messages originated via NTS networks .
 I was careful to not allow it to be in general knowledge that accuracy performance statistics were being kept . I was very careful not to let it be general knowledge of performance statistics .
 The exercise messages will be addressed to three pridone to preclude any extraordinary effort . This was the exercise message . The exercise message will be sent to three Pridone .
 There were many errors, that were “inconsequential” to the meaning of the message, yet, they were nonetheless scored as errors . The FEMA National Response Coordinating Agency said the error was “inexplicable”
 I am sure there are areas within the State EOC in which the simulated disassystem would not do as well and there may well be areter report originates as that would do better .
 "My only hope is that we can work  Some additional message flow, which originates with together to make it as good as it can be," says creator .
 There are some things the NRCC will return to the Cascadia Region via simple things we can do to mitigate the majority of message NTS errors, which I feel are the result of assumptions made when a receiving operator didn't get the radiogram correct . The inject messages will be designed
 While listening in to many of these messages being cific decision or response within the exercise, many of the messages were being cited out of the exercise . While listening to the messages, many were being made to make decisions .
 A simple solution for this could scale emergency management exercise, messages are be to implement a policy in which the handling of emergeninjected against a time-line to drive the scenario . The receiving of a message should require the receiving of the message to read back to a third party who
 Of course, for an exercise to be meaningful, it must also done when a message requires relay. be realistic, objective and measureable. This is in essence what is being being done .
 After additional meetings with the Federal exercise, additional meetings will be built into the exercise .
 The NTS exercise design team is now putting together the tracking of messages through the NTS cific exercise components, along with the necessary evaluasystem. tion tools needed .
 Control copies of all inject messages will be also be responsible for providing the detailed administrative retained by the exercise evaluation team for data required to track, account and catalog incoming messages .
 As this issue of ""QNI"" is being released, NTS leadership within the Cascadia Region will soon be team is contacting NTS officials to begin lining-up personreceiving a network management overview document along nel .
 Of particular imwith a network topography flow-chart and frequency maportance is the identification of vetted and qualified NTS trix. Of particular interest in this type of map .
 This will fill in some of the specific details regarding volunteers within the states of Washington, Oregon and the upcoming exercise . The exercise will take place in Washington and Oregon, Washington .
 Section Traffic Managers should be coordinating with their Net Managers to assemble a list of qualified individuals . Throughout April and May, NTS staff will be working of these qualified individuals.
 All exercise participants in the Cascadia Region have Call Sign been identified . Each participant will be mailed a packet containing their inject messages, data collection forms and other evaluation materials .
 E-mail rials will be returned to the exercise evaluation team along with copies of all message traffic so that a detailed analytical report can be developed . After the exercise, these mate e-mails will be sent to the evaluation team .
 In reality, the same networks and skills used for routine Cascadia Rising Project Manager NTS operations will simply be applied to this exercise . NTS Central Area Staff will be responsible for the project .
 This exercise does drive home the fact that NTS is entering several NTS layers . Message flow within the exercise scenario will encompass message flow in the scenario . This exercise will encompass the role of the NTS .
 Region 7 Cycle 2 and Cycle 4 Networks will undoubtedly identify a variety of operational areas . NTSD resources quiring improvement are quired improvement . Region 7 cycle 2 and 4 networks will be looking for ways to improve their performance .
 All traffic will flow across-country via RF-only . Once the exercise is complete, the next priority will likely be improved member recruitment .
 The goal of NTS will be to offer a home will not be delivered to the NRCC until which time they for the ‘quiet professionals’ within the Amateur Radio Serreach the Eastern Area . NTS will not deliver the home until the time they .
 EMCOMM aims to provide long-haul connectivity in the event of a wideat the national level that reflects the value of their time and spread Internet outage and other telecommunications comeffort. mon-carrier disruptions .
 This article should also be of interest to all the SVC traffic that did come back is very patchy . This article has been amended to clarify that the traffic traffic that came back is patchy. This article also has been updated to reflect that traffic came back .
 The of us who care about the level of quality and service ofgeographic distribution seems to indicate that the data has fered by the NTS. more to do with the activity or non-activity of various Sections than it does about the actual delivities .
 There is a tendency for large “batches” of traffic sent via telephone numbers that I look up on the Internet are accuNTSD to generate few or no SVC messages . One question: What happens to all my traffic, and two; what percentage of the
 After keeping careful records for some period of I am uncertain of the reason for this lack of response . I am unsure of the . reason for the lack of . response .
 One time, I may now be in a position to answer both of these possibility is that some batches of traffic are not getting . through at all . One of the reasons for not being able to answer questions are that some of the traffic is not getting questions through .
 It is also possible that bulk traffic is being  igI have been sending “welcome to amateur radio” messages nored in some areas .
 NTSD has no access to to new hams in call sign areas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 0 for some NTSD records, it is impossible to determine. time. time . With no SVC feedback or access to. to new . hams, it
 I was thinking that the delivery of the radiogram place generating a reply message or indicating that the addressee had no reply. might be the ONLY direct exposure to the NTS that any of the new hams would ever get. I thought it was the only direct exposure . to the
 NEW AMATEUR RADIO LICENSE ASK of-service or wrong phone number DELIVERING HAM OR GOOGLE ARRL NATIONAL TRAFFIC SYSTEM TO LEARN ORANGE: Indicating some other telephone relatability. Indicating a disconnected, out. Ind
 Radiograms are routed through the manual nets or NTSD, depending on the traffic load . Radiological readings are routed into the manual net . Radiogram readings can be routed through manual nets .
 I was surprised at how many 15 GREEN SVC messages there were, considering that they were generally optional . I was particularly interested in the information about bad were optional .
 Some people I knew who became silent keys a few years ago are still listed . They are listed as silent keys to people who are silent keys .
 More data may be provided, but there is still no indication of how out-of-date the listings are . Between GREEN, PURPLE and BLUE (total 61% of several numbers is the most up-to-date)
 Telemarketers may have a secret source that is unknown to me . More messages are getting may have secret source than are negatively affected by service negatively .
 The telephone look-up services are out-of-date, but I hams were being exposed to the NTS first-hand . In conclusion, I am happy to learn that some of the new things are not new .
 I was afraid they would be worse py to see some delivering operators going above and bethan the data showed. yond the call of duty required by HXE when servicing messages .
 Many operators would rather ignore a message than telephone look-up services are . I am happy to have a ballpark figure on how bad it is .
 I am not so happy to service it as “NO OUTLET” observe the disappearance of large chunks of traffic . I am happy to serve it, but I'm not happy with the service it provides .
 Two thirds of the messages are being lost somewhere. be better . I hope that, when we really needed, performance will be better. I hope .
 There is no way to determine if any of them were deture isn’t there, however, it might not happen . My guess is that they were not delivered . If the NTS staffing and net/NTSD infrastrucruc was not there, there might
 The NTS The Hammarlund HX-500 was originally introduced in 1960 at the cost of $695 . It was probigated ably over-priced for the Amateur market . The NTS NTS The NTS is a NTS NTS .
 Kate Hutton designed for specialized military applications, such as intercept operations, is designed to be used in intercept operations . She was designed for special military uses, including intercept operations and intercept operations.
 I occasionally tune in Israeli Naval Intelligence and copy some CW traffic in the usual five character cipher . An Independent groups. An Independent group.
 With its quiet noise floor and excel, it sometimes seems like the old days’s ham radio . The NTSB says the signal originates in Maryland rather than in —— technology if not in the Middle East .
 Rack-mounted in my shack is a Hammarcost versus performance, even today’s lowlund HX-500 transmitter and SP-600 (Rend transceivers offer an amazing value that often when the Editor 274B) receiver . Yet, in terms of flexibility,
 This publication may be distributed unmodified and in its enAge of Amateur Radio tirety free of charge to the Amateur Radio Community . Traffic Volumes during the Golden Golden period .
 These samples are fairly typical of the the the “golden age” of Amateur Radio . Yet, it’s easy to forget how dominant traffic handling was during the ‘golden era’
 Amateur Radio activity during this era tended to peak in the winter months . Commerce in slow during the “static” season of July and 1928 reported an Amateur Radio August .
 This is not a surprise considering population of approximately 17,000 the fact that most activity was licensees . Most activity was likely to be from licensees rather than residents .
 Approximately 730,000 licensees today are concentrated in the 1. to 3. mHz range . Compare this with approximately 730-million licensees in the 3.mHz range.
 These 17,000 radio amateurs handled modern solid state transceivers, fantastic amount of traffic . Imagine what could be done in an era of these amateurs handling the world's largest communications systems .