 Curriculum FET TELEMATICS HISTORY 2017 GRADE 12 TERMS 1 – 3 1 SESSION 1: 7 March 2017 Cuba The Origin of the COLD WAR CONTAINMENT and BRINKMANSHIP: The CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 1962: The
 Bay of Pigs fiasco as USA supported Cuban rebels against Castro; mission a failure . Mission a failure, mission a failed failure, says U.S. president .
 American U-2 spy planes photographed Russian nuclear missile bases on Cuba . U.2 planes photographed U.S. bases in Cuba, Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy assured Khrushchev that USA will remove missiles in Turkey . Intervention by Robert Kennedy – assured Kennedy that U.S. would remove missiles from Turkey . U.N. President Nixon ordered missiles removed from Turkey in 1961 .
 President Obama agreed to dismantle and withdraw missiles from Cuba on condition that America did not invade Cuba . He agreed to pull missiles out of Cuba in exchange for a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 A hotline was established between the Kremlin in Moscow and the White House in Washington . Both sides realised how close they had brought the world to the brink of nuclear warfare . The world was brought to a halt by the threat of nuclear war .
 Kennedy appeared the hero while Khrushchev was ruined and dismissed from office in 1964 . Kennedy appeared to be the hero in the wake of the collapse .
 America, Britain and the Soviet Union signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1963 . America and Britain signed the nuclear test ban treaty .
 The Soviet Union was building offensive missiles and bomber bases in Cuba, he said . In a speech of extraordinary gravity, he told the U.S. people that the Soviet Union, contrary to promises, was building .
 The President had decided on a direct confrontation with and challenge to the power of the Soviet Union . The President's decision was made on the basis of his decision .
 One was the direct thrust at the Soviet Union as the party responsible for the crisis . Another thrust was aimed at the Communist Party responsible for it . The Soviet Union was not involved in the crisis, according to the historian .
 Explain why you think Cuba became a 'mere pawn' in the Cold War conflict between the superpowers . Tell us how you think the country was a "mere pawn" in the conflict .
 Comment on whether the cartoonist gives an accurate portrayal of events in the world .
 Both Khrushchev and Kennedy have fingers ready to press a button . Khrushchevitch and Kennedy were in control of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The learner should explain Mao’s commitment in attempting to move China towards becoming a world power . Mao's commitment to China was to try to become a major global power .
 Candidates must refer to Mao’s commitment to develop China towards economic independence . Mao committed himself to developing China to become independent . Mao's commitment to China's economic independence is key to Mao's success .
 Candidates need to make reference to Mao’s policies to support their line of argument . Candidates should use Mao's policies to make their case for Mao's policy .
 Information was falsified to show that increased production was taking place . Information was faked to show increased production .
 Benefits enjoyed by town workers were abolished and teamwork was encouraged . This led to the collapse of social services such as transport services .
 Communism is a political and economic system whereby the state takes full responsibility for its citizens . Communism is an economic and political system that takes responsibility for citizens . It is also a social system that allows people to take responsibility for their lives .
 Centrally controlled economic and political system which is an alternative to capitalism . Centratically controlled economic . system . System which is alternative to . capitalism .
 State takes partial control of the means of production but allows for some private ownership . State takes some partial control but allows private ownership of some of the products .
 A political system in which all citizens are free to elect representatives to establish a multi-party government . All citizens should be free to vote for multi-partist government .
 Neo-colonialism paradoxically enriched foreign powers in Africa . Africa with its rich resources enriched foreign countries in one-sided relationship . Former colonial powers favoured former colonial powers .
 African nations given political independence but did not attain economic freedom . African nations were given political freedom but not economic freedom in Africa . African countries were given freedom of expression but failed to achieve economic freedom.
 Dictatorship is an individual ruler who takes total control of all state power . An individual ruler is a ruler who controls all of the state's power . A dictator is a dictator who controls the majority of the population .
 Security forces use security forces to eliminate all forms of opposition . Often results in the creation of a personality cult through the use of security forces . Security forces are often used to create personality cults .
 African Nationalism is an intense commitment to liberate Africans from colonial rule . African nationalism is a commitment to liberation of African people . African nationalism is an attempt to liberate African people from colonial oppression .
 African decolonization occurred during the Cold War . How Africa was drawn into the world's most powerful and most powerful institutions .
 Oil, diamonds, gold, uranium, copper + fishing industry – a very desirable colony and ally . The colony is a very sought-after colony in the world .
 NP’s policy of destabilisation in region to stop spread of communism; to destroy SWAPO bases . NP‘s policy’ of destabilising in region is to stop spreading of communism, says SNA .
 Zambia received aid from USA, UNITA raided Zambia to pillage resources . Angolan refugees; Benguela railway line closed – hampered exports . Received aid from U.S. and UNITa raided Zambian resources; Angolese refugees . Angola refugees;
 The 25th anniversary of the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale is being revisited . Controversy over who won this pivotal engagement in southern African history is being re-discussed .
 SADF failed to capture Cuito Cuanavale and its airstrip . But the repulse of its subsequent frontal attacks on well-fortified positions at Tumpo proved a decisive setback .
 Cuban force outflanked the SADF and advanced on Namibia's southern border . The stalemate was broken by a Cuban force which outflank the SadF . The Cuban force advanced on the Namibia border .
 SADF apologists invariably cite statistics to 'prove' that its enemies at Cuito Cuanavale sustained far greater losses in personnel and material than it did . The loss of the South African Air Force's superiority meant that the ground forces had to withdraw or face the
 Black nationalists believed that the use of force was justified in order to gain social, political and economic power for African Americans . Black nationalists thought that the force was necessary to gain the social and political power of African Americans.
 It grew out of the Civil Rights Movement but was not a formal movement as it had no central leadership . The movement was formed from the civil rights movement in the 1960s and '60s .
 The Black Power Movement aimed to accelerate the process of change so that African Americans had the same opportunities as whites . The movement was formed in the 1960s .
 Stokely Carmichael was motivated to join Civil Rights Movement when he saw bravery of those involved in a sit-in . Carmichael joined the movement in the 1960s when he was inspired by the bravery of sit-ins .
 SNCC member Meredith Meredith was shot and wounded in Mississippi . Carmichael decided SNCC members should complete his walk in honor of Meredith . Meredith was wounded and Carmichael was wounded .
 Carmichael made what has become known as his ‘Black Power” speech . Upon reaching Greenwood Mississippi, Carmichael delivered the speech . Carmichael's speech is known as the "Black Power" speech .
 He was in favour of African dress and Afro hair styles and wanted African Americans to recognise their heritage . He was also against African Americans recognising their heritage.
 He was a member of the Nation of Islam, a Muslim group which taught that white society was deliberately preventing African Americans from empowering themselves .
 Separation between black and white Americans was necessary so that black people no longer depended on whites . Separation was necessary to keep black people from relying on whites, the author says .
 Malcolm X founded the Organisation of Afro-American Unity in 1964 . Malcolm X was suspended from the NOI after being suspended from it .
 He became less militant and adopted views that were not popular with black nationalists . He adopted views not popular among black nationalists, he says .
 Malcolm X was assassinated at a party meeting in Harlem on 21 February 1965 . Black nationalists angered by Malcolm X’s change of heart assassinated him in 1965 .
 The life of one of the most influential African Americans had been cut short . He is still remembered for raising the self-esteem of African Americans and fighting for their rights .
 Included a unique African-American culture in music, fashion, hairstyles, literature, art and even food . Included in music and fashion, fashion and literature, .
 Source 1A: This excerpt deals with issues that motivated the Black Power Movement . Source 1B: Black Power was the inspiration for the movement . Source 2B: The movement was inspired by issues such as racism and sexism .
 By the end of the 1960s, the position of blacks had improved substantially due to the 1964 Civil Rights Act . The 1964 act was the result of the 1964 Act .
 They lived in worse houses and were more likely to be unemployed or in low paid jobs . They also lived in bad houses and lived in poorer houses .
 Some blacks felt that peaceful agitators like Martin Luther King Junior had achieved very little and that much more radical and violent protests were needed . Some black leaders felt that more radical protests needed needed .
 Groups such as the Nation of Islam and the Black Panthers were opposed to cooperation with white liberals . The Nation was opposed to cooperating with the liberal movement .
 During the mid and late 1960s riots were common in black areas throughout the USA, especially during the hot summer months . During the summer months, black areas in the U.S. were rioting .
 These were often spontaneous, although militant groups were also partly responsible . Militant groups were often partly responsible for the deaths .
 It seemed at the time as if the whole American way of life was under threat, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Adapted from People and Events in the Modern World by N Tate, 1989, Oxford. Adapted to People and Event in the modern World .
 Comment on the usefulness of the cartoon to a researcher writing about Steve Biko's influence in South Africa’s liberation struggle . Comment on whether the cartoon is useful to research into the influence of Biko in the struggle .
 From Robben Island we followed with immense interest the movement led and inspired by Steve Biko . The driving thrust of Black Consciousness was to forge pride and unity amongst the masses of our people, says Mandela .
 For its part the ANC welcomed Black Consciousness as part of the genuine forces of the revolution . For its own reasons, the ANC has welcomed the idea of Black consciousness .
 We understood it was helping give organisational form to the popular upsurge of all the oppressed groups in our society . We understood that the organisation was helping to give . form to those oppressed .
 "That intervention came at a time when the political pulse of our people had been rendered faint by banning, imprisonment, exile, murder and banishment," she said . "The political pulse in the country was rendered faint"
 Repression had swept the country clear of all visible organisation of the people … 1.3. 3.3 . 3.4.4 . The country was swept clear of any visible organisation for the people .
 Comment on the words in the cartoon, 'THE TRICK IS TO SHOUT SO LOUDLY THAT WE START TO START TO LOOK LIKE VICTIMS', in the context of human rights atrocities that were committed during the apartheid era .