 This program is unique in equipping modern diplomats with and policy tools that balance strategic thinking with agility . The and worry about your learning process. November/December 2021 THUNDERBIRD School of Global Management in Washington, DC .
 It does not accept responsibility for the views expressed in any article, signed or unsigned, which appear in its pages .
 The contents of Foreign Affairs are copyrighted . The content of this article is copyrighted. It is published by Foreign Affairs.
 FIONA HILL is a leading expert on modern Russia . She is the author of a book on Russia .
 Hill served as intelligence officer for Russia and Eurasia on the National Intelligence Council in the George W Bush and Obama administrations . Hill also served as deputy assistant to the president and senior director for European and Russian affairs in the Trump administration .
 Brookings Institution senior fellow at Brookings Institution: Putin capitalizing on corruption, inequality, and political divisions in the U.S. to accelerate American decline . She argues in “The Kremlin’s Strange Victory” that Vladimir Putin capitalizes on corruption .
 Rory Stewart studied at Eton and Oxford before serving in the British army . He is the son of a British intelligence officer and served as an infantryman in the army .
 While on leave from the British foreign service, he walked for 21 months across Nepal, India, Pakistan, Iran, and Afghanistan . He partly told in his best-selling book The Places in Between . The Places In Between is published by Simon Tisdall .
 Stewart went on to serve in Parliament and serve in various ministerial positions . Stewart now teaches at Yale .
 In “The Last Days of Intervention” , he blames the tragic outcome in Afghanistan on the international community’s inability to chart a path between overreach and neglect . He blames the tragedy on international failure to chart the right path .
 Isai earned a Ph.D. from the London School of Economics and is an expert on international political economy . Isai was born and raised in Taipei, Taiwan .
 Tsai spent 15 years working on trade-related issues and then ran the agency that handles relations with China . She is Taiwan’s first female head of state, in 2016 .
 In “Taiwan and the Fight for Democracy” she argues that Taiwan owes its success to its commitment to democracy . Taiwan is ready to join the fight in the global struggle for democratic values, she says .
 MADELEINE ALBRIGHT served as the first female U.S. secretary of state from 1997 to 2001 . She had earlier served as United States ambassador to the United Nations .
 Born in Prague, she was forced to escape her homeland twice from the Nazis and the communists . Her family eventually settled in Denver when she was 11 years old . Albright was 11 when she left her homeland for Denver, Colorado .
 In “The Coming Democratic Revival” , she argues that democracy is poised for a global comeback . She argues that the coming Democratic Revival is a global revival .
 Suspicions and acrimony threaten to sink trust and cooperation even in the face of shared existential challenges . Yet rather than offering reassurance, this chorus served mostly to highlight just how dismal the geopolitical reality has become, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Hal Brands and John Lewis Gaddis argue that the time has come to carefully study the lessons of the U.S.-Soviet contest then and now . Despite some clear differences between the two, they say the time is now to learn the lessons from the past .
 Sarotte digs deep into the archives to reveal how and why Washington's relationship with Moscow so rapidly regressed after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Sarotte: The relationship between the U.S. and Russia quickly deteriorated after the Soviet-era Soviet Union split .
 Hill was a senior Russia official on Donald ‘Trump’s National Security Council . Hill reflects on how effectively and advantageously the Kremlin has exploited American dysfunction during the administration .
 Historians and policymakers have endlessly studied the opening moves of the Cold War . Historians have debated what could have been done differently in the decades since its start .
 To invoke the Cold War parallel is not to endorse it as either desirable or inevitable, it's not to say whether it's desirable . The Cold War parallels are not to be seen as inevitable or desirable, it is to say .
 Cold wars in this sense are as old as history itself . Cold wars are cold wars in the sense of the Cold War era .
 No if we mean the Cold War, which we capitalize because it originated and popularized the term . The Cold War was the first to use the term "cold war" No if it means Cold War .
 None of those issues looms as large now, and where parallels do exist, the context is quite different . The context is very different now, with parallels to growing bipolarity, intensifying polemics .
 Chinese President Xi Jinping has declared it, and a rare bipartisan consensus in the U.S. has accepted the challenge . The United States has accepted it, with a bipartisan consensus .
 The future is, of course, less knowable than the past, but it’s not in all respects unknowable . It's not all the knowable, but the future is still unknowable, as is the future .
 Time will continue to pass, the law of gravity will still apply, and none of us will outlive our physiological term limits . Time will pass, but the law still applies, and no one will be able to outlive their physiological limits .
 Thucydides had such predictabilities and surprises in mind when he cautioned, 24 centuries ago, that the future would resemble the past but not in all respects reflect it . He also argued that the greatest single war of his time revealed timeless truths about all wars to come .
 Our purpose is to show how the greatest unfought war of our time might expand experience and enhance resilience in a Sino-American rivalry whose future, hot or cold, remains unclear . The future of the Cold War is unclear .
 History provides a framework within which to survive uncertainty, and possibly even thrive within it . That history provides an example of how to cope with uncertainty in the 21st century .
 Our first known is geography, which continental drift will in time alter, but not in our time . The first known benefit of the concept is geography .
 Hal Brands and John Lewis Gaddis are chiefly a land power, beset by an ancient dilemma . China will remain a major player in the global retail sector .
 If, in search of strategic depth, it tries to expand its perimeters, it is likely to overstretch its capabilities and provoke resistance from neighbors .
 "If, to regain solvency, it contracts its perimeters, it risks inviting in enemies," he says . "It risks inviting enemies. It risks inviting them in," he adds .
 Even behind great walls, uneasy lie the heads of those whose boundaries remain unfixed . The walls of the U.S. Capitol Hill are a reminder of the tensions surrounding the walls .
 The U.S. benefits from boundaries that geography has determined . The United States, however, benefits from geography, not from geography .
 The trigger warning was Russia's completion of its transSiberian railroad in 1904, a slapdash project soon overtaken by war and revolution . The British geopolitician Halford Mackinder’s portentous warning that “heartland” control of Eurasian �
 President Woodrow Wilson declared war on imperial Germany in 1917 . President Franklin Roosevelt said in 1940-41 that Hitler's ultimate target was the United States itself .
 George Kennan called for “containing” an emboldened World War II ally, the Soviet Union, in 1947 . Kennan had long legacies on which to draw .
 The “belt” is to be a network of rail and road corridors across Eurasia . The ‘belt’ will be built across the continent . The 'belt' will be a 'network of rail, road corridors'
 It’s too easy to claim that maritime states project power without generating resistance, for if that were the case, colonialism would still thrive . If that were not the case it would have been easier for colonialism to thrive .
 The relationship between geography and governance is clear enough to be our second known . But it's not the first known, but it's the second known.
 Liberty, in these situations, is decreed from the top down, not evolved from the bottom up . Liberty is not decreed, it's decreed by the top, not by the bottom down .
 Autocracies that fall short, such as the Soviet Union, risk hollowing themselves out from within . Autocracy that fall out of control risks hollowing itself out of within, writes David Frum .
 China’s post-Cold War leaders sought to avoid repeating the Soviet example . They sought to transform Marxism into consumer capitalism without at the same time allowing democracy . China's post-cold War leaders have studied the Soviet model .
 This latest “rectification of names” —the ancient Chinese procedure of conforming names to shifting realities —seemed until recently, it seemed until recently to have succeeded . This latest "rectification"
 Xi is cutting off access to the outside world, defying international legal norms, and encouraging “Wolf Warrior” diplomacy, none of which seems calculated to win or retain allies . Instead, Xi is turning off allies and defying legal norms . None of these seems calculated or calculated
 The New Cold War is pressing minorities in ways defunct Russian and Chinese emperors might have applauded . At home, he is enforcing orthodoxy, whitewashing history, and op. At home he's enforcing orthodoxy .
 He has sought to secure reversals by abolishing his own term limits . Most significant is his abolishing of his own own term limit .
 Perhaps he fears the risks of his own retirement, even though these mount with each rival he imprisons or purges . Perhaps he feared the risk of retiring, perhaps he fears his own .
 Perhaps he has realized that innovation requires but may also inspire spontaneity within his country . Perhaps he realizes that innovation needs to be seen as innovation requires innovation .
 Perhaps he worries that increasingly hostile international rivals won't allow him unlimited time to achieve his aims . Perhaps he also worries that international rivals might not be able to achieve their aims .
 Perhaps he sees the prevailing concept of world order itself as at odds with a mandate from Heaven, Marx, or Mao . Perhaps he thinks the world order is in conflict with the mandate of Heaven or Marx .
 Xi envisions a world order with authoritarianism at its core and with China at its center . Or it could be that he envisions an authoritarian world order . Xi could be trying to create a world of authoritarianism with China as the center .
 Technology, he may expect, will make human consciousness as transparent as satellites made the earth’s surface during the Cold War . Technology may also make consciousness transparent as it did in the 1950s .
 Expectations within China, he may suppose, will never find reasons not to rise . Expectations in China will continue to rise, he says .
 Xi, as he ages, will gain in the wisdom, energy, and attentiveness that only he, as supreme leader, can trust himself to provide . Xi will gain the wisdom and energy he needs to provide for China's future, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If Xi really believes all of this, then he’s already losing sight of the gaps between promises and performance that have long been Catch-22s for authoritarian regimes . But if Xi really thinks all of the this is true, he may be losing sight .
 If you ignore such fissures, they'll only worsen, like Gorbachev’s predecessors did, they’ll only worsen . For if you ignore them, you’ve got to deal with them, they won’t, they will only worsen.
 Hal Brands and John Lewis Gaddis' infallibility on which legitimacy in an autocracy must rest must rest . But if, like Gorbachev himself, you acknowledge them, you'll undermine the claim to November/December 2021 .
 Democracy in America suffers from Brezhnev-like paralysis . Democracy in U.S. suffers from gaps between promises and performance . The Roots of Roots of Resilience is published by John Sutter .
 The United States differs from China, though, in that distrust of authority is constitutionally mandated . The U.S. is constitutionally constitutionally mandated to distrust authority .
 The separation of powers secures a center of gravity to which the nation can return after crises . Separated powers secure the nation's center to which crises may have demanded .
 Respect for authority permeates its culture, but stability is punctuated by protracted upheavals when authority fails . "Respect for authority" permeates the culture of the United States .
 Autocracies often win sprints, but smart investors put marathon money on democracies . Smart investors put their marathon money in democracies, says Julian Zelizer .
 The pattern emerges clearly from the two costliest civil wars of the nineteenth century . The patterns emerge from the costliest Civil Wars of the century .
 Taiping Rebellion of 1850-64 took some 20 million Chinese lives, about five percent of the population . The Taiping rebellion took about 20 million lives, including about five per cent of Chinese .
 The American Civil War of 1861-65 killed 750,000 combatants, 2.5 percent of a much less crowded country . The war was the first civil war of its kind in the U.S.
 China after the Taiping Rebellion underwent decades of turmoil from which it emerged only with Mao's proclamation of the People’s Republic in 1949 . China emerged from the turmoil of decades from which Mao's proclaimed People's Republic emerged .
 The United States, by that same account, 14 FOREIGN AFFIRS recovered quickly enough to join the European predators victimizing China at the end of the nineteenth century . The U.S. has continued doing so ever since .
 X1’s erowing reliance on this narrative and nationalism it stokes implies an inflammability in Chinese culture that is currently useful to the regime . But that might not be easily extinguished, it's not easily extinguished .
 Kennan: Only cumulative frustrations would convince Stalin or his successors that it was in their best interests to alter their system's worst aspects . Nothing could reassure such a regime, Kennan insisted, only cumulative frustrations .
 Kennan carefully pointed out that it would never have worked with Hitler, who had a fixed timetable, dictated by his own mortality, for achieving his aims . Kennan: 'It would never work' with Hitler .
 Xi has ruled out passing that problem from generation to generation, although he has not yet set a date for resolving it . Xi has also ruled out handing the problem over to the next generation .
 The U.S. has deliberately left its own ‘Taiwan policy unclear . Nonetheless, his increasingly aggressive rhetoric adds to the risk of a Sino-American cold war to become hot .
 The first half of the twentieth century offered no support for the idea that great-power rivalries could be resolved peacefully . Great power rivalries were not resolved peacefully in the early 1900s .
 Given what most leaders had experienced in a second world war, few anywhere were eager to risk a third . Given the experience of a second war, many leaders were wary of a third war .
 Once Stalin's successors realized the extent of his miscalculations, it was too late to reverse their effects . Stalin's successor realized the effects of the miscalculation, it would have been too late .
 The Chinese haven't fought any significant wars for more than half a century . The Chinese, except for their brief invasion of Vietnam in 1979, have been involved in more than 50 years .
 A second way in which historians have explained the ‘long peace’ is that nuclear weapons suppressed optimism about how wars might end . A third way to explain the peace was suppressed by nuclear weapons, historians say .
 Nikita Khrushchev and John F Kennedy did not want to die for Berlin . But this in itself suggests a balanced lack of resolve, for both of them .
 They accepted a walled city inside a partitioned country in the middle of a divided continent . Instead of a wall, the city was built in a divided country . The city is now a wall of walled land inside a divided nation .
 No grand design could have produced such an oddity, and yet it held up until the Cold War evolved its own peaceful, if equally unexpected, end .
 None of this could have happened without nuclear capabilities, for only they could put lives on the line simultaneously in Washington and Moscow . Only they could do this with only their nuclear capabilities .
 The Chinese deploy less than ten percent of the number of nuclear weapons the U.S. and Russia retain . That number is only 15 percent of what the two superpowers had at the height of the Cold War .
 It’s even less plausible today that the U.S. would use nuclear weapons to defend Taiwan, for that island is more important to Beijing than Cuba or Berlin ever was to Moscow .
 Xi believes he can invade Taiwan without risking a U.S. nuclear response . Yet that is implausibility could lead Xi to think he can do so without risking U.N. response .
 China's growing cyberand antisatellite capabilities may also encourage him, for they bring back possibilities of surprise attacks that the Cold War’s reconnaissance revolution seemed, for decades, to have diminished .
 Japan, the Philippines, Indonesia, Australia, Australia and New Zealand are also big islands in the region .
 China’s forcefully expanding its perimeters, the self-created problem that once plagued Moscow . One such response might be to exploit the overstretch that comes from China's expanding its borders, the author says .
 The Brezhnev Doctrine—the commitment to act similarly wherever else “socialism’ might be at risk—alarmed more than it reassured the leaders of other such states, notably Mao . Mao, who secretly began planning his 1971 “opening” to Washington,
 By the time the Soviet Union invoked the doctrine again, in Afghanistan in 1979, it had few allies left anywhere and none on whose reliability it could count . The Soviet Union had no allies left in Afghanistan and no reliable allies .
 Xi’s threats to Taiwan could have a similar effect in states surrounding China, which may in turn look for their own “openings” to Washington .
 Central Asians may not indefinitely ignore repressions of ‘Tibetans and Uyghurs’ Central Asians . Central Asians are not indefinitely ignoring repressorships of the ‘Uyghur and Tibetan people .
 Debt traps and environmental degradation are souring recipients on the BRI’s benefits . Debt traps, environmental degradation, and onerous repayment terms are sourring recipients . The BRI's benefits are due to be funded by taxpayers .
 Russia, the original source of early-twentieth-century concerns about the “heartland,” could now find itself surrounded by Chinese “rimlands” in Asia, eastern and southeastern Europe, and even the Arctic . Russia could now be surrounded by China's
 U.S. unipolarity may end not with a precarious Sino-American bipolarity but with a multipolarity that restrains Beijing by making assertiveness selfdefeating . All of which raises the possibility that . Beijing's assertiveness may be self-defeating,
 A crafty American Cold Warrior would have hoped to deploy a similar strategy . So would a crafty Cold Warrior who, following their example, hoped to .
 "Our final known is the inescapability of surprises," says the author of the series .
 International systems are anarchic, theorists tell us, in that no component within them is fully in control . International systems have been described as anarchic by theorists as 'anarchy'
 It may be possible to derive from these categories of surprises likely to occur in the Sino-American cold war .
 Existential surprises are shifts in the arenas within which great powers compete, for which neither is responsible but that endanger them both . Neither is responsible for the shifts in which they occur, but that both are in danger .
 Climates have always fluctuated, which is why it used to be possible to walk from Siberia to Alaska . Climates in Alaska have fluctuated dramatically .
 Hal Brands and John Lewis Gaddis address the deep histories that are increasingly altering their own . What is new is the extent to which globalization has accelerated these phenomena .
 Exhaustive dangers produced tacit cooperation where negotiated formalities almost surely would have failed . Instead, existential dangers produce tacit cooperation, instead of formal formalities .
 CovID-19 has so far spurred only Chinese abrasiveness . Climate change may present similar opportunities in the SinoAmerican cold war, even if it's not a war .
 The point should be to keep landing sites for Martian equivalents open, not to welcome existential problems, but explore whether collaborative outcomes can result from them . The point of the mission is to find out if the Martian equivalent exists .
 Intentional surprises originate in efforts by single competitors to startle, confuse, or dismay their adversaries . Intentionally surprises originated in efforts to surprise, confuse or dismay opponents .
 Surprise attacks, as on Pearl Harbor, fit this category, and intelligence failures can never be ruled out . Surprise attacks are possible, but intelligence failures are never ruled out, as is intelligence failures .
 The Cold War’s greatest surprises, however, arose from reversals of polarity, of which Mao was a master . Mao was the master of reversals, and Mao was master of his skill .
 When he leaned east, in 1949-50, he blindsided the Truman administration and opened the way for the Korean War and a communist offensive in Asia . He blindsided Truman administration, opening the way to the Korea War and communist offensive .
 When he leaned west, in 1970-71, he made the U.S. an ally while rendering the Soviet Union vulnerable on two fronts . The Soviet Union never recovered from that disadvantage from which it never recovered .
 An American “opening” to Moscow might someday turn it against Beijing . That’s why an American ‘opening’ to Russia might turn it on Beijing . An American "opening" to Moscow could turn it back against Beijing.
 The original Sino-Soviet split took two decades to develop . Eisenhower administration sought to speed the process by driving Mao into a mutually repulsive relationship with Khrushchev .
 Russia has long complained about U.S. “containment” of Russia . Xi’s BRI may be accomitiated to China .
 Kremlin: Chinese “containment,” from the Kremlin's perspective, may ultimately become the greater danger . Chinese "containment" may ultimately be the greatest danger, Kremlin says .
 One other form of intentional surprise comes from supposed subordinates who turn out not to be . One of the biggest surprises is when they turn out to be the boss .
 Khrushchev provoked the Berlin crises of 1958-59 and 1961 . The communist leader Walter Ulbricht’s warnings of an imminent East German collapse forced him to provoke the crises .
 Egypt by attacking Israel in 1973; Cuba by intervening in Africa in 1975-77 . Hafizullah Amin in Afghanistan, whose contacts with U.S. officials triggered a self-defeating Soviet invasion .
 Thucydides showed Corinth and Corcyra doing something similar to the Spartans and the Athenians 24 centuries earlier .
 Capitalism, they were sure, would eventually destroy itself by creating too great a gap between the means of production and the benefits it distributed . Capitalism was sure to destroy itself, but it would destroy itself .
 The gap between productive means and distributed benefits would instead, he insisted in 1946-47, bring about the collapse of communism within the Soviet Union and its post-World War II satellite states .
 But he did understand how stresses within societies can themselves greatly surprise him .
 Its success requires living with uncertainties, of which the future will not be short supply . The future is not in short supply, but it is in the future, with uncertainty .
 The strategy of containment, although imperfect in its accomplishments and at times tragic in its failures, did successfully manage its own contradictions while buying the time necessary for those within the Soviet system to become obvious, even, to its own leaders .
 Even the clearest of destinations may not always always, or even often, reveal the paths by which to reach them . It did this chiefly by combining simplicity of conception with flexibility .
 Eisenhower, Kennedy, Nixon, and Reagan employed both to begin transformations of the adversaries confronting them . Reagan, Kennedy and Reagan used both to start transformations of adversaries .
 Kennan distrusted such elasticities in the pursuit of containment, but it was precisely this maneuverability that ensured the strategy’s safe arrival at its intended destination, he says .
 A second way in which containment succeeded was by treating spontaneity as a strength, he says . A third way was to deal with the crisis was to treat spontaneism as a weakness, he adds .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was as much a European as an American creation, in striking contrast to its Moscow-dominated rival, the Warsaw Pact . The organization was formed in 1953 after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The U.S. did not insist on ideological uniformity among its friends . Nor, outside of Eu, did the United States insist on ideology uniformity . The United States did not want to be seen as an ally of the European Union .
 A third asset, although it didn't always seem so at the time, was the American election cycle . The U.S. election cycle was also a third asset .
 Quadrennial stress tests for containment unnerved its architects, upset sympathetic pundits, and alarmed overseas allies . But they were at least safeguards against ossification .
 "No long-term strategy can succeed if it allows aspirations to outrun its capabilities or capabilities to corrupt its aspirations," says John Defterios . He says the U.S. should not let aspirations outrun capabilities .
 They are better than having no means of reconsideration apart from the demise of aged autocrats . The timing of their departure from this world is not given to their followers to know .
 Americans proclaim their ideals so explicitly, they illustrate departures from them all the more vividly . Because Americans proclaim ideals so clearly, they leave them more vividly, they do not .
 Domestic failures such as economic inequality, racial segregation, sexual discrimination, environmental degradation, and toplevel extraconstitutional excesses all go on display for the world .
 Kennan: “Exhibitions of indecision, disunity and internal disintegration within this country” can “have an exhilarating 20 FOREIGN AFFAIRS effect” on external enemies . As Kennan pointed out in the most quoted article ever published
 The study of history is the best compass we have in navigating this future, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: History is best compass to guide us in navigating the future .
 The UC San Diego School of Global Policy and Strategy provides analytical training for the next generation of policymakers . The school is based in San Diego, California .
 U.S. Secretary of State James Baker met with Russian President Boris Yeltsin in 1991 . Baker arrived in Moscow amid political chaos to meet with Russian leader . Baker was at the time busy wresting power from Mikhail Gorbachev .
 Yeltsin had recently made a shocking announcement that he and the leaders of Belarus and Ukraine were dismantling the Soviet Union . The announcement was made in a shocking move .
 Their motive was to render Gorbachev impotent by transforming him from the head of a massive country into the president of nothing . The Soviet Union wanted to make him impotent, according to a former KGB chief .
 In the short run, it was a brilliant move, and within ten days, it had succeeded completely . The move was brilliant, but it was not a long-term success, says David Cameron .
 Even before Yeltsin’s gambit, Baker had begun worrying about whether the desire of some Soviet republics to become independent might yield bloodshed . Baker had been worried about whether some republics might become independent .
 Yeltsin called for the Soviet Union's complete destruction, Baker feared . Baker had a new fear: The Soviet Union would be destroyed . Baker: "It's not just a matter of days"
 Baker’s goal for his December 1991 journey was to ascertain who, after the Soviet Union's dissolution, would retain the power to authorize a nuclear launch and how that fateful order might be delivered . Baker's goal for the trip was to find out who would keep the power of authorizing
 Yeltsin’s openness to Baker was partly a gambit to win U.S. help in his struggle with Gorbachev . Baker was also an attempt to secure financial aid from the United States . Baker's visit to Russia was part of a bid to help Yelts
 President Vladimir Putin wants a fresh start in Moscow’s relations with the West, one characterized by openness and trust . But it was also a sign that he wanted a new start to Moscow's relations with West, he said .
 Yeltsin and Baker worked to ensure that only one nuclear successor state would emerge from the Soviet collapse . Russia would emerge as a successor state after the Soviet Union collapsed, Baker says .
 Former Soviet atomic weapons in Belarus, Kazakhstan, and above all Ukraine were either destroyed or relocated to Russian soil . Sarotte William Perry, and Strobe Talbott, Clinton’s top Russia adviser, were among those to ensure that former Soviet nuclear weapons were destroyed or moved to Russian
 Vladimir Putin, Yeltsin’s handpicked successor, divulged little in grudging 1999 conversations with Clinton and Talbott . Putin's successor, Putin, had little to say, but Clinton, Talbott said .
 Putin later remarked, “By launching the sovereignty parade” —his term for the independence movements of Soviet republics in 1990-91—“Russia itself aided in the collapse of the Soviet Union,” he said . The outcome that had opened the door to such gruesome
 Moscow should have dug in, rather than stand aside while former Soviet bloc states jumped ship to join the West, he says . In his view, Moscow should've dug in both within the union and abroad, instead of standing aside .
 Putin began backtracking on the democratization of 24 FOREIGN AFFAIRS the Yeltsin era and on cooperative ventures with Washington . Once firmly in power, Putin began to backtrack on democratization .
 Although there were notable episodes reprising the spirit of the early 1990s, the trend line was negative . The most notable episodes of sympathy were after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and nuclear accord in 2010 .
 The relationship reached frightening new lows during Russia’s 2008 conflict with Georgia and its 2014 invasion of Ukraine, and it has even further since 2016, owing to the revelation of Russia' cyberattacks on U.S. businesses, institutions, and elections .
 History is rarely monocausal, and the decay was the result of U.S. and Russian policies and politics over time . The decay was a cumulative product of United States and Russia policies over time, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Expansion itself was a justifiable response to the geopolitics of the 1990s . Expansion was a response to a decade-long political crisis in the U.S.
 Former Soviet bloc states are clamoring to join the NATO alliance . It's neither unprecedented nor unreasonable to let them in, it's not unreasonable to do so .
 What was unwise was expanding the alliance in a way that took little account of the geopolitical reality, he says . The alliance was expanding in the way it did, he adds .
 The closer NATO moves its infrastructure, foreign bases, troops, and nuclear weapons, to Moscow, the higher the political cost to the newly cooperative relationship with Russia . Russia is cooperating with the U.S. in the wake of the crisis in Ukraine .
 Some U.S. policymakers understood this problem at the time and proposed expanding in contingent phases to minimize the damage . Some of the damage was caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 Washington opposed alternative mode of enlargement to avoid drawing a new line across Europe . That would have avoided drawing new lines across Europe, but it faced strong opposition within Washington .
 Advocates of a one-size-fitsall manner of expansion triumphed . Instead, advocates of a single-size, all-in-a-piece-size manner of expanding triumphing .
 Washington's error was not to enlarge the alliance but to do so in a way that maximized Moscow's aggravation and gave fuel to Russian reactionaries . Washington's mistake was to expand the NATO alliance, not enlarge it, it was to maximize the aggravation .
 The two countries still possess more than 90 percent of the world’s nuclear warheads . The ability to kill nearly every living creature on earth is the ability to do so .
 Between them, both states have shredded nearly every remaining arms control accord . They have shown little willingness to replace them with new agreements . Yet between them, they have shredded many remaining arms controls .
 Understanding the decay in U.S. relations can help the United States better manage long-term strategic competition in the future . Understanding the manner of NATO expansion contributed to it will help the U.K. better manage its own interests .
 As the 1990s showed, the way that Washington competes can, over time, have just as profound an impact as the competition itself . The state of Washington, D.C., has a history of winning and losing .
 To grasp what went wrong in U.S. relations, it is necessary to look beyond the familiar binary that categoContainment rizes NATO enlargement as either good or bad . Beyond the Cold War, focus on the manner in which the alliance grew .
 After the collapse of Soviet power in Europe, NaTO swelled in multiple rounds of enlargement to 30 states . NaTO was formed in response to urgent requests from states emerging from Moscow's domination, now justifiably eager to choose security alliance for themselves .
 New historical evidence shows that U.S. leaders were so focused on enlarging NATO in their preferred manner that they did not consider the perils of the path they were taking or how their choices would magnify Russia's own self-harming choices .
 Put simply, expansion was a reasonable policy; the problem was how it happened . The problem is how the expansion of the U.S. military's military's ability to expand is how it occurred .
 Article 5 pledge to treat an attack on one as “an attack against them all” is at stake . Article 5 guarantee is a guarantee that the U.S. will not tolerate an attack against one of its enemies .
 Scandinavian alliance members, such as Norway, had in earlier decades wisely customized their NATO memberships . Norway is savvy about living in a neighborhood that was Soviet-adjacent but not Soviet-controlled . Norway's NATO membership was customized in the 1980s .
 Sarotte had ruled out nuclear weapons either on its land or in its ports . Sarotte bases or the deployment of foreign forces on its territory in peacetime were banned .
 All of this was done to keep long-term frictions with Moscow manageable . Russia and the U.S. have been at odds with each other for years .
 The approach could have been a model for central and eastern European states and the Baltics, since they occupy a region close to but not controlled by Russia . The Baltics are too far away from Russia, but not far from Russia .
 American hubris and tragic decisions by Yeltsin provided ammunition to those arguing that Washington did not need phased enlargement to manage Russia . But U.S. hubris, combined with tragic decisions, provided ammunition .
 The U.S. needs to pursue a policy of containment beyond the Cold War, the authors say . They say . Instead, they say, the United States needs to focus on containment beyond Cold War .
 This happened just as Yeltsin was succumbing to illness and Putin was rising through the ranks in Russia . And this happened just before Yeltsins' illness . Putin is now a rising star in Russia and Putin is rising through Russia's ranks .
 The devil, in this case, really is in the details, in three choices that Washington made about NATO expansion, one under Bush and two under Clinton . Each of these choices foreclosed other options for European security .
 By November 24, 1989, just two weeks after the Berlin Wall’s unexpected fall, George W. Bush was already sensing the magnitude of more changes yet to come . Bush was the president of the United States in 1989 .
 As protesters toppled one government after another in central and eastern Europe, it seemed clear that new leaders in that region would abandon the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact, an involuntary military alliance with the Soviet Union, was an alliance .
 She saw the pact as an essential “fig leaf for Gorbachev” amid the humiliation of the Soviet collapse . According to British records, she saw it as a ‘fig leaf’ for Gorgachev amid the collapse .
 She also “discouraged from coming out publicly in support of independence for the Baltic Republics,” since now is not the time to question European borders .
 Bush preferred to solve this problem by pushing NATO beyond the old Cold War line . Bush prefers to push NATO beyond Cold War lines . Bush: "NATO is not a solution to this problem."
 Bush most certainly did not want NATO to dissipate or the United States’ leading role in European security to disappear with it . All these options were anathema to Bush .
 Moscow had hundreds of thousands of troops in East Germany and legal right to keep them there . The Soviet victory over the Nazis in World War II gave Moscow the right to have troops in the country .
 As the Cold War’s frontline, a divided Germany had the highest concentration of nuclear arms per square mile anywhere on the planet . A divided Germany also had the most nuclear arms in a square mile of the world .
 The weapons in West Germany had been installed to deter a Soviet invasion . NATO's conventional forces alone would have been unable to stop a massive advance .
 Had deterrence failed, the missiles’ use would have rendered the heart of Europe uninhabitable, a terrifying prospect to Germans . Because they were living at ground zero, they arguably had more skin in the game than allies .
 The chancellor, Helmut Kohl, had to be particularly attuned to voter sentiment on reunification and the nuclear issue .
 Moscow gave Russia the ability to undermine the established order of transatlantic relations . This reality gave Moscow the . ability to . undermine the establishment order of the transatlantic . relations, he says .
 Genscher raised this idea in a negative sense, meaning he was certain that Moscow would not allow reunification unless such coverage was explicitly ruled out . He said he would be certain that such coverage would not be allowed .
 Bush and his National Security Council sensed that they might be able to finesse the way NATO moved eastward . Bush wanted to limit what could happen on eastern German territory after Germany joined the alliance .
 Although they did not use the term, they were following the Scandinavian strategy . The U.S. government is following a Scandinavian strategy, they say .
 The secretary had to drop this wording, however, after realizing that it was inconsistent with Bush's preferences .
 NATO would shift eastward after all, with a special status for eastern Germany . Eastern Germany would become Europe's only guaranteed nuclear-free zone . It was a sign that NATO would move eastward .
 Bush shifted Gorbachev’s attention away from removal of nuclear weapons in western territory and toward economic inducements to allow for German reunification . The move to limit NATO infrastructure in eastern Germany was played on Moscow's economic weakness .
 In exchange for billions of deutsche marks in various forms of support, the Soviet leader ultimately allowed Germany to reunify and its eastern regions to join NATO on October 3, 1990 . Germany joined NATO in 1990, allowing NATO to expand across the Cold War frontline .
 By October 11, 1991, President Bush could even indulge in speculation about a more ambitious goal . By that date, he could even speculate about a bigger goal .
 Bush lost to Clinton in the 1992 U.S. presidential election . Soon, Bush would be gone as well, after he lost in 1992 .
 By the time the new president got his team in place, in mid-1993, hyperinflation and corruption were already weakening the prospects of democracy in Russia . The new president took office in 1993 .
 Yeltsin made a series of tragic decisions that cast doubt on the country’s ability to develop into a peaceful, democratic neighbor to the new states on its borders . Yeltsins' decisions cast doubt doubt on his ability to become a peaceful neighbor .
 In October 1993, Yeltsin had tanks fire on the parliamentary building in Moscow . Yeltsins clashed with anti-reform extremists in the parliament, clashing with extremists .
 Extremist extremists did well in the subsequent parliamentary elections, on December 12, 1993 . Despite, or perhaps because of, the attack, extremists did .
 For a while, a budding friendship between “Bill and Boris’s” distracted the world from these troubling events . ‘Bill’ and ‘Boris’ have been friends for a while .
 In January 1994, he launched a novel plan for European security, one aimed at putting those countries on the path to NATO membership without antagonizing Russia . The plan was designed to help those countries join NATO membership .
 Sarotte idea largely conceived of by General John Shalikashvili, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and his advisers . The idea of Sarotte was largely conceived by the Joint chiefs of Staff .
 PfP’s connection to NATO membership was intentionally left vague, but the idea was roughly that would-be NATO members could, through militaryto-military contacts, training, and operations, put themselves on a path to full membership and the Article 5 guarantee . PfP's connection
 Even Poland wanted full membership, but understood that it had to follow Washington's lead . This strategy offered a compromise sufficiently acceptable to key players, including Poland .
 PfP also had the benefit of not immediately redrawing a line across Europe between states with Article 5 protection and those without . PfP has the advantage of not having to redraw the line between Article 5 and Article 5 .
 A host of countries in disparate locations could join the partnership and then progress at their own pace . Instead, a host of nations could join in and progress on their own at the moment .
 PfP could incorporate post-Soviet states, including Ukraine, even if they were unlikely to become NATO allies . PfP was formed from a group of post-soviet states in the early 1990s .
 The genius of PfP was that it balanced these competing interests and 30 FOREIGN AFFAIRS even opened its door to Russia as well . Russia would eventually join the partnership . PfP even opened the door to Russian as well, which would later join PfP .
 Clinton later noted that PfP “has proven to be a bigger deal than we had expected—with more countries, and more substantive cooperation.” Clinton noted to NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana . Clinton later said PfP has proven “to be a big deal than
 Opponents of PfP say it gave Moscow a de facto veto over when, where, and how NATO would expand . PfP made central and eastern European countries wait to gain the full Article 5 guarantee .
 They argued for extending the alliance as soon as possible to deserving new democracies . They argued instead for extending it to deserving countries .
 Yeltsin reportedly approved what he reportedly thought would be a high-precision police action to counter separatists in Chechnya region . The PfP has been criticized for its anti-terror policies since 1994 .
 He started what became what became a brutal, protracted, and bloody conflict . "Instead of starting what was supposed to be a war, he started what was a war," he says .
 Central and eastern European states seized on the bloodshed to argue that they might be next if Washington and NATO did not protect them with Article 5 . The U.S. and NATO have been involved in the fight in Syria .
 Polish President Lech Walesa and Czech President Vaclav Havel established with Clinton . Such thinking, along with the relationships that they had with Clinton, increasingly made an impact on Clinton .
 He shifted instead to a one-size-fits-all enlargement with full guarantees from the start of the project .
 The text declared that “security must be equal for all allies” and that ‘there will be no second-tier security guarantees” —shorthand for contingent memberships or infrastructure limits . The text declares that security must be equally equal for allies .
 Perry: Progress on arms control in the early 1990s had been nothing short of astounding . Perry: In the early 90s, arms control was a huge step up in arms control .
 A nuclear superpower had fallen apart, and only one nuclear-armed country had emerged from its ruins . The United States had emerged as one of the world's most powerful nuclear powers .
 Other postSoviet successor states were joining the Nuclear Nonproproliferation Treaty . Other post-Soviet successor countries were joining nuclear non-profliferation treaty . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 There are new agreements on safeguards and transparency about the number and location of warheads . There were new agreements .
 PfP’s opponents were, in his view, throwing a spanner into the works by pursuing a Containment Beyond the Cold War form of NATO expansion that Moscow would find far more threatening . These were matters of existential importance, on which the United States and Russia had made historic
 Russians immediately concluded that PfP had been a ruse, even though it had not . As an unfortunate corollary, the Russians also concluded PfP was a hoax . PfP is now being investigated by the U.S. State Department .
 The significance of Clinton's shift would become apparent over time . Clinton's shifts would become obvious over time, he says .
 Clinton administration needed to decide how many countries to add as full Naro members . PfP had jettisoned PfP’s method of allowing a wide array of countries to join .
 Sarotte lics, such as the Baltics and Ukraine, would yield a much higher cost per inch . bases that hosted foreign forces and nuclear weapons would yield much higher costs per inch, the Pentagon says .
 'Talbott had already begun pointedly telling Baltic leaders that the first countries to enter NATO as new members would certainly not be the last. As early as June 1995, ‘Talbott’
 In April 1999, at NaTo’s 50th anniversary summit in Washington, D.C., the alliance publicly welcomed the interest of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania in full membership . Estonia and Latvia joined the alliance in 1999 .
 Washington brushed aside quiet expressions of concern from Scandinavian leaders . They noted the desirability of sticking with more contingent solutions for their neighborhood .
 1999 turned 1999 into an inflection point for U.S.-Russian relations . The alliance’s March 1999 military intervention in Kosovo, which Russia fiercely opposed, was a turning point for relations with Russia .
 Moscow's decision to again escalate the brutal combat in Chechnya later that year added to the sense that the postCold War moment of cooperation was collapsing . The post Cold War moment was collapsing when Moscow escalated the brutal fighting in Russia's Chechen region .
 Yeltsin made sweeping demands during a private conversation with Clinton . The Russian leader made the demands, according to a transcript of the private conversation . Clinton said the Russian leader also made a similar request to Clinton .
 Clinton tried to deflect the tirade, but Yeltsin kept pressing, adding, “Give Europe to itself.” Clinton said, "I'm not going to blame Europe for Europe's problems."
 Clinton would not let his Russian counterpart go, however, without asking who would win the upcoming Russian election in 2000 . Clinton would also ask if he would win an election in Russia in 2000.
 The two presidents had patched up relations after spats before, but now Clinton was out of time . Clinton: "I'm not going to get back in touch with President Obama."
 Serious heart disease, alcoholism, and fear of prosecution have worn the Russian president down . Russian President Vladimir Putin has died of heart disease and alcoholism . He is believed to be suffering from alcoholism and heart disease .
 Yeltsin confided to Putin that, on the last day of the year, he would make the younger man acting president . On December 14, 1999, according to his memoirs, Yeltsins told Putin that he would act as president . Putin's memoirs: Yelts
 As promised, Yeltsin shocked his nation with the broadcast of a brief, prerecorded resignation speech . The speech was broadcast on New Year's Eve on the radio .
 The president's stiff, weak delivery of his scripted words intensified the atmosphere of melancholy . The president’s stiff, soft delivery of . his scripted speech intensified the . atmosphere of sadness .
 Putin would later uphold his end of the bargain by eranting Yeltsin immunity . Putin would subsequently upholds his end to the bargain, eranting immunity from Russia .
 Yeltsin left the Kremlin around 1 pm Moscow time, feeling immensely relieved to have no obligations for the first time in decades . He told his driver to take him to his family, and told him to go home .
 Yeltsin told Clinton to call back at 5 pm, even though the American president was preparing to host hundreds of guests at the White House that day for a lavish millennial celebration . Clinton was the president of Russia in the 1980s and '90s . Yeltsins: "I
 New leader of Russia made Clinton wait 26 hours before making contact with him .
 Putin's rise, in terms of Moscow's relations with Washington, was more an end than a start . DASHED HOPES: It soon became apparent that Putin's . rise was more than an end .
 The peak of U.S.-Russian cooperation was now in the past, not least as measured in arms control . Russia and the United States have been at odds for years .
 Washington and Moscow failed to conclude any major new accords in the Clinton era . Letting a decades-long trend lapse, the two countries failed to reach a new deal .
 Nuclear targeting of U.S. and European cities resumed under Russian leader . Russian leader in December 1999, had started a reign measuring in decades .
 For U.S. relations with Russia, these events signaled, if not a return to Cold War conditions precluding all cooperation, then certainly the onset of a killing frost . For United States relations with . Russia, this may be the beginning of a Cold War .
 For central and eastern Europeans who had suffered decades of brutality, war, and suppression, entering NATO on the cusp of the twentyfirst century was the fulfillment of a dream of partnership with the West . Of course, for . central and . eastern Europeans .
 Madeleine Albright: "A decade earlier, when the Berlin Wall had come down, there was dancing in the streets" Sarotte Sarotte: "Dancing in the street" is the first time the Wall Wall came down .
 The world created in the 1990s never fulfilled the hopes that arose after the collapse of both the Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union . The world was created in 1990s, but never fulfilled hopes of the world that arose .
 Initially, there was a widespread belief that the tenets of liberal international order had succeeded and that residents of all the states between the Atlantic and the Pacific, not just Western ones, could now cooperate within that order .
 Both U.S. and Russian leaders repeatedly made choices to promote that outcome . But both made choices at odds with their stated intentions to promote it .
 Bush talked about a Europe whole, free, and at peace; Clinton repeatedly proclaimed his wish to avoid drawing a line . Clinton talked about Europe whole and free, but Bush wanted it to be at peace .
 Both sides created a new dividing line across post-Cold War Europe . Yet both ultimately helped create a new divide line across Europe .
 Gorbachev sought to save the Soviet Union; Yeltsin sought lasting democratization for Russia . Yeltsins sought lasting democracy for Russia in the 1980s and '90s .
 The manner of the alliance’s enlargement— in interaction with tragic Russian choices—contributed to their extent and impact . But the manner of NATO's enlargement — in interaction . —contributing to tragic Russian . choices — contributed to their . impact .
 It's not possible to separate a serious assessment of enlargement’s role in eroding U.S.-Russian relations from how it happened . Put differently, it's not impossible to separate the role in enlargement .
 Washington's error was not to expand the alliance but to do so in a way that maximized friction with Moscow, says CNN's John Avlon . Washington should not expand the NATO alliance, he says, but it should do so to maximise friction with Russia .
 The U.S. misjudged both the permanence of cooperative relations with Moscow and the extent of Putin’s willingness to damage those relations . That error resulted from the United States misjudging both of its cooperation with Moscow .
 Former Warsaw Pact states succeeded in joining NATO (and eventually the European Union) But membership did not automatically guarantee their democratic transformation . The former Warsaw Pact members failed to fully transform their democratic systems .
 The prospect of incrementally gaining membership in international organizations would likely have more effectively solidified political and institutional reforms, according to Pf{P . The process offered by Pf {P}P is likely to be more effective in solidifying political, institutional reforms .
 Joe Biden, then a U.S. senator, sensed in the 1990s that NATO's enlarging would cause problems . Biden was a strong supporter of NATO enlargement as a United States senator . Biden: "The way the alliance was enlarging will cause problems"
 One of the biggest challenges for the U.S. is the way that confrontation between the West and Russia has once again become the order of the day .
 At least some Republicans were never comfortable with Trump's embrace of Putin . Democrats and Republicans agreed on little, but at least some were uncomfortable with the move .
 A shared sense of mission in dealing with Moscow offers a path toward a rare U.S. domestic consensus . NATO is still standing despite Trump's toying with the idea of a United States withdrawal from NATO .
 Even with Trump gone, critics continue to question the alliance’s worth . Even with the president gone, some question the value of the alliance .
 Historian Stephen Wertheim argues that Washington should no longer ‘continue to fetishize military alliances’ as if they were sacred obligations . Some, such as the historian, do so in general terms, argue that Washington shouldn't continue to ‘fetalize’ military
 Critics have more specific complaints, particularly regarding the recent chaotic withdrawal of Western forces from Afghanistan . Other critics have specific complaints .
 European allies lament what they saw as an unconscionable lack of advance consultation . The move eviscerated early hopes of a new, Biden-inspired golden age for the alliance . European allies lamented what they called the move .
 Pundits should think twice about writing off NATO, however, or letting the chaos in Kabul derail post-Trump attempts at repairing transatlantic relations .
 There is clearly a need for a vigorous debate over what went wrong in Afghanistan . European concerns are valid, and there are valid European concerns, writes Peter Bergen .
 Critics need to think about how a call to downgrade or dismantle the alliance will land in a time of turmoil . But critics need to consider how such a call would land in such turmoil .
 The Trump years, the CovID-19 pandemic, and Biden’s Afghan pullout have all damaged the structure of transatlantic relations . The CovID 19 pandemic pandemic and Biden's pullout of Afghanistan have all contributed to this damage .
 When a house is on fire, it is not time to start renovations, no matter how badly needed before the fire started . When a fire is on a fire, renovations should not be started, fire officials say .
 There is also a larger takeaway from this history of NATO expansion, one relevant not just to U.S. relations with Russia but also to ties with China and other competitors .
 A flawed execution can undermine even a reasonable strategy, as well as the withdrawal from Afghanistan has shown . The U.S. has been criticized for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan .
 Mistakes can yield cumulative damage and scar tissue when a strategy’s implementation is measured in years rather than months . Even worse, mistakes can yield a strategy's implementation can be measured in months rather than years .
 Success in long-term strategic competition requires getting the details right . Success requires getting details right, says U.S. president .
 Finding Opportunity in the Twentyfirst Century is the work of Robert Greene, author of the book, "Finding Opportunity" Greene's book, Finding Opportunity, is published by Robert Greene .
 Former White House staffer says he learned a great deal about Trump's idiosyncrasies . He says he had learned a lot about the president's quirks in the past .
 We all knew, for instance, that Trump rarely read briefing materials his staff prepared for him . He could never stick to an agreed script or his cabinet members’ recommendations, he said .
 Trump often seemed to his foreign counterparts as though ‘Trump was hearing about the issues on the agenda for the first time . This had proved to be a major liability during those conversations, since it often seemed . to foreign counterparts .
 When Trump was winging it, he could be persuaded of all kinds of things, says CNN's John Sutter . "He could be persuasive of all sorts of things," he says of the president .
 If a foreign visitor or caller was one of his favored strongmen, Trump would always give the strongman’s views and version of events the benefit of the doubt over those of his own advisers . If a strongman was one, Trump always gave his own views of events to
 Trump cut off acting U.S. Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan, who was trying to make a point about a critical Kuropean security issue, during a cabinet meeting .
 Trump told Shanahan that the autocratic Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orban, had already explained it all to him when they had met in the Oval Office moments earlier . Orban knew better than Shanahan did, anyway .
 In Trump’s mind, the Hungarian strongman simply had more authority than the American officials who worked for Trump himself . In Trump's mind, he said he thought the strongman was more powerful than his American officials .
 For Trump, all pertinent information trickled down from him, not up to him . For Trump it was not up for him to reveal, but for him, it was up for the president to reveal .
 Fiona Hill was inexcusable (and indeed impossible to explain or justify) when it spilled out into public view . This tendency of ‘Trump's’ was lamentable when it played out behind closed doors, but it spilled onto public view during the now legendarily disastrous press conference
 ‘Trump was pleased with how things had gone in his one-on-one meeting with Putin,’ he said . ‘Before the press conference, ‘The president said he was pleased that he had been able to get along with Putin.’
 The two men had agreed to get U.S.-Russian arms control negotiations going again . They also agreed to convene meetings between their countries’ national security councils .
 Trump was keen to show that he and Putin could have a productive, normal relationship, partly to dispel the prevailing notion that there was something perverse about his ties to the Russian president .
 Trump was eager to brush away allegations that he had conspired with the Kremlin in its interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election or that the Russians had somehow compromised him . Special Counsel Robert Mueller was actively investigating the allegations .
 Trump expected public praise for meeting with Putin and tackling the nuclear threat . Trump expected to meet with Putin for the first time .
 U.S. journalists in attendance were not interested in arms control . But the United States journalists were in attendance at the event .
 The Russians wanted to know about the one-on-one meeting and what Putin might have said or not said regarding 2016 and election interference . The Russians want to know what Putin may have said about the 2016 election .
 Putin repeatedly denied that his country had done anything to meddle in the election . The U.S. intelligence agencies had concluded the opposite .
 The only way that Trump could view Russia's broad-based attack on the U.S. democratic system was through the lens of his own ego and image . Trump could only view the attack through his own image and ego, says CNN's John Sutter .
 CNN's John Sutter says endorsing the conclusions of the U.S. intelligence agencies would be tantamount to admitting that Trump had not won the 2016 election . In his interactions with Trump and his closest staff in the White House, it had become clear .
 Trump tried to divert attention away from the White House . The president often tries to distract attention from the controversy .
 I have great confidence in my intelligence people, but I will tell you that President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today . Putin was "extremely strong" in denial today, says CNN's John D. A. Miller .
 The outcome of the Helsinki press conference was entirely predictable, which was why I and others had counseled against holding it at all . The outcome was predictable, says Julian Zelizer, who had advised against holding the press conference .
 'I was sitting in front of the podium as ‘Trump spoke, immediately behind the United States national security adviser and the secretary of state. I was sitting behind the U.S. national security advisers and the Secretary of State.’
 I saw them stiffen slightly, and I contemplated throwing a fit or faking a seizure and hurling myself backward into the row of journalists behind me . I saw the stiffenness of the crowd behind me, but I was not hurt .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin was dismayed by the outcome of the U.S. State Department's visit to Moscow . Putin was not expected to meet with the president of Russia .
 'He reveled in the national and personal humiliation that Trump was courting, but also knew that 'Trump's careless remarks would provoke a backlash in the United States,' he said . ‘He revels in the fact that he knew that ‘Trump’s careless remarks
 The modest agreements for further high-level meetings were already out of the window . The modest agreement for further meetings was already out the window.
 Trump's critics immediately pounced on his bizarre conduct in Helsinki . Trump has been criticized for his actions in the wake of the summit .
 It was more evidence that Trump was in league with Putin and that the Kremlin held sway over the U.S. president, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The following year, Mueller’s final report determined that during the 2016 U.S. presidential election, the Trump campaign had been willing to exploit any derogatory information from Russia .
 In seeking to thwart Clinton’s bid to become the first female U.S. president, the Trump campaign and the Kremlin had been acting in parallel . Their goals had aligned; their goals had been aligned .
 Mueller concluded that although this did not amount to a criminal conspiracy, there was plenty of evidence of an extensive and sophisticated Russian political influence operation against the United States . The Kremlin’s Strange Victory .
 In some crucial ways, Russia and the United States were not so different . Putin, Putin, for one, knew it, and Putin knew it .
 In the early years of the post-Cold War era, many analysts and observers had hoped that Russia would slowly but surely converge with the U.S. In the very early years, many hoped that this would happen in some ways .
 They predicted that once the Soviet Union and communism had fallen away, Russia would move toward a form of liberal democracy . They predicted the country would become a liberal democracy once it fell away from communism .
 By the late 1990s, it was clear that such an outcome was not on the horizon . But by the late 90s, such a change was not expected to happen .
 This is a development that few would have foreseen 20 years ago, but one that U.S. leaders should be doing everything in their power to halt and reverse it .
 The United States and Russia have become subject to the same economic and social forces, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia and the U.S. have been subject to same economic, social forces over time, he says .
 Putin recognized that the U.S. was on a path similar to the one that Russia took in the 1990s, when economic dislocation and political upheaval after the collapse of the Soviet Union had left the Russian state weak and insolvent .
 In the United States, decades of fast-paced social and demographic changes and the Great Recession of 2008-9 had weakened the country and increased its November/December 2021 vulnerability to subversion . In the U.S., decades of social changes and . demographic changes .
 The fire was already burning; all Putin had to do was pour on some gasoline . Putin had already poured on the fire, but he had to pour on gasoline .
 When Trump was elected, Putin and the Kremlin made no attempt to conceal their glee . Putin and Putin made no attempts to conceal the Kremlin's glee at the election .
 President Trump is a populist, nativistic president with no prior experience in foreign policy and a huge ego . The GOP got the best possible outcome from their perspective, the author says .
 Trump fit a mold that Putin himself had helped forge as the first populist leader to take power in a major country in the twenty-first century . Trump, after all, fits the mold Putin himself has helped forge in Russia .
 Putin had blazed the trail that Trump would follow during his four years in office . Putin had led the way for the president during his first term .
 The essence of populism is creating a direct link with ‘the people’ and bypassing or eliminating intermediaries such as political parties, parliamentary representatives, and established institutions, says Julian Zelizer .
 Putin promised to fix everything when he came to power on December 31, 1999, at the end of a decade of crisis and strife in Russia . Putin has been in power since then since 1999 .
 Putin did not belong to a formal political party . Unlike his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, he did not have a formal party . Putin was elected to Russia in 2008 .
 After 2000, Putin turned Russian presidential elections into national referendums on himself by making sure his rivals were obscure (or wholly manufactured) opposition candidates . Putin turned the 2000 election into a national referendum on himself .
 Putin has adjusted Russia's political system to entrench himself in the Kremlin . And at every critical juncture during his time in power, he has adjusted his political system . Putin's government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 In 2020, he formally amended the constitution so that he can run for reelection and stay in power until 2036 . Finally, in 2020, in theory (and health permitting), he can . He can run again and win reelection .
 The other officials in the room got up to leave, and the president’s attention shifted . Such was life as a female adviser in the Trump White House .
 Trump took at face value rumors that Putin was the richest man in the world . Trump told close associates that he admired Putin for his presumed wealth and for the way he ran Russia as if it were his own private company .
 The Master of International Affairs program at UAlbany’s Rockefeller College of Public Affairs & Policy will equip you with practical knowledge and skills that will enable you to succeed in organizations with international reach .
 Move into roles that support multi-national cooperation related to global commerce, diplomacy, humanitarian aid, violent conflict, security and intelligence, and economic development .
 Putin restored Soviet memorials that had been toppled under Gorbachev and Yeltsin . Putin put statues of Soviet-era figures back on their pedestals and restored memorials .
 Trump also aped Putin's willingness to abuse his executive power by going after his political adversaries . Trump's first impeachment was provoked by his attempt to coerce the government of Ukraine into smearing one of his most formidable opponents, Joe Biden, ahead of the 2020 presidential election .
 Trump imported Putin's style of personalist rule, bypassing the professional civil servants in the federal government . Trump relied on the counsel and interventions of cronies in the White House to come up with his decision .
 Foreign politicians called in chits with celebrities who had personal connections to the president and his family . Foreign politicians avoided their own embassies in the process .
 Lobbyists complained to whomever they could reach in the West Wing or the Trump family circle . Lobbyists say they have complained to the White House or family members .
 They were quick to set attack dogs on anyone perceived as an obstacle and to rile up pro-Trump trolls on the Internet, because this always seemed to work . They set up attack dogs and rile-up trolls on Twitter . This always seemed like it worked .
 Influence peddlers both domestic and foreign courted the president to pursue their own priorities . The policymaking process became, in essence, privatized, in the White House .
 The event that most clearly revealed the convergence of politics in the United States and Russia during Trump’s term was his disorganized but deadly serious attempt to stage a self-coup and halt the peaceful transfer of executive power .
 Russia has a long history of coups and succession crises, dating back to the tsarist era, including three during the past 30 years . Russia, after all, has had three coups in 30 years, including one in the 1980s .
 In August 1991, hard-liners staged a brief putsch, declaring a state of emergency and placing Gorbachev under house arrest at his vacation home . Hard-liners opposed to the reforms staged a short putsch .
 The effort fizzled, and the coup was a debacle, but it helped bring down the Soviet Union . The coup fizzed, and it was a disaster .
 Violence erupted from a bitter dispute between the Russian parliament and Yeltsin over the respective powers of the legislature and the president in competing drafts of a new constitution . Violence erupted two years later, violence erupted from the dispute between parliament and president over their respective powers .
 Yeltsin moved to dissolve parliament after it refused to confirm his choice for prime minister . Yeltsins' choice was not confirmed by the parliament . He dissolved parliament in protest at the decision .
 His vice president and the Speaker of the parliament, in response, sought to impeach him . He has been accused of corruption in the past . The president's vice president has been charged with corruption .
 Yeltsin invoked “extraordinary powers” and called out the Russian army to shell the parliament building, thus settling the argument with brute force . In the end of the end, Yeltsins invoked ‘extraordinary power” in the end .
 Putin wanted to amend Yeltsin’s version of the constitution to beef up his presidential powers . He wanted to remove the existing term limits so that he could potentially stay on as president until 2036 . The next coup was a legal one and came in 2020 .
 Putin tapped Valentina Tereshkova, a loyal supporter in parliament and the first woman to travel to outer space, as a cosmonaut . As a proxy to propose the necessary constitutional amendments, Putin tapped her as a proxy . As an iconic figure in Russian society, Teresh
 Putin's means were subtler than Yeltsin's in 1993, but his methods were no less effective . Putin’s means are subtler but no longer effective, says Putin's methods were less subtle . Putin: "Putin's methods are no more effective. He is a
 A mob whipped up by Trump and his allies stormed the U.S. Capitol on January 6, trying to stop the formal certification of the 2020 election results . It would have been impossible for any close observer of recent Russian history to not recall those episodes .
 The attack on the Capitol was the culmination of four years of conspiracies and lies that Trump and his allies had fed to his supporters . Trump's allies had been feeding the lies on social media platforms, in speeches, and on television .
 The “Big Lie” that Trump had won the election was built on the The Kremlin’s Strange Victory backs of the thousands of little lies that Trump uttered nearly every time he spoke and that were then nurtured within the dense ecosystem of Trumpist media outlets . The Kremlin
 This was yet one more way in which, under Trump, the U.S. came to resemble Russia . Putin has long solidified his grip on power by manipulating the media, fueling nationalist grievances, and peddling conspiracy theories .
 Putin took Russia back toward the authoritarianism of the Soviet Union under the guise of strengthening the state and restoring the country’s global position . Likewise, Putin also tried to take Russia back to authoritarianism under guise of restoring the state .
 This striking convergence casts U.S.-Russian relations and the exigencies of Washington's approach to Moscow in a new light . The striking convergence is a striking convergence that casts the relationship between Washington and Moscow in new light, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Historically, U.S. policies toward Russia have been premised on the idea that the two countries’ paths and expectations diverged at the end of the Cold War . Historically, the United States has focused on the fact that Russia and Russia's paths diverged .
 Western analysts had initially thought that Russia might embrace some of the international institutional arrangements that Washington and its allies had long championed . In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union, analysts had hoped that Russia would embrace those arrangements . But Russia has since rejected those efforts .
 Under Putin, U.S.-Russian relations have become more frazzled and fraught than at any point in the 1990s . And under Putin, they've become more fragile and tense than ever before .
 There is something confounding about the ongoing confrontation between the two countries, which seems like an artifact from another era . The two countries have been at odds for decades .
 The Soviet Union posed an existential threat to the United States and its allies . The two superpowers faced off in an ideological clash between capitalism and communism and a geopolitical tussle over spheres of influence .
 Today, Russia maintains the capacity to obliterate the United States, but the Soviet Union and the communist system are gone . The Soviet Union is gone. Today, the U.S. may still be capable of obliterating the world, but that's not true .
 Foreign policy circles in Washington and Moscow still view U.S.-Russian relations through the lens of greatpower competition . But the struggle for Europe is over, foreign policy circles still see it as a problem .
 For the U.S., China, not Russia, poses the greatest foreign policy challenge of the twentyfirst century, writes Julian Zelizer . For the United States, the challenge is the threat of climate change and pandemics, he says .
 Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, its annexation of Crimea in 2014 and its intervention in Syria in 2015, the Kremlin’s interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, and the frequent ransomware attacks and email hacks attributed to Russian actors .
 Russians point to NATO expansion of NATO into eastern Europe and the Baltic states, Kosovo war in Kosovo and Iraq invasion in 2003 . U.S. support for “color revolutions” that took place in postSoviet states such as Georgia and Ukraine in the first decade of this century .
 Washington is hell-bent on invasion and regime change and also has Russia and Putin in its cross hairs . In Moscow, all of these serve as proof that Moscow is in the right place .
 Most American policymakers simply wish that Russia would just go away so they can refocus their attention on what really matters . In truth, most American policymakers just wish that .
 For their Russian counterparts, the United States still represents the main opponent . The U.S. still represents their main opponent, however, according to Russian officials .
 Putin sees the U.S. as a geopolitical threat to Russia but also as personal threat to himself . Putin is a populist leader and populist leader . He sees the United States as a threat to his country .
 His attempt to retain Russia's grip on independent countries that were once part of the Soviet Union is inseparable from his effort to consolidate and expand his authority at home . Putin is also trying to reassert Moscow's influence in other global arenas .
 Putin sits at the apex of a personalized and semi-privatized kleptocratic system that straddles the Russian state and its institutions and population . Putin is at the top of the system, which he sits in a state of his own . Putin has been accused of corruption
 He has embedded loyalists in every important Russian institution, enterprise, and industry . The Russian president has invested heavily in the country's economy .
 If Putin wants to retain the presidency until 2036, he will be 84 years old and will have become the longest-serving modern Russian ruler . Putin will have to maintain this level of control or even increase it, since any slippage might be perceived as weakness .
 Putin has to deter or defeat any opponents, foreign or domestic, who have the capacity to undermine his regime . To do so, Putin must be deterring or defeating any opponents who threaten to undermine him, he says . Putin has been accused of trying to undermine or defeat his regime in
 Putin hopes leaders in the U.S. will get bogged down with problems at home that they will stop criticizing his personalization of power . He hopes leaders will eschew any efforts to transform Russia similar to those the United States government carried out in the 1990s .
 Putin also blurs the line between domestic and foreign policy to distract the Russian population from the distortions and deficiencies of his rule . Putin's rule is supposed to distract from the distortion and deficiencies in his rule, he says . Putin has been accused of using foreign policy as a tool to distract
 On the one hand, he stresses how decadent and dissolute the U.S. has become and how ill suited its leaders are to teach anyone a lesson on how to run a country . On the other hand, the United States has become decadent, dissolute .
 Putin says the United States still poses a military threat and that it aims to bring Russia to its knees . On the other hand, he stresses that the U.S. still poses an enormous military threat .
 Putin's constant refrain is that the contest between Russia and the U.S. is a perpetual Darwinian struggle . Without Putin's leadership, Russia will not survive, Putin says .
 As the sole true champion of his country and his people, he can never be seen to stand down or compromise when it comes to the Americans, he said . He said: "He can never stand down"
 Putin must intimidate, marginalize, defuse, or defeat any opposition to his rule . Putin must also intimidate or marginalize any opposition in order to keep his rule in power .
 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny and Clinton fall into the same category . In this sense, the jailed opposition leader Navalny is a Russian opposition figure . Clinton and Navalny are both jailed in Russia .
 In Putin's view, if Clinton had become U.S. president, she would have continued to hound him and hold him to task . She would have promoted democracy and civil society to root out corruption in Russia, Putin says .
 Navalny is far more dangerous to Putin than Clinton would have been . Of course, Navalny would be more likely to be dangerous to the Russian leader than Clinton .
 Navalny has survived an audacious assassination attempt and has humiliated Putin on numerous occasions . Navalny is known for his ability to humiliate the Russian leader .
 Navalny uses digital media and slick video skills to highlight the excesses of the Russian leader’s kleptocratic system . Navalny has gotten under Putin's skin .
 Putin has moved swiftly to roll up his movement, forestalling any chance that Navalny might compete for the presidency in 2024 . This is why Navalny is in jail and why Putin is rolling up his campaign, he says .
 The current U.S.-Russian relationship no longer mirrors the Cold War challenge, even if some geopolitical contours and antagonisms persist . The U.K. and Russia are no longer at odds .
 The old U.S. foreign policy approach of balancing deterrence with limited engagement is ill suited to the present task of dealing with Putin’s insecurities . The old United States foreign policy .
 The arms control summitry that took the edge off the acute phase of the Cold War and nuclear confrontation can provide little guidance for how to anchor the future relationship . And after Trump's disastrous performance at Helsinki, it is also clear that the arms control .
 The Biden administration's problem is rooted in domestic politics, not foreign policy, says CNN's Julian Zelizer . Biden administration should focus on domestic politics of the U.S. and Russia, he says .
 The two countries have been heading in the same political direction for some of the same reasons over the last several years . The two nations have been headed in the November/December 2021 election .
 The U.S. will never change Putin's threat perceptions, because they are deeply personal . They have similar political predispositions, he says . The United States will never be able to change Putin and his threat perceptions .
 Americans will have to change themselves to blunt the effects of Russian political interference campaigns for the foreseeable future . Americans will need to change how they respond to the threat of Russian interference campaigns .
 Biden and his team must integrate their approach to Russia with their efforts to shore up American democracy, tackle inequality and racism, and lead the country out of a period of intense division . Achieving that goal will require Biden to integrate his approach with his efforts to tackle inequality, racism and
 The polarization of U.S. society has become a national security threat, author says . It is a barrier to collective action necessary for combating catastrophes and thwarting external dangers, he says .
 Every peril was politicized and turned into fodder for personal gain and partisan games, says former White House staffer . "During my time in the Trump administration, I watched as . every peril was . politicized," he says .
 Successive national security advisers, cabinet members, and their professional staffs were unable to mount coherent responses to security issues in the face of personalized, chaotic, and opportunistic conduct at the top .
 Trump railed against a mythological American deep state, whereas Putin spent 46 FOREIGN AFFAIRS decades as an intelligence operative before ascending to ofiice . Putin is a product of Russia's very real deep state .
 Putin rules Russia as a state insider, unlike Trump, who saw the U.S. state apparatus as his enemy . Unlike Trump, Putin ruled Russia as an outsider, Putin rules the country as an insider .
 Putin rarely dives into Russia's social, class, racial, or religious divisions to gain political traction . Also unlike Trump, Putin rarely engages in Russia's racial, class or social divisions . Unlike Trump, unlike Putin, Putin has little chance to gain traction on the ground .
 Putin tends to promote a single, synthetic Russian culture and identity to overcome domestic conflicts of the past that destabilized and helped bring down both the Russian empire and the Soviet Union . Instead of targeting individuals and social groups that enjoy little popular support, Putin targets individuals and groups that have little popular
 A successful U.S. policy approach to Russia will rest in part on denying Putin and Russian operatives the possibility to exploit divisions in American society . It highlights the fact that a successful United States policy .
 The United States’ vulnerability to the Kremlin's subversion has been amplified by social media . The U.S. is vulnerable to the subversion of Russia, experts say . Social media has amplified the vulnerability of social media to subvert Russia's influence .
 Americanmade technology has magnified the impact of once fringe ideas and subversive actors around the world . It has become a tool in the hands of hostile states and criminal groups, says Americanmade .
 Extremists can network and reach audiences as never before on platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, which are designed to attract people's attention and divide them into affinity groups . Extremists are now able to reach audiences via social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube .
 Putin has weaponized this technology against the U.S. He has taken advantage of the ways that social media undermines social cohesion and erodes Americans’ sense of a shared purpose .
 Policymakers should step up their cooperation with the private sector to deter Russian intelligence operations, says CNN.com . Policymakers need to step up cooperation with private sector in order to cast light on and deter Russian operations .
 They also need to figure out ways to educate the American public about the perils of posting personal and political information online . They must also figure out how to educate them about the dangers of posting information online.
 Making the United States and its society more resilient and less vulnerable to manipulation by tackling inequality, corruption, and polarization will require innovative policies across a huge range of issues . Making the U.S. and its . society more . resilient and . less . vulnerable to manipulations by tackling .
 Perhaps the highest priority should be given to investing in people where they reside, particularly through education . Perhaps the best way to help is to invest in people's education .
 Education can lower the barriers to opportunity and accurate information in a way that nothing else can . Education can also lower the barrier to opportunity, accurate information, says CNN.com senior author .
 It offers all people the chance not only to develop knowledge and learn skills but also to continue to transform themselves and their communities . And it offers all . people the . chance to develop . skills and develop knowledge, learn skills .
 One thing U.S. leaders should avoid in seeking to foster domestic unity is attempting to mobilize Americans around the idea of a common enemy, such as China . Leaders should avoid trying to engage Americans in a common fight against China .
 Doing so risks backfiring by stirring up xenophobic anger toward Americans and immigrants of Asian heritage, thus fueling more divisions at home .
 Biden should rally Americans in support of the democratic U.S. allies that Trump spurned and derided . Instead of trying to rally Americans against China, he should rally them against China . Biden should instead rally Americans to support democratic United States allies .
 Many of those countries, especially in Europe, find themselves in the same political predicament as the U.S., as authoritarian leaders and powers seek to exploit socioeconomic factors .
 Biden should base a new transatlantic agenda on the mutual fight against populism at home and authoritarianism abroad . The fight will be fought through economic rebuilding and democratic renewal, Biden says .
 Biden must do everything in his power to restore trust in government and promote fairness, equity, and justice . Biden must also do everything he can do to restore public trust, equity and justice, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As many Americans learned during ‘Trump's presidency, no country, no matter how advanced, is immune to flawed leadership, the erosion of political checks and balances, and the degradation of its institutions, writes CNN.com .
 U.S. policymakers seemed to have little cause for concern, especially not about China . China had been aligned with the United States against the Soviet Union for over a decade . China is a weak and impoverished country that had been aligning with the US .
 China had nearly five times as many people as the U.S. as the United States . China's leaders had embraced economic reform .
 Population size and wealth are the main building blocks of China's military power . Population size is key to China's potential to become stronger in the decades to come .
 President Obama made a bold choice in the face of a momentous choice . Obama has been criticized for being too liberal for his stance on gay marriage .
 Washington promoted investment in China and welcomed the country into the global trading system . Washington thought it would become a peace-loving democracy and a responsible stakeholder in a U.S.-led international order .
 China grew more repressive and ambitious as it rose . Far from embracing liberal values at home and the status quo abroad, China grew increasingly repressive . China's rise was marked by a series of repressive measures against the West .
 Engagement failed to forestall a rivalry and hastened the end of the so-called unipolar moment . Instead of fostering harmony between Beijing and Washington, engagement failed to prevent a rivalry . The U.S.-China relationship has been described as one of the worst in history .
 China and the U.S. are locked in what can only be called a new cold war . China's intense security competition touches on every dimension of their relationship with the United States .
 China is likely to be a more powerful competitor than the Soviet Union was in its prime . This rivalry will test U.S. policymakers more than the original Cold War did, as China will be more powerful .
 The U.S. rose to become a hegemon in its own region, rising to become the most secure and influential country in the world .
 The United States is acting just as realist logic would predict . And today, the U.S. is also acting as a realist, it would seem .
 Long opposed to the emergence of other regional hegemons, it sees China's John J Mearsheimer ambitions as a direct threat and is determined to check the country's continued rise .
 What was avoidable, however, was the speed and extent of China's extraordinary rise . China's rise has been the fastest and greatest growth in the world's history .
 Had U.S. policymakers during the unipolar moment thought in terms of balance-of-power politics, they would have tried to slow Chinese growth and maximize the power gap between Beijing and Washington .
 The country had a per capita Gpp that was one-7/5th the size of the United States . The country's Gpp is one- 7/5% the U.S. size .
 Given China's population advantage, if its economy grew rapidly in the decades ahead, it could eclipse the U.S. in sheer economic might . But given China's size advantage, the United States could eclipse its economic might.
 The consequences of an increasingly wealthy China for the global balance of power were enormous . Simply put, the consequences of the growing power of China were enormous, writes David Perry .
 From a realist perspective, the prospect of China as an economic colossus 50 FOREIGN AFFAIRS was a nightmare . From a realistic perspective, it's a nightmare for realists .
 China would surely also build a formidable military, as populous and rich countries invariably convert their economic power into military power . Not only would it mean the end of unipolarity, it would also mean the rise of China's rise in power .
 China would almost certainly use that military to pursue hegemony in Asia and project power into other regions of the world . The country's military is almost certainly using it to pursue its own hegemony in the region .
 U.S. would have to contain, if not try to roll back, Chinese power, spurring a dangerous security competition . Once it did, the United States would have no choice but to contain and roll back .
 There is no higher authority to adjudicate disputes among states or protect them when threatened . The U.S. has no right to protect its citizens when threatened, the U.N. says . The United States has a right to enforce its sovereignty, but it's not a matter of
 No state can ever be certain that a rival, especially a state with abundant military power, will not attack it . Furthermore, no state can be certain of a rival's attack, especially that it will not be attacked .
 Countries figure out that the best way to survive in an anarchic world is to be the most powerful actor of all . That means being a hegemon in one’s own region and making sure no other great powers dominate their regions . In practice, this means being the he
 This realist logic has informed U.S. foreign policy since the very beginning, says President Obama . "Realist logic" has informed United States foreign policy for decades, he says .
 Early presidents and their successors worked assiduously to make the U.S. the most powerful country in the Western Hemisphere .
 The U.S. feared potential hegemons might grow powerful enough to roam into the Western Hemisphere . That would make it harder for Washington to project power globally . The United States feared they might grow power in the region .
 China is acting according to this same realist logic, in effect imitating the U.S. China has acted according to the same logic as the United States, writes Peter Bergen .
 It wants to be the most powerful state in its backyard and eventually, eventually, in the world . The state wants to become the world's most powerful .
 It wants to build a blue-water navy to protect its access to Persian Gulf oil . The U.S. wants to protect access to the Persian Gulf from Iran .
 It wants to create an international order that is more favorable to its interests, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I want to create a more favorable international order" Putin: Russia wants to take advantage of its influence in the world .
 A powerful China would be foolish to pass up the opportunity to pursue these goals . China is a powerful nation, but it would be wise to pursue its own goals, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Most Americans do not recognize that Beijing and Washington are following the same playbook . They believe the U.S. is a noble democracy that acts differently from authoritarian countries such as China .
 All great powers, be they democracies or not, have little choice but to compete for power in what is at root a zero-sum game . "All great powers," be beleaguered democracies or republics, compete to be the most powerful .
 It motivates China today and would motivate its leaders even if it were a democracy . China's leaders would be motivated by it, even if they were a democratic, it says .
 U.S. leaders are determined to contain China . China is a major source of tension in the region .
 Turning China, of all countries, into a great power was a recipe for trouble . U.S. leaders should have recognized that turning China into a powerful nation, he says .
 The Inevitable Rivalry harbored extensive revisionist goals in East Asia . After all, it had long sought to settle its border dispute with India on terms favorable to itself .
 Chinese policymakers have consistently stated their desire to reintegrate Taiwan, take back the Diaoyu Islands (known in Japan as the Senkaku Islands) from Japan, and control most of the South China Sea . China's neighbors, not the United States, are likely to be fiercely
 China has always had revisionist goals, but the mistake was allowing it to become powerful enough to act on them . China has a long history of revisionism, but it has always acted on its goals, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Had U.S. policymakers accepted the logic of realism, there was a straightforward set of policies they could have pursued to slow economic growth in China and maintain the wealth gap between it and the United States .
 In the early 1990s, the Chinese economy was woefully underdeveloped, and its future depended heavily on access to U.S. markets, technology, and capital . China's future depends heavily on its access to the United States .
 An economic and political Goliath at the time, the U.S. was in an ideal position to hinder China's rise . The United States was in a position to be an ideal place to hinder the rise of China .
 Beginning in 1980, U.S. presidents had granted China “most favored nation” status . The designation gave the country the best possible trade terms with the United States .
 U.S. leaders should have negotiated a new bilateral trade agreement that imposed harsher terms on China, author says . That favoritism should have ended with the Cold War, he says .
 Given the small size of the Chinese economy, it would have taken a far bigger hit than the United States economy . They should have done so even if the agreement was also less favorable to the U.S.
 U.S. presidents unwisely kept granting China most-favored-nation status annually . Mearsheimer status was given to China in November/December 2021 .
 In 2000, the U.S. made that status permanent, markedly reducing Washington's leverage over Beijing . The error was compounded in 2000, when the status was made permanent . Washington made that decision in 2000 .
 With global markets now open, Chinese businesses expanded, their products became more competitive, and China grew more powerful . With global market open, China expanded and became more powerful, opening up more and more .
 The United States should have strictly controlled the export of sophisticated U.S. technologies, the authors say . China's access to the international trading system should have been limited, they say .
 Export controls would have been especially effective in the 1990s and early years of the next decade, when Chinese companies were mainly copying Western technology, not innovating on their own . denying China access to advanced technologies in areas such as aerospace and electronics would almost certainly have slowed its economic development .
 Washington let technology flow with few limits, allowing China to challenge U.S. dominance in the critical realm of innovation . Washington lets technology flow without limits, but Washington lets it flow freely .
 U.S. policymakers also made the mistake of lowering barriers to direct United States investment in China, which was tiny in 1990 but mushroomed over the next three decades . China is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 If the U.S. had played hardball on trade and investment, China would have turned to other countries for help . China would surely have sought help from the United States .
 The U.S. produced the bulk of the world’s most sophisticated technologies . It also had several levers, including sanctions and security guarantees, that it could have used to persuade others to take a harder line on China .
 As part of an effort to constrain China's role in global trade, Washington could have enlisted such allies as Japan and Taiwan, reminding them that a powerful China would pose an existential threat .
 Given its market reforms and latent power potential, China would still have risen despite these policies . China's market reforms would have led to a rise in China's economy .
 The U.S. would have been significantly weaker than the United States and therefore not in a position to seek regional hegemony . And when it did, it would still be significantly weaker . The United States would not have sought regional hegemony when it came to power .
 Realist logic suggests that U.S. policymakers should have coupled efforts to slow China’s economic growth with a campaign to maintain—1if not increase—their country’�s lead over China . Relative, rather than absolute, power is what ultimately matters .
 The U.S. government could have invested heavily in research and development . It could have funded the type of relentless innovation required to preserve American mastery over cuttingedge technologies .
 It could have actively discouraged manufacturers from moving overseas, in order to bolster the United States’ manufacturing base and protect its economy from vulnerable global supply chains .
 Given the liberal triumphalism that pervaded the Washington establishment in the 1990s, there was little chance that realist thinking would inform U.S. foreign policy . Realist thinking is not likely to inform the United States foreign policy in the future .
 U.S. policymakers assumed that global peace and prosperity would be maximized by spreading democracy, promoting an open international economy, and strengthening international institutions . Instead, they assumed that spreading democracy would be the key to maximizing global peace, prosperity .
 The U.S. would integrate the country into the global economy in the hopes that it would become more prosperous . Applied to China, this logic prescribed a policy of engagement, whereby the United States would integrate it with the world .
 Eventually, it was thought, China would even mature into a rights-respecting democracy and a responsible global actor . But now, it is thought that China will mature into rights-abiding democracy and responsible global .
 For such a risky policy, the breadth and depth of support for engagement was remarkable, spanning four administrations . The breadth of support from the public was remarkable .
 Bush committed to engaging with China even before the Cold War ended . Bush was committed to engage with China in the 1980s and '90s .
 Bill Clinton criticized Bush for “coddling” China during the 1992 presidential campaign . Bill Clinton tried playing tough with Beijing after moving into the White House .
 Clinton led the way in convincing Congress to grant China The Inevitable Rivalry permanent most-favored-nation status . That paved the groundwork for its entry into the wro.
 In his first year in office, he signed the proclamation eranting China permanent most-favored-nation status . He took the final steps to guide the country into the wTo.
 One might think that the “pivot to Asia,” unveiled by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in 2011, represented a shift away from engagement and toward containment, but that would be wrong . Hillary Clinton’s ‘pivot’ to Asia was unveiled in 2011
 Clinton was a committed engager, and her Foreign Policy article making the case for the pivot was filled with liberal rhetoric about the virtues of open markets . Clinton was an avid supporter of the open market, but she has been criticized .
 Save for placing 2,500 U.S. marines in Australia, no meaningful steps have been taken to implement a serious containment strategy .
 Support for engagement was also deep and wide within the United States business community, which viewed China as a manufacturing base as a giant market . More than one billion November/December 2021 potential customers could be potential customers .
 Few China experts or international relations scholars questioned the wisdom of helping Beijing grow more powerful . China experts say the move is the best way to help Beijing grow stronger .
 Both Zbigniew Brzezinski and Henry Kissinger supported the strategy . The most prominent Democratic and Republican Cold War hawks supported it .
 Defenders of engagement argue that their policy allowed for the possibility of failure .
 None of the engagers foresaw the implications of failure . More important, none of the . engagers . foresaw . implications of the failure .
 If China refused to democratize, they believed, it would simply be a less capable country . They believed that it would be a more capable country if China did not democratize .
 The prospect that it would become more powerful and no less authoritarian did not appear to enter their calculations . The prospect of it becoming more powerful did not seem to enter the calculations .
 Some engagers now maintain that the U.S. hedged its bets, pursuing containment side by side with engagement in case a friendship with China did not flourish . Some now believe that the United States hedged bets .
 U.S. policymakers say they were not containing China . This claim is at odds with the frequent refrain that they weren't . China is a major source of tension in the region .
 Even if U.S. policymakers were quietly containing China, engagement undermined their efforts . Engagement undermined efforts, because that policy shifted the global balance of power in China's favor . That policy ultimately shifted the globe's balance in power in favor of China .
 Nobody can say that engagement wasn't given ample opportunity to work, nor can anyone argue that China emerged as a threat because the U.S. was not accommodating enough . China's engagement with the United States is a failed experiment, but it's not a failure to work .
 China's economy experienced unprecedented economic growth, but the country did not turn into a liberal democracy or a responsible stakeholder . China's economic growth was unprecedented, but China did not become a major stakeholder or liberal democracy, says author .
 Obama vowed a tougher line against Beijing during his presidency, contesting its maritime claims and filing suits against it within the wTo . But these halfhearted efforts amounted to little.
 After Donald Trump became U.S. president, he quickly abandoned the engagement strategy that the previous four administrations had embraced, pursuing containment instead .
 Determined to stop China from succeeding, Trump initiated a trade war in 2018 . He tried to undermine the technology giant Huawei and other Chinese corporations that threatened the United States’ technological dominance .
 His administration developed closer relations with Taiwan and challenged Beijing’s claims in the South China Sea . His administration also developed closer ties with Taiwan .
 One might have expected President Joe Biden to abandon containment and return to engagement . Biden staunchly supported that policy as chair of the Senate Foreign Relations ComThe Inevitable Rivalry mittee .
 President Obama pledged "extreme competition" with China shortly after taking office . In fact, as president, he has embraced containment and embraced containment .
 In June, the United States Innovation and Competition Act sailed through the Senate with bipartisan support . The bill passed the Senate in June .
 The bill labels China “the greatest geopolitical and geo-economic challenge for U.S. foreign policy” The bill calls for treating Taiwan as a sovereign state of “vital” strategic importance . It also calls for the state of "vital" strategic importance to
 In fact, it is likely to intensify, no matter who is in the White House, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Engagement’s remaining defenders now portray the downward spiral in U.S.-Chinese relations as the work of individuals bent on creating a confrontation . “New Cold Warriors” in the words of former George W Bush administration official Robert Zoellick .
 The incentives for further economic cooperation outweigh the need to compete for power, the engagers say . The engagers’ view is that the incentives for cooperation outweigh competition for power .
 The U.S.-Chinese rivalry is more likely to lead to a shooting war than a cold war . Cold War II is already here, and when one compares the two cold wars, it becomes apparent that the two are already here .
 The first point of contrast between the two conflicts concerns capabilities . November/December 2021 is 55 John J Mearsheimer, 55 .
 China is already closer to the United States in terms of latent power than the Soviet Union ever was . China is now closer to U.S. than the USSR ever was.
 At the height of its power, in the mid-1970s, the Soviet Union had a small advantage in population . Using GNP as a rough indicator of wealth, it was almost 60 percent as wealthy as the United States .
 China now has four times as many people as the United States . China is about 70 percent as wealthy as the U.S. China is now four times more populous than the United.
 If China's economy continues erowing at an impressive rate of around five percent annually, it will eventually have more latent power than the U.S. The United States. China's economic growth is expected to grow at a rate of five percent .
 By 2050, China will have a population advantage of approximately 3. to 1.1 . It has been projected that by 2050, the population advantage will be about 3.5% .
 If China has half of the United States’ per capita GDP in 2050, it will be 1.1 times as wealthy as the U.S. South Korea is today . China will become 1.5 times as rich as the US in 2050 .
 If it does better and reaches threefifths of United States per capita Gpp by then, it will be 2. times as wealthy as the U.S. by then . Japan is roughly where the United States is today . And if it reaches 3.5% of U.
 Beijing could build a military that is much more powerful than the United States’, which would be contesting China’s from 6,000 miles away . With all that latent power, Beijing could .
 During the height of the Cold War, the Soviet Union was still recovering from the devastation wreaked by Nazi Germany . Not only was poorer than the United States, it was also still recovering after World War II .
 In World War II, the country lost 24 million citizens, including more than 70,000 towns and villages, 32,000 industrial enterprises, and 40,000 miles of railroad track .
 China last fought a war in 1979 and in the ensuing decades became an economic juggernaut . China, in 56 FOREIGN AFFAIRS contrast, last fought in 1979 . China's last war was held in 1979; it has since become an economic powerhouse .
 Throughout the Cold War, the Soviet Union maintained a huge military presence in Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union was deeply involved in the politics of almost every country in that region .
 It had to contend with insurrections in East Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia . It also faced insurrectors in East and Poland, Poland and Hungary .
 Albania, Romania, and Yugoslavia routinely challenged Moscow's economic and security policies . Yugoslavia, Albania and Yugoslavia challenged Russia's economic, security policies.
 The Soviets also had to deal with China, which switched sides midway through the Cold War . The Soviets and China were at odds for decades .
 Contemporary China has few allies and, except when it comes to North Korea, is far less tied to its friends than the Soviets were to theirs . Contemporary China is less likely to rely on its allies than its Soviet allies .
 China is led by a nominally communist government . Like the Soviet Union was, China is now a major economic rival . China is the world's most populous country .
 Americans during the Cold War were wrong to view Moscow as primarily a communist threat, but it would be a mistake to portray China as an ideological menace today . China is not an ideological threat today, but the U.S. should not view it as a threat .
 Soviet foreign policy was influenced only by the margins by communist thinking . Joseph Stalin was a hardcore realist, as were his successors . Stalin and his successors were realists .
 China is best understood as an authoritarian state that embraces capitalism . Communism matters even less in contemporary China, which is best seen as authoritarian .
 Americans should wish that China were communist, then it would have a lethargic economy . Americans wish China were a communist, but that would make it lethargy economy .
 Nationalism had limited influence in the Soviet Union because it was at odds with communism . Nationalism is the world's most powerful political ideology .
 Chinese nationalism, however, has been gathering steam since the early 1990s . Chinese nationalism is gathering steam in China .
 What makes it especially dangerous is its emphasis on China’s “century of national humiliation,” a period beginning with the First Opium War . China was victimized by great powers, especially Japan but also, in the Chinese narrative, the United States .
 The effects of this potent nationalist story were on display in 2012-13, when China and Japan skirmished over the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands, igniting anti-Japanese protests .
 In the coming years, the intensifying security competition in East Asia will ramp up Chinese hostility toward Japan and the U.S., increasing the likelihood of a hot war . In the past, China's hostility toward the United States and Japan is likely to rise .
 Soviet leaders were busy recovering from World War IT and managing their empire in Eastern Europe . They were content with the status quo on the continent .
 China, by contrast, is committed to an expansionist agenda in East Asia . China is deeply committed to expanding its own territory in Asia .
 China's main targets certainly have strategic value for China . But they are also considered sacred territory, which means their fate is bound up with Chinese nationalism .
 The geography of the new cold war is more war-prone than that of the old one . The new Cold War is more likely to be followed by a war, writes David Frum .
 The U.S.-Soviet rivalry was global in scope, but its center of gravity was the Iron Curtain in Europe . Both sides had massive armies and air forces equipped with thousands of nuclear weapons .
 There was little chance of a superpower war in Europe, because policymakers on both sides understood the fearsome risks of nuclear escalation . Policymakers in both countries understood the risks of a nuclear war .
 "No leader was willing to start a conflict that would likely have destroyed his own country," says President Obama . No leader would have started a war that would have destroyed himself, he says .
 In Asia, there are no clear dividing line like the Iron Curtain to anchor stability . In Asia there is no clear divide line like that of the Soviet-era Cold War .
 There are a handful of potential conflicts that would involve conventional arms, which makes war thinkable . Instead of war, there would be limited conflicts involving conventional arms . The U.S. has a long history of using conventional arms in the Middle East .
 China is fighting for control over ‘Taiwan, the South China Sea, the Diaoyu/Senkaku Islands, and the maritime routes that run between China and the Persian Gulf .
 These conflicts would be fought mainly in open waters between rival air and naval forces . Small-scale ground forces would likely take part in these conflicts .
 Even a fight over ‘Taiwan, which might draw in Chinese amphibious forces, would not involve huge nuclear-equipped armies crashing .
 These limited-war scenarios are more plausible than a major war between NATO and the Warsaw Pact was . None of this is to say that these limited war scenarios are likely, but they are more likely to happen .
 Beijing and Washington could clash over Taiwan or the South China Sea . Still, one cannot assume that there would be no nuclear escalation if the two sides fight over Taiwan .
 If one side were losing badly, it would at least consider employing nuclear weapons to rescue the situation . John J Mearsheimer, 57, would at November/December 2021 57 .
 Some decision-makers might conclude that nuclear weapons could be used without an unacceptable risk of escalation . The attacks would take place at sea and spared the territory of China and the United States and its allies .
 Great-power war more likely in the new cold war, so is nuclear use . Nuclear use is more likely to be used in great-power conflict than in any other cold war . Great power wars more likely, and nuclear use more likely .
 Advocates of engagement remain, and they still think the U.S. can find common ground with China . Although their numbers have dwindled, they remain advocates of engagement . China is a major rival of America’s making, but it is also a potential ally in the Middle
 Great powers are simply unwilling to let other great powers grow stronger at their expense . But great powers simply want to protect themselves from growing stronger .
 The driving force behind this great-power rivalry is structural, says Andrew Hammond . The problem cannot be eliminated with clever policymaking, he says .
 The only thing that could change the underlying dynamic would be a major crisis that halted China’s rise . An eventuality that seems unlikely considering the country's long record of stability, competence, and economic stability .
 U.S. would need to maintain formidable conventional forces in East Asia to persuade Beijing that a clash of arms would at best yield a Pyrrhic victory .
 Convincing adversaries that they cannot achieve quick and decisive wins deters wars, says President Obama . The U.S. should not rely on winning quickly and decisive victories, says Obama .
 U.S. policymakers must constantly remind themselves, and Chinese leaders, about the ever-present possibility of nuclear escalation in wartime . The U.N. must also remind themselves of the possibility of a nuclear escalation .
 Washington can work to establish clear rules of the road for waging this security competition . Washington can also work to avoid incidents at sea or other accidental military clashes . Washington should work to set up clear rules for warring nations .
 If each side understands what crossing the other side’s redlines would mean, war becomes less likely . The U.S. and the U.K. should be aware of each other's redlines, not crossing them .
 These measures can only do so much to minimize the dangers inherent in the growing U.S.-Chinese rivalry . The measures can't be enough to reduce the dangers of the growing rivalry .
 The U.S. must pay for ignoring realist logic and turning China into a powerful state that is determined to challenge it on every front . But that is the price the United States must pay, he says .
 At the heart of the tragedy was an obsession with universal plans and extensive resources, which stymied progress that could have been achieved with far fewer troops and at a lower cost . The tragedy was a failure to focus on universal plans, rather than resources .
 Failure to chart a middle path between ruinous overinvestment and complete neglect says less about what was possible in Afghanistan than it does about the fantasies of those who intervened there . Yet this failure to chart the middle path says less than what is possible than what it is possible .
 The age of intervention began in Bosnia in 1995 and accelerated with the missions in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq . In Kosovo, Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan, the missions began in 1995 .
 Former British Secretary of State for International Development, served as coalition official in lraq, and ran a development organization in Afghanistan . He is a former British secretary of state for international development .
 The Last Days of Intervention has been skeptical of universal blueprints for societal transformation . It has paid more attention to the history and trauma of local communities and been more modest about their own status as outsiders .
 They might have understood messiness was inevitable, failure possible, and patience essential . They might also have understood that messiness is inevitable and failure possible .
 They might even have grasped why humility was better than a heavy footprint . They might also have understood why listening is better than lecturing and why humility is better . And why they might have grasped the importance of humility .
 Any setback, they reasoned, could be blamed only on a lack of international planning or resources . They reasoned that any setback could only be blamed on lack of planning .
 In Afghanistan and Iraq, humanitarianism and counterterrorism became even more unstable hybrids of state building and counterinsurgency . The interventions proved fatal. They proved fatal .
 From the very beginning, the international plans were surreally detached from the local reality . From the start, the plans for the country's future have been 'surreally detached' from local reality, says CNN.com .
 Such hyperbolic untruths, which multiplied with each new strategy or plan, were designed to win resources and defend the intervention at home . Such lies, such as the lies of the U.S. President Barack Obama, have been used in the past for years .
 By exaggerating both the potential for success and the risks of failure in Afghanistan, they made it difficult to resist calls for more troops . The risks of success and failure in the Afghan war have been exaggerated .
 Domestic politics dictated ever more strident mission statements, increasingly inflated plans, and additional troop deployments . And when troops were killed (and more) they were killed than at any time since the Vietnam War, domestic politics dictated more .
 The U.S. and its allies seemed unable to recognize or value progress that was actually occurring on the ground . The progress was slow, unfamiliar, and often not in line with their plans, they say .
 Political leaders had so overstated their case that once they were revealed to be wrong, they could not return to the moderate position of a light footprint . Instead lurched from extreme overreach to November/December 2021 61 Rory Stewart .
 In the end, they walked out, blaming the chaos that followed on the corruption, ingratitude, and the supposed cowardice of their former partners . They walked out .
 The obsession with universal plans backed by heavy resources that led to the failures in Afghanistan and Iraq stemmed in part from a misunderstanding of an earlier success . The failure of universal plans in Iraq and Afghanistan stemmed from a misunderstood of earlier success.
 This success emerged from a large but very restrained international presence . It was misinterpreted as an argument for bold international interventions grounded in universal state-building templates and backed by overwhelming resources .
 Paddy Ashdown, the British politician who was the senior international representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, asserted that Bosnia demonstrated seven “pillars of peace-making” that “apply more or less universally” and provided a plan to create everything from security to
 In his view, an international administration with absolute executive power was needed to achieve these things . The president's view is that an international government is needed in order to succeed .
 James Dobbins is a former U.S. special envoy to Bosnia and a future special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan . He co-authored The Beginner's Guide to Nation-Building, published by the RAND Corporation . The RAND Corporation asserted that “heavy” peace-
 The future president of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, matched this with a co-authored textbook titled Fixing Failed States . The textbook defined ten functions of a state and laid out a universal state construction scheme that could be applied from the Horn of Africa to the Urals .
 In Kosovo and Iraq, ever-greater power was deployed to advance such plans . The Last Days of Intervention: The Last days of Intervention in Kosovo .
 Paul Bremer, the administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority, assumed full executive power in Iraq . He sent American and British officials—I was one of them—to govern the Iraqi provinces .
 Afghanistan—the third of the four great interventions of the age, was P. lans and extensive the exception . Afghanistan was the third-of-the-four great interventions in the age of the war .
 Senior UN official, Lakhdar Brahimi, and United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld proposed a light footprint . Brahimi and U.S. secretary of defense proposed light footprint in Syria .
 Both Brahimi and Brahimi mocked Kosovo as a neocolonial farce . Although they came from very different political traditions, both mocked Kosovo .
 Both feared a heavy footprint in Afghanistan would make the government too dependent on foreign money and troops and provoke an insurgency . Both feared that a heavy presence in the country would make it too dependent .
 Rumsfeld initially authorized only 2,000 U.S. troops and forbade any nation building . He also forbade nation building in the United States .
 No attempt was made to create anything comparable to the mission in Kosovo or, later, that in Iraq . No attempt to create a similar mission was made in Kosovo .
 Brahimi blocked the opening of UN field offices in many of the provinces in Afghanistan . Brahimi wanted to ensure that his idealistic UN staff was not tempted into running Afghanistan .
 The lead was given to the Afghan transitional government under President Hamid Karzai . Instead of the lead, the government has given it to the transitional government .
 By 2004, most of Afghanistan was safer, freer, and more prosperous, with better services and opportunities than it had had in 30 years . By 2004 the country was safer and freer than it'd had had before .
 The production of opium poppies had been nearly eliminated by the Taliban by 2000 . profits flowing to the most senior government officials, according to reports .
 It was controlled by local strongmen who used their newfound power to reignite a decades-long civil war over land and drugs . Their families had run the province in the 1980s and early 1990s and used their new power to reinite a long civil war .
 Afghans in some parts of the province became nostalgic for the Taliban after being robbed and tortured by their commanders . Afghans in parts of Afghanistan have become nostalgic for their former Taliban commanders .
 Many commentators blamed the U.S. for the setbacks on the light footprint . They say the United States had failed to plan properly and had not deployed enough resources or troops .
 UN officials, counternarcotics agents, journalists, and human rights and anticorruption campaigners all called for the toppling of the warlords . UN officials and journalists have been calling for toppling the warlord .
 Academics warn that the lack of good governance would alienate the local population and undermine the credibility of the Afghan government . Academicics say it will alienate local people and undermine Afghan government's credibility .
 Practically everyone assumed that there was a realistic plan to fix governance in Afghanistan . The missing ingredients were more resources and international troops, they say .
 By 2005, NaTo “provincial reconstruction teams” had sprouted up across the country . The UN had begun to disarm and demobilize the warlords and their militias .
 By 2006, the most powerful warlords had been stripped of their posts in Helmand . The United Kingdom had deployed thousands of troops to the province . In 2006, thousands of British troops were deployed to Helmand province .
 Their aim was not to fight the Taliban, perceived at the time as a weak force . The Taliban was perceived as the weak force, but was perceived to be weak .
 Troops focused on improving governance and justice and on stamping out corruption and drugs, says President Obama .
 This plan, dubbed “the comprehensive approach,’ demanded an ever-heavier international footprint . This plan was dubbed ‘The comprehensive approach’ and demanded an even larger international footprint.
 Professor Rubenstein’s multidisciplinary approach yields fresh insights and reasons for hope . —Theda Skocpol, coeditor of Upending American Politics. —Laurie Garrett, Pulitzer Prize-winning writer .
 "An empirically rich and diverse analysis. Policymakers and community activists will want to take note" "A tremendous set of insights from an exceptional group of scholars," says Publishers Weekly .
 The problem of good governance became a problem of insurgency, says President Obama . But as the troop counts rose, the problem of governance has become a problem .
 In 2006, the number of ‘Taliban bomb attacks increased fivefold,’s number of British casualties increased tenfold . The number of 'Taliban bombings' in 2006 was fivefold .
 In 2007, a new general announced another strategy, requiring still more resources . The U.S. military says it has more resources to deal with the problem .
 By this point, tens of thousands of Afghans and thousands of international troops had been killed, and Afghanistan was considerably less safe than it had been in 2005 . Afghanistan is not an option for failure, says President Obama .
 Interventionists insist that somewhere out there is a formula for state building and counterinsurgency that could succeed . But the interveners still insisted that somewhere . out there was a formula . that could . succeed .
 Counterinsurgency experts began to suggest that perhaps 700,000 troops would do it . Counterinsergency experts suggested that perhaps 7,500 troops would be needed .
 As the U.S. presence in Afghanistan increased, so did the temperature of the political rhetoric in Washington . As the United States presence increased in Afghanistan, political rhetoric intensified .
 In 2003, 30 U.S. service members were killed in Afghanistan . The mission was one of a number of small United States operations stretching from Asia to Horn of Africa .
 By 2008, five times as many U.S. soldiers died per year and tens of billions of dollars were spent, more extreme justifications were demanded . But by 2008, with five times more than a million soldiers dying per year, more was demanded .
 Officials now argue that if Afghanistan fell to the Taliban, Pakistan would, too, and extremists would get their hands on nuclear weapons . Officials now argued that if Pakistan fell to Taliban, it would, also, and extremism would get the hands on nukes .
 Catching Osama bin Laden, President Barack Obama insisted, required “winning” in Afghanistan . Catching bin Laden required ‘winning’ in Afghanistan, Obama insisted .
 Pakistan and much of the Middle East were more important threats in terms of terrorism and regional instability than terrorism . Pakistan and the Mideast were the most important threats to the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 But the savage and changeable winds of public opinion demanded ever more paranoid and grandiose statements, he says .
 U.S. plans for state building and counterinsurgency became tissues of evasion and euphemism, justified with contorted logic, dressed in partial statistics, and decorated with false analogies . The United States. became a state of state building .
 Plans to fix 'aliban-dominated areas of southern Afghanistan' diverted investment from the 'stable' areas of central and northern Afghanistan, author says .
 Many optimistic plans contained barely concealed prophecies of failure . Many of these optimistic plans contain barely concealed predictions of failure. Many of them were optimistic .
 Obama authorized a slightly pared-down version of McChrystal’s request for almost 40,000 additional troops . Obama himself acknowledged that such misconduct was unlikely to change .
 The Taliban implemented their own vision for how to establish security, governance, and the rule of law . While the U.S. continued to refine its plans, the Taliban implemented its own vision . The Taliban is the Taliban's first government to take over the Taliban .
 They sold it not from a military fort but from within tribal structures, appealing to rural habits and using Islamic references, in Pashto . They called it sharia, and they sold it from inside tribal structures . They used Islamic references and used Pashtto to sell it not
 The more military power the interveners deployed against them, the more they could present themselves as leading a jihad for Afghanistan and Islam against a foreign military occupation . The more they use military power, they could be seen as leading jihad for the Afghan people against the foreign occupation .
 To the Americans and their allies, it seemed impossible that the U.S. military, with its fleets of gunships and cyberwarfare capabilities, could be held off by a medieval group that lived in mud huts, carried guns designed in the 1940s .
 The interveners continued to believe that the international community could succeed in nation building anywhere in the world, provided that it had the right plan and enough resources . The interventionists continued to think that the world could succeed .
 This view reflected a tragic misreading of the experience in Bosnia, which was a much more cautious and constrained intervention than many recall . The Bosnian war was a more cautious, constrained intervention in the country than many remember .
 The number of international troops was higher in Bosnia than in the early days of the war in Afghanistan . Both foreign soldiers and foreign civilians in Bosnia were severely limited in what they could do .
 Senior U.S. and European officials did not wish to be drawn into the long history of ethnic strife in the Balkans . They approached the conflict with immense caution after Vietnam and Somalia failed intervention in Somalia .
 U.S. focused on air operations to bomb the Bosnian Serb artillery around Sarajevo . The United States belatedly mounted a military intervention in Bosnia .
 The ground fighting was conducted by the Sarajevo-based Bosnia authority and by Croatian soldiers . Croatian soldiers received their training from United States contractors .
 When international troops were deployed after the Dayton peace accords, they spent most of their time on their bases . International troops spent most time on bases .
 More U.S. soldiers were injured playing sports than in action . More United States soldiers injured playing sport than in service .
 The Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina had much less power than its equivalent would be given in Kosovo . The office could not order military or police officers to enforce its decrees . It was given less power as it would be in Kosovo and could not be ordered
 Dayton agreement handed 49 percent of the country’s territory to the Bosnian Serb aggressors . The agreement enshrined their power in areas that they had ethnically cleansed .
 Bosnia's high representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina was required to work with war criminals . Instead of doing the equivalent of “de-Baathifying,” as Bremer did in Iraq, or toppling the warlords, as U.S. and coalition forces
 Bosnia was transformed not by foreign hands but by messy and often unexpected local solutions . Bosnia was ultimately transformed by messy local solutions that were supported by international diplomacy .
 First breakthrough came when Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic split from her mentor, the war criminal Karadzic, and then requested international support . The first breakthrough came after she split with her mentor .
 Bosnian Serb units acted as de facto militias in Bosnia . International forces worked with her to disarm special police forces . But international forces worked to disarm them .
 The death of Croatian President Franjo Tudjman and the toppling of Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic fatally weakened their proxies in Bosnia . Later, the death of Croatia's president Franjo Tudjman also weakened the country's political position .
 The Last Days of Intervention Karadzic was the last days of intervention in Yugoslavia . The tribunal was initially a tiny and apparently toothless war crimes tribunal in The Hague . It led to the capture and prosecution of Plavsic and her husband .
 The reversal of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia also owed very little to international plans . Bosnia's ethnic cleansing also owed little to the international plans, says historian .
 Many international experts considered it reckless to allow refugees to go back to villages that had been burned to the ground and occupied by hostile militias . Despite Dayton agreement’s commitment to refugee return, many international experts consider it reckless .
 Small groups of Bosnians tried to move back to their homes . Nonetheless, small groups of people tried to return to their Bosnian homes .
 Some were ejected immediately by armed groups, but others held on . Others held on and persuaded international troops to follow and protect them . International troops followed and protected them from armed groups .
 Bosnian-led initiatives have opened the door for the return of over a million refugees . Bosnian refugees have been forced to return to their homes in the past .
 Within a decade of the intervention, more than 200,000 homes had been given back to their owners . Over 400,000 soldiers from three armies had been disarmed, and Bosnia had built a unified army of 15,000 . Bosnia had been able to build a unified, unified army
 All the major war criminals were caught and tried, and Bosnia’s homicide rate fell below that of Sweden . Bosnia's homicide rate was lower than Sweden's of the 1990s . The war crime rate was also lower than in Sweden .
 All of this was achieved at a cost of almost zero American and NATO lives . The U.S. and NATO forces killed almost zero Americans in the attack .
 The initially limited and restrained international presence in Afghanistan still enabled far more progress than most critics of the war have acknowledged . But critics say the initial and restrained presence in the country still enabled more progress .
 The violence and poor governance used to discredit the light-footprint approach were not representative of all of rural Afghanistan, says Rory Stewart . The violence was particularly in Helmand, elsewhere in southern Afghanistan, and in eastern Afghanistan, he says .
 In Bamiyan, for example, military strongmen retained power, but there was peace . The Taliban has been fighting in the country since 2001 .
 Between 2001 and 2004, locals established excellent schools, even in outlying settlements, providing most girls with their first experience of formal education and A light and sustained laying the foundation for some of the best schools .
 The people of Bosnian intervention should have been the Bamityan, long a marginalized community . Bamityans have taken senior positions in universities, the media, approach for Afghanistan ministries, and other government 70 agencies .
 Life was much better than it had been under the Taliban, which had led genocidal attacks against Bamiyan communities . Life is much better now than under Taliban .
 All this progress occurred with only a few dozen foreign soldiers in the province and no international civilian administrators . No international civilian civilian administrators were present in Afghanistan .
 Progress also reported in Herat, Mazar-e Sharif, Panjshir Valley, the Shomali Plain, and Kabul . There also was progress in other central regions and areas to the north .
 In all these places, a light international footprint meant fewer international casualties, which in turn reduced the pressure on U.S. politicians and generals to make exaggerated claims . In the United States and Europe, the U.N. military says it has a "light international footprint"
 The Afghan people want to accept ideas and values that Americans and Europeans did not always share . It also compelled the international community to engage in a more modest discussion with the Afghan people .
 By 2005, the Afghan economy was almost twice as big as it had been in 2001 . Afghanistan's economy had doubled in 2005 as it was twice the size of the country's GDP .
 On television, young female and male presenters had the confidence to satirize their rulers . On TV, young women and men were able to satirise their rulers with the confidence .
 Mobile phones spread like FOREIGN AFFAIRs spread like wildfire . The Last Days of Intervention wildfire .
 Millions of Afghan refugees were choosing to return home during this period . Millions of people had fled in the wake of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, millions of Afghans were returning home .
 The answer would have depended on the initiatives of local actors and the competition among them, the developments in neighboring countries, and luck . The outcome in Bosnia did not depend on the initiative, just as it did in the Balkans .
 In many parts of Afghanistan, there would have been poverty, a lack of democratic representation, and strongman rule . In many of Afghanistan's most impoverished areas, poverty, and democratic representation would not have been possible .
 In regions controlled by drug lords and racked by Pashtun infighting and Pakistani meddling, there probably would have been continued horror, especially if U.S. special operations forces and their proxies had continued to hunt for terrorists .
 There could have been continued improvements in health, education, and employment across much of the country, from Bamtyan to Panjshir . But an overambitious surge had not diverted development funds away from these regions and to insurgency areas .
 For millions in Herat and Kabul, this progress could have been combined with an increasingly open and democratic civil society . And for millions of people, it was possible to combine this progress with an open civil society, she says .
 Many of the problems caused by the heavier international presence and the surge would have been avoided . Most important, however, was the heavy international presence . The surge would not have been prevented by the presence of international personnel .
 The attempts to depose local warlords in the name of good governance created power vacuums in some of the most ungovernable regions of the country, and drove the warlords and their m1litias to ally with the ‘Taliban .
 The counternarcotics campaigns alienated many others who lost their livelihoods . Many people lost their jobs because of the campaigns . The campaigns have alienated many of them from their livelihood .
 The United States did attempt to return to a lighter footprint in 2014, but by then, immense damage had been done . The U.S. tried to return in 2014 to a light footprint, but the damage was already done .
 The surge had formed an Afghan army that was entirely reliant on expensive U.S. aircraft and technology . It also created a new group of gangster capitalists fed from foreign military contracts, and supercharged corruption .
 72 operations had killed thousands of people, including many civilians, deepening hatred . Military November/December 2021 pl Rory Stewart pl. Rory Stewart .
 More than 100,000 international troops in rural villages had allowed the ‘Taliban—which had been a weak and fragile group — to present themselves as fighting for Afghanistan and Islam against a foreign occupation . And the presence of more than 100-000 international . troops in . rural villages
 In 2005, under the light footprint, British intelligence analyst told me there were between 2,000 and 3,000 ‘Taliban fighters in Afghanistan’ The Taliban is thought to have a large presence in Afghanistan .
 General Richard Barrons of the British army estimated that there were 36,000 ‘Taliban fighters in the country’ Six years later, tens of thousands of Afghans had been killed and half a trillion dollars had been spent .
 Just as the initial light footprint was better than the surge, so the later light footprint is better than a total withdrawal . The first light footprint of a withdrawal is better, but the later is better .
 A few thousand international troops, supporting air operations, were still capable of preventing the ‘Taliban from holding any district capital—much less marching on Kabul’s capital, Kabul .
 By preventing a Taliban takeover, the troops were able to buy valuable time for health and educational outcomes to improve, development assistance to continue, and income to grow .
 The cost of remaining beyond 2021 would have been minimal, the government said . Although the cost of the surge had been immense, the cost was minimal, it was said .
 The United States could have supported 2,500 soldiers in Afghanistan almost indefinitely, with little risk . The U.S. could have done so much without risk, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Taliban would have posed a minimal threat to U.S. troops in their heavily defended air bases . So long as United. States airpower and support for the Afghan air force remained in place, the Taliban would .
 The Taliban won because the U.S. withdrew, crippled the Afghan air force on its way out, and left Afghan troops without air support or resupply lines . The Taliban were not on the verge of victory; they won because of the United States withdrawal .
 The decision to withdraw was driven not by military necessity, the interests of the Afghans, or even larger U.S. foreign policy objectives, but by United States domestic politics . In other words, the decision was driven by domestic politics rather than military necessity .
 Many Americans welcomed the end of the United States war in Afghanistan because their leaders had not properly explained to them how light the U.S. presence had become or what it was protecting . Yet many Americans welcomed it because they had not been explained how light it had become .
 Politics in the West seems to abhor the middle ground, swinging inexorably from overreach and overstatement to isolationism and withdrawal . Politicians in West seem to abhor overreach, overstatement, withdrawal .
 The Last Days of Intervention intervention intervention should have been the approach for Afghanistan . A light and sustained footprint modeled on the Bosnian Bosnian .
 Former U.S. President Donald Trump behaved as though failure had no consequences . Instead of arguing that failure in Afghanistan was not an option, he behaved like failure had consequences . Former President Barack Obama was the president of the United States from 2001 to 2009 .
 He showed no concern for how a U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan would affect the United States’ reputation and alliances, regional stability, terrorism, or the lives of ordinary Afghans . The Afghan Taliban is the Taliban’s only major ally in the country .
 President Obama responded to exaggerated claims about Afghanistan's importance not with moderate claims but with a refusal to maintain even the smallest presence there or to bear the slightest cost .
 President Joe Biden has followed Trump’s Afghan policy in every detail . Biden famously advocated a light footprint when he was Obama's vice president . Biden had famously advocated against the surge in Afghanistan .
 He seems to have convinced himself that such an approach had failed . Somehow, over the years, he seemed to have . convinced himself . that such a . failed . It was not the first time it had failed.
 "What failed was the political culture of the West and the imagination of Western bureaucrats," says David Cameron . "It was a failure of political culture and imagination, says Cameron . What failed is the imagination and political culture, he says .
 The United States and its allies lacked patience, realism, and moderation needed to find the middle path . The U.S. and allies lacked the patience and realism to find a middle path, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Our success is a testament to what a determined practitioner of democracy, characterized by good governance and transparency, can achieve," says the mayor . "We are proud to be a proud citizen of democracy," he says .
 The story of 'Taiwan is not only about the maintenance of our own democratic way of life. Yet the story of ‘Taiwan’s story is not just about the . maintenance of . our own . way of . life . Yet the . story of Taiwan is
 It is also about the strength and sense of responsibility Taiwan brings to efforts to safeguard the stability of the region and the world . Taiwan is a key ally in the Middle East and Asia .
 Taiwan has succeeded in making a place for themselves in the international community . Through hard work and courage, the 23. million people of Taiwan have succeeded in the global community .
 authoritarian regimes are more convinced than ever that their model of governance is better adapted than democracy to the requirements of the twenty-first century . Emerging from the covip-19 pandemic, authoritarian regimes believe they are better suited than democracy .
 Taiwan lies at the intersection of contending systems . This has fueled a contest of ideologies, and Taiwan lies in the middle of these systems .
 Taiwan's refusal to give up, its persistent embrace of democracy, and its commitment to act as a responsible stakeholder has made that difficult . TSAI ING-WEN is President of Taiwan .
 Taiwan and the Fight for Democracy now spurring the rest of the world to reassess its value as a liberal democracy . Taiwan is on the frontlines of a new clash of ideologies .
 If Taiwan were to fall, the consequences would be catastrophic for regional peace and the democratic alliance system . And they should remember that if they do, they should also remember the consequences of Taiwan's fall .
 It would signal that in today’s global contest of values, authoritarianism has the upper hand over democracy . It would send a message that authoritarianism is the key to winning back power in the world .
 The course of the Indo-Pacific, the world’s fastest-growing region, will in many ways shape the future of the twenty-first century . The region is the world's fastest growing region .
 Its emergence offers myriad opportunities but also brings new tensions and systemic contradictions . If not handled wisely, it could have devastating effects on international security and the global economy .
 Beijing is replacing its commitment to a peaceful resolution with an increasingly aggressive posture . Beijing has invested heavily in the military, expanding its military in Taiwan Strait and surrounding areas .
 Taiwan has made clear to the world that democracy is nonnegotiable . Despite these worrying developments, the people of Taiwan have made clear that democracy remains nonnegotiable .
 Taiwan will not bend to pressure, but nor will it turn adventurist, even when it accumulates support from the international community . Taiwan is not willing to back down, but will not back down .
 The maintenance of regional security will remain a significant part of Tatwan’s overall government policy, he says .
 China will continue to express its openness to dialogue with Beijing, as long as this dialogue proceeds in a spirit of equality and without political preconditions .
 U.S. is investing resources to deepen its understanding of China's administration in Beijing . China is seeking to reduce the risks of misinterpretation and misjudgment and facilitate more precise decision-making .
 'Taiwan is prepared to meet its challenges. We look to maintain a clear-eyed understanding of the external environment, both threats and opportunities, in order to ensure that ‘Taiwan’s future is secure,’ the government said .
 ‘Iaiwan is fully committed to working with other regional actors to ensure stability. At the same time, ‘iaiwan’s government is committed to ensuring stability,’ she said .
 Tatwan and the U.S. signed a memorandum of understanding on the establishment of a coast guard working group in March . The United States and Tatwan signed an agreement to establish a working group .
 This working group will improve communication and information sharing between the U.S. and ‘Taiwanese coast guards, while also facilitating greater . objectives such as preserving maritime resources and reducing illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing .
 The understanding should serve as a springboard for greater collaboration on nonmilitary matters with other partners in the Indo-Pacific .
 Taiwan has also launched a series of initiatives to modernize and reorganize its military, in order to be better prepared for both present and future challenges . Taiwan's military has also been reorganizing and modernizing its military .
 ‘Tatwan has made hefty investments in asymmetric capabilities, including mobile land-based antiship cruise missiles,’ says ‘tatwan’ . In addition to investments in traditional platforms such as combat aircraft, the country has also invested heavily in antish
 The All-Out Defense Mobilization Agency will launch in 2022 . It aims to ensure that a well-trained and well-equipped military reserve force stands as a more reliable backup for the regular military forces .
 Such initiatives are meant to maximize [Taiwan's self-reliance and preparedness] and to signal that we are willing to bear our share of the burden and don't take our security partners' support for granted .
 We are committed to collaborating with our neighbors to prevent armed conflict in the East China and South China Seas, as well as in the Taiwan Strait . We are fully committed to preventing armed conflict .
 Taiwan lies along the first island chain, which runs from northern Japan to Borneo . Should this line be broken by force, the consequences would disrupt international trade and destabilize the entire western Pacific .
 A failure to defend Taiwan would not only be catastrophic for the ‘Taiwanese; it would overturn a security architecture that has allowed for peace and extraordinary development in the region for seven decades .
 Taiwan and the Fight for Democracy Tsai at a campaign rally in Chiayi City, Taiwan, September 2015 . Taiwan does not seek military confrontation. Tsai: "Taiwan is not seeking military confrontation."
 It hopes for peaceful, stable, predictable, and mutually beneficial coexistence with its neighbors . The U.S. hopes for peace, stable and predictable coexistence .
 'Taiwan will do whatever it takes to defend itself. But if its democracy and way of life are threatened, ‘Taiwan’s democracy and life is threatened,’ says president .
 Taiwan's history is filled with both hardship and accomplishments, and the authors of this history are the people of Taiwan . Taiwan's people are the nation's people .
 "Over the past few decades, we have overcome adversity and international isolation to achieve one of modern political history’s most successful democratic transitions," says President Vladimir Putin .
 The key ingredients of this achievement have been patience, resourcefulness, pragmatism, and a stubborn refusal to give up . The key ingredient of this success is patience and resourcefulness .
 Taiwanese know that practical collaboration is often better than being loud or adventurous . A willingness to lend a hand is better than trying to provoke or impose a system on others, Taiwanese say .
 The people of ‘Taiwan’ have not always achieved consensus, over time, a collective identity has emerged . Over time, the people of 'Taiwan' have achieved consensus .
 We have absorbed values that we have made our own, merging them with local traditions to create a liberal, progressive order and a new sense of what it means to be Taiwanese . Through our interactions with the . rest of the world, we have absorbed . values . We have created a liberal
 At the heart of this identity is our embrace of democracy, reflecting a choice that the Taiwanese made and fought for after decades of authoritarian rule . November/December 2021 77 Tsai Ing-wen. 77 .
 Democracy has become a nonnegotiable part of who we are . Imperfect though it may be, democracy has become an important part of the U.S.
 If Taiwan were to fall, the seeking to undermine its hard-won consequences would be catastrophic . This determination gives Taiwan the resilience to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century and provides a firewall .
 A fundamental part of this em78 brace of democracy is a firm belief that the future of Taiwan is to be decided by the Taiwanese through democratic means . The future of the Taiwanese is to decide by the future, says the president .
 ‘Taiwanese in some ways differ in their sense of what exactly this future should look like, we are united in our commitment to democracy and the values and institutions that allow us to fight back against external efforts to erode our identity and alter the way of life we cherish,'
 The great majority of us regard democracy as the best form of government for Taiwan . We are willing to do what is necessary to defend it, says the author .
 Taiwan would rise up if the very existence of Taiwan were under threat . Taiwan's beliefs are tested every day, but there is no doubt that the people would rise to defend their country .
 During the period of authoritarian rule under the Kuomintang, the Dangwai movement pushed to lift martial law and democratize ‘Taiwan’ Even after being instrumental in ending martial law, it continued to offer an effective check on government power .
 The extent of ‘Taiwanese civil society’s role in governance is unmatched anywhere in the region,’ says Taiwanese . The trust between elected officials and citizens can influence policy both through and between elections . As a result, citizens are able to influence policy through
 Taiwan's civil society has proved integral to the island’s international standing . Civil society has proven integral to Taiwan's international standing. Taiwan has a long history of civil society as a result .
 Taiwan's exclusion from the United Nations and most other international institutions could have led to isolation . ‘Taiwan instead tapped into the tremendous creativity and capacity of its people,’ says the president of Taiwan’
 The refusal of many countries to officially recognize Taiwan compelled us to think asymmetrically, combating efforts to counter efforts to recognize Taiwan . Rather than being an impediment, the refusal of countries to formally recognize Taiwan required us to fight efforts to do so .
 OUSC Alfa-Bank is incorporated, focused and based in Russia . It is not affiliated with U.S.-based Alfa Insurance . Apply by culturalvistas.org/alfa .
 At the Josef Korbel School of International Studies, we are confronting the great challenges of our time . Promoting robust democracy, achieving environmental sustainability, and creating a safer and more equitable world are challenges .
 Tsai Ing-wen 80 negate Taiwan's existence by deepening our engagement with the world through nontraditional channels . Learn more at korbel.du.com .
 Taiwan is transforming itself into an economic powerhouse and one of the most vibrant democracies in the Indo-Pacific . Despite decades of isolation, Taiwan has succeeded in making a place for themselves within the international community .
 Taiwan's ability to survive and thrive as a liberal democracy has important implications for the prevailing rules of international relations . Taiwan's success has implications for international relations, says CNN's John Defterios .
 "Our bid to play a more meaningful role in the international community is evolving in the context of changing regional politics," says the UK . "We are evolving in a context of change regional politics, with more assertive challenges to the liberal international order," she says .
 With increasing awareness of the potential impact of such authoritarian ambitions, more and more countries have been willing to reexamine their long-standing assumptions about, and self-imposed limitations on, engagement with ‘Taiwan’
 Taiwan seeks to be part of the solution to emerging challenges with ramifications on a planetary scale, from climate change and new diseases to proliferation and terrorism, to human trafficking and threats to supply chains . Taiwan is an economic powerhouse and a participatory democracy .
 In many cases, the speed with which new emergencies arise and spread is beyond the ability of states and existing international institutions to respond . The speed of new emergencies can be too fast for states and international institutions, experts say . The World Health Organization says it is working to respond to the situation
 The international community must move toward inclusiveness rather than rigidly adhering to current structures . To prepare for future emergencies, the international community needs to be more inclusive . The UN should move toward a more inclusive approach to dealing with future crises, says UN expert .
 Taiwan has demonstrated to the world that democratic systems can respond effectively to a pandemic, harnessing the powers of artificial intelligence, big data, and surveillance networks . Even as it experienced a flare-up in Covip-19 cases last spring, Taiwan demonstrated that the information gathered is used
 Taiwan has long been excluded from global institutions such as the FOREIGN AFFAIRS Taiwan and the Fight for Democracy World Health Organization . Taiwan has developed its own methods of cooperating and communicating with international partners .
 Being left out of the United Nations and other multilateral institutions has encouraged resilience and spurred novel approaches to dealing with challenges and crises of all kinds . Being out of U.N. and other institutions has spurred innovation and new approaches, experts say .
 ‘Taiwan has strived to adhere to international protocols, such as the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, amending its domestic laws and seeking its own formulas for meeting increasingly complex chal .’
 In 2016, we | launched the New Southbound Policy, nonnegotable. which facilitates regional prosperity through trade and investment partnerships, educational and people-to-people exchanges, with countries in South and Southeast Asia, as well as Australia and New Zealand .
 Taiwan is well positioned to help create secure global supply chains in sectors such as semiconductors, biotechnology, and renewable energy . Taiwan's high-tech leadership and educated and globalized workforce are key to international cooperation .
 A new regional high-end production hub initiative will solidify our position in the global supply chain . We are working to further strengthen our role in securing global supply chains .
 Tatwan is active in high-precision manufacturing, artificial intelligence, 5G applications, renewable energy, biotechnology, and more, helping create more diverse supply chains that can withstand disruption .
 Taiwan derives additional soft power from expertise and capabilities in a variety of other fields, including education, public health, medicine, and natural-disaster prevention . Taiwan also has expertise in education and public health .
 These are fields in which experts are taking on a growing regional role . And these are fields where experts and institutions have a growing role .
 81 Tsai Ing-wen 82 universities, for example, are prepared to work with other universities in the region to develop Chinese language training .
 Our medical facilities are sharing expertise in medical technology and management with partners around Asia . The facilities will be sharing expertise with partners in Asia .
 "We are ready to work with major countries to provide infrastructure investment in developing countries," says minister . And we're ready to help develop countries, he says .
 Similar efforts are being made through an agreement with the United States to enhance cooperation on infrastructure financing, investment, and market development in Latin America .
 Taiwan can be a crucial force in the peaceful development and prosperity of our region and the world, says President Obama . In short, Taiwan can become a force in peace, he says .
 Taiwan is on the frontlines of the global contest between the liberal democratic order and the authoritarian alternative . Taiwan also has an important part to play in strengthening global democracy, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Taiwan Foundation for Democracy is the region’s first nongovernmental organization devoted to democracy assistance and advocacy .
 TFD provides funding for nongovernmental organizations, international and domestic, that advocate democratic development and human rights . TFD is following the models set by the U.S. and UK's Westminster Foundation for Democracy .
 It also works to promote public participation in governance through mechanisms such as participatory budgeting and to encourage youth engagement through initiatives such as the Asia Young Leaders for Democracy program .
 In 2019, the TFD organized its inaugural regional forum on religious freedom, and appointed its first ambassador-at-large for religious freedom . The TFD has also organized its first regional forum, a regional forum .
 Taiwan's strong record on democracy, gender equality, and press and religious freedom has also made it a home for a growing number of global nongovernmental organizations . Taiwan has faced an increasingly difficult environment in Asia .
 Organizations including Reporters Without Borders, the National Democratic Institute, the International Republican Institute and the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom have set up regional offices in Taiwan .
 From ‘Taiwan, they are able to continue their important work in the region without the constant threats of surveillance, harassment, and interruptions by authorities .
 Taiwan and the Fight for Democracy are open to international institutions interested in establishing a presence in the Indo-Pacific . We have also made FOREIGN AFFAIRS Taiwan hospitable to international organizations interested in setting up a presence .
 The Global Cooperation and Training Framework is a platform jointly administered by ‘Taiwan, the United States, and other partners that allows us to share our expertise with countries around the world . It has fostered creative cooperation .
 Taiwan has an abundance of experience in dealing with disinformation . One recent round of GCTF activity focused on media literacy and how democracies can combat disinformation .
 More than 2,300 experts and officials from more than 87 countries have attended GcTF workshops in Tatwan . The forum will continue to expand—offering a path to greater collaboration between ‘Taiwan and countries around the world, including the U.S.
 'Tatwan works closely with the U.S. on many issues, in the service of regional peace and stability,' she said .
 "Our hope is to shoulder more responsibility by being a close political and economic partner of the United States and other like-minded countries," she said .
 The threat posed by authoritarian regimes has served as an important wake-up call for democracies . It spurs them to emerge from their complacency, says Julian Zelizer .
 Democracies around the world are working to safeguard their values and renew their ossified institutions . Although extraordinary challenges remain, democracies around the globe are now working to protect values .
 Alliances are being rekindled to serve the interests of the international community, says President Obama . Alliances will be re-kindled, he says .
 Taiwan may be small in terms of territory, but it has proved that it can have a large global presence . Taiwan has shown that this presence matters to the world, and that this .
 It has persevered in the face of existential threats and made itself an indispensable actor in the Indo-Pacific . The U.S. has made itself indispensable in the region of the world .
 Taiwan's handling of the covip-19 pandemic pandemic has offered one more example of the crucial role that Taiwan can play and of why ‘Taiwan matters’
 Going forward, our high-tech industries, and especially our production of advanced semiconducors, will continue to fuel the global economy, says Taiwan's president .
 ‘Taiwan’s ability to balance ties to various countries while defending its democratic way of life will continue to inspire others in the region,’ says the president .
 Although the world faces an arduous journey ahead, this presents Taiwan with opportunities not seen before . The world faces a difficult journey ahead of the next few years, but this presents the country with new opportunities .
 It should increasingly be regarded as part of the solution, particularly as democratic countries seek to find the right balance between the need to engage and trade with authoritarian countries .
 ‘Taiwan is ready to be a global force for good,’ says the president of the Republic of Republic of Taiwan .
 He saw little value in alliances and spurned multilateral institutions . President Obama spurned alliances and turned multilateral organizations .
 President Obama coddled autocrats and trained his ire on the United States’ democratic partners . He trained his anger on the U.S.’s democratic partners, Obama said .
 At first glance, the foreign policy of U.S. President Joe Biden could hardly be more different than that of President Barack Obama . Biden's foreign policy has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency . Biden has been accused of being a hypocrite for his foreign policy .
 He treats climate change as a serious threat and arms control as an essential tool . He treats it as an important tool for arms control .
 He sees the fight of our time as one between democracy and autocracy . He pledges to convene what he is calling the Summit for Democracy to reestablish U.S. leadership .
 Critical elements of this continuity arose even before Trump's presidency, during the administration of Barack Obama . This suggests a longer-term development—a paradigm shift in the United States’ approach to the world, he says .
 The outlines of a post-Cold War U.S. foreign policy are emerging . The outlines are emerging of a new era of American foreign policy in the United States .
 The old foreign policy paradigm grew out of World War II and the Cold War . It was founded on the recognition that U.S. national security depended on more than just looking out for the country’s own narrowly defined concerns . Richard Haass will be the next president of the
 Protecting and advancing U.S. interests, both domestic and international, required helping shepherd into existence and sustaining an international system that, however imperfect, would buttress United States security and prosperity over the long term .
 Despite missteps, the results largely validated these assumptions, the war in Vietnam was largely successful . The Korean Peninsula was largely defined as the Korean Peninsula .
 The hold of this emerging nationalist approach to the world is clear, accounting for the continuity across administrations as different as those of Obama, ‘Trump, and Biden,’s .
 Whether it can produce a foreign policy that advances U.S. security, prosperity, and values is another matter .
 As with any paradigm shift, the one taking place now is possible only because of the failures—both real and perceitved—of much of what came in the years before . The new paradigm shift is possible because of failures, both real and perceived, of much of that came in
 The Cold War ended 30 years ago, and the United States emerged from that four-decade struggle with a degree of primacy that had few, if any, historical precedents .
 It may have been an exaggeration to hail a ‘unipolar moment,’ but not by much . It may be an exaggeration, but it may be a good thing to hail the moment of the year .
 Historians will be critical of a lot that the United States did, and did not do, with its position . Trump and Biden debating in Cleveland, September 2020, will be September 2020 .
 But these achievements must be weighed against American failures, both of commission and omission . The U.S. has a history of failure, both in commission and in commission .
 Dean Acheson titled his memoir Present at the Creation . No secretary of state could credibly include the word "creation" in his or her memoir . The word was used during the Truman administration .
 Despite its unmatched power, the U.S. did little to address the widening gap between global challenges and institutions meant to contend with them . The United States should address the gap between its power and its institutions, the authors say .
 Its decision to enlarge NATO, in violation of Churchill’s dictum “In victory, magnanimity,’ fanned Russian hostility . The decision was made without sufficient modernizing or strengthening the alliance, says Haass .
 Africa and Latin America received only intermittent attention from the continent . Latin America was given limited attention in the early 1900s .
 Post-9/11 wars in Afghanistan and Iraq were failures of both design and execution, resulting in costly overreach . The wars were part of a broader U.S. focus on the greater Middle East that defied strategic logic .
 The George W Bush and Obama administrations dedicated a high percentage of their foreign policy focus to a region home to only about five percent of the world’s population, no great powers, and economies dependent on the wasting asset of fossil fuels .
 The U.S. missed its best chance to update the system that had successfully waged the Cold War for a new era defined by new challenges and new rivalries .
 Thanks to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the American public largely soured on what was widely seen as a costly, failed foreign policy . Meanwhile, the U.S. public has largely turned its back on the Bush administration .
 Americans came to blame trade for the disappearance of millions of manufacturing jobs . Growing inequality, exacerbated by the 2008 financial crisis and pandemic, fueled populist suspicion of elites .
 In the face of looming domestic problems, foreign involvement came to be viewed as a costly distraction . The U.S. has a long history of foreign involvement in the Middle East .
 The first and most prominent element of continuity between Trump and Biden is the centrality of great-power rivalry . Above all, with China, the new president will focus on China .
 This new posture reflects the pervasive disillusionment in the U.S. foreign policy establishment with the results of efforts to integrate China into the world economy and the broader international system . Beijing is using its growing strength abroad and engaging in repression at home, the author says .
 Taiwan is the most likely flash point between the U.S. and China . The two administrations' approaches to Taiwan can be seen in their approaches to the country .
 The Biden administration has actively implemented a policy that publicizes high-level meetings between U.S. officials and their Taiwanese counterparts . The policy was introduced in the final weeks of the Trump administration .
 The U.S. administration has repeatedly stressed order without doing the its ‘rock solid” support for ‘Taiwan hard wore . Biden has inserted language emphasizing the importance of cross-strait stability into joint statements .
 Biden administration has kept in place Trump-era tariffs and export controls . The Biden administration is reportedly looking into launching an investigation into China's large-scale industrial subsidies .
 China has doubled down on criticism of China’s refusal to allow independent investigation into the origins of COvID-19 . It has given credence to the possibility that the new coronavirus leaked from a laboratory in Wuhan .
 Beijing has called Beijing’s repression of the Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang a “genocide” and denounced its violation of the “one country, two systems” principle in Hong Kong .
 It has strengthened efforts to upgrade the Quad, a dialogue meant to enhance cooperation among Australia, India, Japan, and the U.S. It has launched a complementary strategic initiative with Australia and the United Kingdom .
 The U.S. has continued to use the term ‘Indo-Pacific’ first brought into common official usage by the Trump administration .
 There are differences in the Biden administration’s approach in some important areas, including a focus on finding ways to cooperate on climate change . The Biden administration's focus is to build a common stance with allies, including China .
 The view that China is the U.S.’s chief competitor and even adversary has become widespread and ingrained . Yet the similarities in the two administrations’ approaches far outweigh any differences, the authors say .
 Much the same can be said of the administrations’ policies toward the United States’s other great-power competitor . November/December 2021 89 Richard Haass 90 .
 Since Biden took over, U.S. policy toward Russia has changed little in substance . Biden has been in charge of the administration since 2009 .
 Gone is the inexplicable admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin . Trump's admiration for Putin has gone on to be an embarrassment .
 Trump administration's posture toward Russia was fairly tough . But whatever Trump’s personal regard for Putin, the U.S. posture toward the Russian leader was fairly strong .
 Biden has continued his efforts to combat Russia's influence in Ukraine . Biden also expanded and expanded U.S. military support to Ukraine . Russia has been hit with sanctions, closed Russian consulates in the United States .
 The common view between the two administrations seems to be that U.S. policy toward Russia should mostly consist of damage limitation . This is to prevent tensions, whether in Europe or cyberspace, from deteriorating into a crisis .
 Biden’s willingness to extend U.S.-Russian arms control pacts and start ‘strategic stability’ talks is mostly about preventing additional erosion, not making further progress . Biden's unwillingness to extend pacts is about preventing further erosion of progress, he says .
 America's focus on great powers is shared embrace of U.S. nationalism, says President Obama .
 The Biden administration is less overt in its nationalism, but its mantra of “a foreign policy for the middle class” reflects some similar inclinations . Biden administration's mantra is “A foreign policy” for the Middle Class .
 U.S. exports of vaccines were limited and delayed even as domestic supply far exceeded demand . There has been only a modest effort to expand manufacturing capacity to allow greater exports .
 This domestic focus was shortsighted, as highly contagious variants were able to emerge in other parts of the world before coming to do immense damage in the U.S. The U.N. should not have focused on the domestic focus .
 It forfeited an opportunity to cultivate goodwill internationally by demonstrating the superiority of American technology and generosity in the face of Chinese and Russian vaccine diplomacy . The U.S. also forfeited a chance to demonstrate its superiority of technology .
 Trade policy has been shaped by similar forces, demonstrating further continuity between Trump and Biden . United States trade policy has shaped U.S. trade policy, says Biden .
 President Obama has avoided the hyperbole of the former . He savaged all trade pacts except for the ones his own administration had negotiated .
 Staying outside the agreement leaves the U.S. on the sidelines of the Indo-Pacific economic order . It also means missing opportunities in other areas, such as advancing global climate goals through cross-border carbon taxes .
 Central to the new foreign policy is the desire to pull back from the greater Middle East, the venue of the so-called forever wars that did so much to fuel this shift in U.S. foreign policy .
 In February 2020, the Trump administration signed an accord with the Taliban that set a May 1, 2021, deadline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from the country . The deal was reached in February 2020 .
 The negotiations cut out and undercut the government of Afghanistan . The agreement itself failed to call for the Taliban to lay down their arms or even to commit to a cease-fire .
 It was not so much a peace agreement as a pact to facilitate U.S. military withdrawal . The agreement was not a peace deal, it was a deal to facilitate American military withdrawal from Afghanistan .
 By the time Biden assumed the presidency, the overreach that had once characterized U.S. strategy in Afghanistan was a thing of the past . Biden: "The overreach" was once characterized by overreach in Afghanistan .
 United States troop levels had hit 100,000 during the Obama administration . Under 3,000 U.S. troops are now limited to training, advising, and supporting Afghan forces .
 The modest U.S. presence provided an anchor for some 7,000 troops from allied countries and a psychological and military backstop for the Afghan government . But not enough to achieve victory or peace in Afghanistan .
 After 20 years, the U.S. seems to have found a level of commitment in Afghanistan commensurate with the stakes . The United States has been involved in Afghanistan for 20 years .
 The Biden administration rejected the options of renegotiating or scrapping the accord . Biden administration rejects options of scrapping or renegotiating the deal .
 Biden rejected tying the removal of U.S. troops to conditions on the ground or to additional Taliban actions . Biden: The removal of troops will not be tied to conditions in Afghanistan . Biden said the Taliban should not be blamed for the Taliban's actions .
 President Obama considered the war in Afworld will make it much ghanistan a “forever war,’ one he was determined to get out of at any cost . Like Trump before, he considered it a war that will last forever . He considered it to be a �
 Trump policy he had inherited inherited; his administration did so in a Trumpian way, consulting minimally with others and leaving NaTo allies to scramble .
 Multilateralism and alliance-first foreign policy in principle gave way to America-first unilateralism in practice . The U.S. has a unilateralist approach to foreign policy, says President Obama .
 In the rest of the greater Middle East, the Biden administration has similarly continued the Trump approach of reducing the U.S. footprint .
 It has resisted any temptation to get more involved in Syria, much less Libya or Yemen . It has announced it will maintain only a small, noncombat military presence in Iraq; embraced the Abraham Accords while participating only reluctantly in diplomatic efforts to end fighting between Israel and Hamas .
 Iran may seem like a glaring exception to the broader similarity . Iran may be the only country in the Middle East to take action against the West .
 Trump was a fierce critic of the 2015 nuclear agreement with Iran and unilaterally exited the accord in 2018 . The Biden administration has made clear its desire to return to the agreement .
 The two governments have been unable to agree on specific obligations or sequencing . But restoring the deal has proved easier said to done than done .
 A new hard-line Iranian government has shown no interest in signing on to the sort of ‘longer and stronger” pact the Biden administration seeks .
 Iran is advancing its nuclear and missile capabilities and its influence throughout the region . As a result, the Biden November/December 2021 administration may well face the same choices its predecessor did .
 Even if Iran accepts timelimited constraints on its nuclear activities, the U.S. will still have to decide how to respond to other Iranian provocations .
 Even on those issues on which Biden's rhetoric starkly differs from Trumps, Biden's policy shifts have been more modest than might have been expected . Biden's policies have been modest on many of the issues he has been criticized for his rhetoric .
 Consider the two presidents’ views on the role of values in foreign policy . The two presidents' views on values and values differ from each other .
 Trump was a transactional leader who often seemed to consider democracy a hindrance . He tried to establish close personal relationships with many of the world’s dictators .
 He lavished praise on Putin and exchanged ‘love letters’ with North Korea’s Kim Jong Un . Putin and Kim Jong-Un exchanged love letters with each other .
 He spoke highly of Xi Jinping, Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Viktor Orban, while denigrating the leaders of democratic allies, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau .
 Biden, by contrast, has declared that the U.S. is in “a contest with autocrats,’ announced plans to hold his Summit for Democracy . Biden has pledged to prioritize relations with countries that share American values .
 Human rights and democracy promotion has hardly been a more prominent part of U.S. foreign policy . Yet such commitments, however sincere, have hardly made human rights more prominent . Human rights, democracy promotion have hardly been more prominent in the United States .
 Well-warranted expressions of outrage have not led to significant changes in behavior by others . The targets of such outrage are generally willing and able to absorb U.S. criticism and increasingly even United States sanctions .
 Washington has offered only a minimal response to incidents such as the Cuban government's brutal reaction to protests last summer or the assassination of Haiti’s president .
 Washington may have concerns about Saudi human rights violations, but it’s unlikely that those concerns would prevent cooperation with Riyadh on Iran, Yemen, or Israel . Saudi Arabia's leaders showed an interest in joining the Abraham Accords if they joined the Abraham Accord .
 U.S. presidents have always allowed professed commitments to human rights and democracy to be set aside when other interests or priorities have come to the fore . The Age of America First: America First .
 U.S. foreign policy has made tradeoffs more frequent and acute in recent years . Today's focus is on great-power competition and short-term domestic priorities, U.N. diplomat says .
 Biden administration set aside concerns about human rights violations by Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte in order to make it easier for the U.S. military to operate in his country . The Biden administration has also worked to bolster ties with Vietnam, another autocracy ruled by a communist party .
 With Russia, it signed an arms control accord while overlooking the imprisonment of the opposition leader Alexei Navalny . The Russian opposition leader was jailed for his anti-government activities .
 It has largely ignored the rise of Hindu nationalism in India in favor of stronger ties with the country to balance China . China largely ignores the rise in Hindu nationalism .
 The fragile state of democracy in the U.S. has further undercut Washington's ability to promote democratic values abroad . And of course, the sad reality of the fragile state in the United States, it has also undercut its efforts abroad .
 These areas of difference have rarely taken priority when other issues, many of which reflect continuity, are at stake . But these areas of differences have rarely been taken priority, especially in this case .
 Washington has been unwilling to use trade to advance climate goals, sanction Brazil for its destruction of the Amazon, or make meaningful contributions to help poorer countries shift to green energy .
 In theory, more continuity in U.S. foreign policy should be a good thing . The problem is that continuity in foreign policy is a problem, not just continuity .
 A great power is unlikely to be effective if its foreign policy lurches from administration to administration in a way that November/December 2021 25 Richard Haass 96 unnerves allies, provides openings to adversaries, confuses voters and confuses them .
 The problem with the emerging U.S. approach to the world is not an absence of domestic political consensus . There is considerable bipartisanship when it comes to foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 The problem is that the consensus is woefully inadequate, above all in its failure to appreciate just how much developments thousands of miles away affect what happens in the UK .
 It is also rife with self-defeating contradictions, especially when it comes to China . China is a nation of contradictions, but it is also a country of contradictions .
 Many Republicans but few Democrats back the former . Few in either party seem ready to sign up for the latter .
 Both parties favor symbolically upgrading U.S.-Taiwanese relations . But going too far in that direction has the potential to trigger a costly conflict between the United States and China .
 As much as the U.S. sees China as an adversary, Washington still needs Betjing’s support if it is to tackle a host of regional and global challenges . Washington needs to tackle North Korea and Afghanistan, from North Korea to global health to global issues .
 The Biden administration has talked much about its support for alliances . United States allies are in many cases unprepared to do what the administration believes is necessary to counter China .
 Most United States allies resist U.S. calls to limit trade and investment ties in sensitive sectors for geopolitical reasons . China and Russia are the two countries most allies have seen in recent years . The United States has been criticized by some of its allies for their policies .
 Competing with China is essential, but it cannot provide the organizing principle for U.S. foreign policy in an era increasingly defined by global challenges, including climate change, pandemic disease, terrorism, proliferation, and online disruption . China is an important part of America's foreign policy,
 Imagine that the U.S. successfully deters China from using aggression against its neighbors, from ‘Taiwan to India and Japan, and in the South China Sea. Imagine that . Imagine that that the United States . would deters . from using . aggression against . its neighbors
 Imagine that China even stops stealing U.S. intellectual property and addresses concerns about its trade practices . Better yet, imagine that China stops stealing intellectual property from the United States . Imagine that .
 Beijing could still frustrate U.S. efforts to tackle global challenges by supporting Iranian and North Korean nuclear ambitions, conducting aggressive cyberattacks, building more coal-fired power plants, and resisting reforms to the World Health Organization and the World ‘Trade Organization .
 The war in Afghanistan revealed limits to Americans’ support for nation building, but building up capacity of friends is essential . Building up capacity is essential in much of Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East if the governments in those regions are to become better able to meet local security challenges
 Economic nationalism (especially “Buy America’ provisions) sets a precedent that, if others follow, will reduce global trade and work against collaborative approaches to developing and fielding new technologies that could make it easier to compete with China .
 It's not clear how pulling back squares with U.S. commitments to counter Iran . Iran is intent on developing its nuclear and missile capabilities and on expanding its regional influence, both directly and through proxies .
 Even a successful effort to revive the 2015 nuclear deal would not change this reality, given what the agreement does not address and given sunset provisions for its nuclear restrictions .
 Whatever the failings of this new paradigm, there is no going back; history does not offer do-overs . AMERICA ALONE. America alone .
 Washington's foreign policy largely failed both in what it did and what it didn't do . Nor should Washington return to a foreign policy that, for much of three decades, largely failed .
 The starting point for a new internationalism should be a clear recognition that although foreign policy begins at home, it cannot end there . Foreign policy should begin at home and not abroad, says David Cameron .
 The U.S. faces a world with both traditional geopolitical threats and new challenges tied to globalization . The United States, regardless of its diminished influence and deep domestic divisions, faces a new challenge .
 An American president must seek to fix what ails the U.S. without neglecting what happens abroad . President Barack Obama should not neglect what is happening abroad, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Greater disarray in the world will make the task to “build back better” much more difficult, if not impossible . The task will be more difficult for the U.S. to deal with global disarray .
 Biden has acknowledged the “fundamental truth of the 21st century ... that our own success is bound up with others succeeding as well” The question is whether he can craft and carry out a foreign policy that reflects it, he says . Biden: “Fundamental truth is
 The U.S. must work with others, through both formal and informal means, to set international norms and standards and marshal collective action . It must set international November/December 2021 standards, says Richard Haass .
 Such an approach will require the involvement of traditional allies in Europe and Asia, new partners, countries that may need U.S. help at home .
 It will require the use of all the tools of power available to the U.S., including trade, aid, intelligence, and the military . The United States will need to use diplomacy, trade and aid, but also intelligence and military .
 U.S. can't risk letting unpredictability give it a reputation as unreliable . Other states will determine their own actions, especially when it comes to balancing or accommodating China, based on how dependable and active they believe the United States will be .
 In the absence of a new American internationalism, the likely outcome will be a world that is less free, more violent, and less willing or able to tackle common challenges . The U.S. will be less free and more violent than ever before, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The U.S. is less willing to carry out a foreign policy that attempts to shape its foreign policy . It is equal parts ironic and dangerous that at a time when the United States is more affected by global developments than ever before, it's less willing .
 The Biden administration’s recent tragedymarred withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan reinforced the view of skeptics from across the domestic political spectrum that actively promoting democracy overseas is naive and less likely .
 They point to a steady decline in global freedom over the past 15 years as evidence that emphasizing democratic values is out of touch with prevailing trends and therefore a losing strategy, they say . They also point to the decline of global freedom as evidence .
 Critics say U.S. leaders can no longer indulge in Lincolnesque fantasies about democracy as the last best hope on earth . With partisan divisions at home and fierce adversaries abroad, these critics assert that the United States .
 They must instead shift their focus inward and accept the world as it is . The world is not going to change, but it will change if it does .
 This thesis, although in keeping with the emotions of the hour, is shortsighted and wrong . This thesis is wrong, but it's not keeping the emotions in the hearts of the nation, says David Cameron .
 It would be a grave error for the U.S. to waver in its commitment to democracy, CNN.com senior editor says .
 Historically, the republic’s claim on the global imagination has been inseparable from its identity— however imperfectly embodied— as a champion of human freedom, which remains a universal aspiration . The republic's claim on global imagination is inseparable .
 She served as U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations from 1993 to 1997 . She also served as Secretary of State from 1997 to 2001 .
 Nothing would be more foolish than to toss away this comparative advantage or to flee the global stage entirely due to past disappointments and self-doubt . The U.S. has a comparative advantage in the world, but it's not enough to throw it away .
 The United States still has immense resources it can deploy for purposes that serve both its immediate needs and its enduring ideals . The U.S. still has .
 Should the country conclude otherwise, however, and decide to absent itself from the democratic struggle, it would disappoint its friends, aid its enemies, magnify future risks to its citizens, impede human progress .
 U.S. leaders would be sounding the call for retreat at precisely the moment an opportunity has arisen to spark a democratic resurgence . What is more important is not to retreat at the moment a chance has arisen .
 Contrary to the conventional wisdom, the momentum is not with the enemies of democracy, it is with the opposition, says Julian Zelizer . The momentum for democracy in the U.S. continues to grow, he says .
 It's true that in recent years, some authoritarians have grown stronger. But that's not always true, it's true to say. Authoritarians are growing stronger. It’s true that they are stronger now.
 People increasingly expect accountable leadership even in the absence of democratic rule . But in many cases, they are now failing to deliver, including in countries where people expect accountability .
 According to Freedom House, authoritarian leaders took advantage of international indifference amid the covip-19 pandemic last year to crush opponents and shrink the space available for democratic activism . Freedom House: The world's indifference to the pandemic was part of a global effort to suppress opponents .
 As a result, “countries experiencing deterioration outnumbered those with improvements by the largest margin recorded since the negative trend began in 2006, the report says .
 Measurements of democracy’s slump typically start with the breakup of the Soviet Union, when newly free democratic governments emerged in almost every region .
 Many states whose democracies are now troubled were under authoritarian rule until about 30 years ago . Many of the countries whose democracies now troubled have been under authoritarian regimes .
 There was a time in recent memory when those countries were not democracies at all . Yet there were times in recent years when they weren't democracies . The U.S. has been a democracy for more than a century .
 Despite their current distress, the forces of freedom have an enlarged platform from which to mount a revival . The forces of free have a enlarged platform for a revival, says David Cameron .
 China and Russia have squandered their best chance to offer an appealing alternative to liberal democracy . This is the case in part because the world’s two most prominent authoritarian states, China and . Russia, squandering their best opportunity to offer appealing alternatives .
 Beijing and Moscow governments had opportunity to establish themselves as global models . With the United States missing in action during President Donald Trump's four years in office, the governments in China and Russia had chance to become global models.
 Unflattering views of China are at a historic high, according to a survey of people in 17 developed countries . A median of 74 percent of those polled reported that they had no confidence in Russian President Vladimir Putin to do the right thing in world affairs .
 The regime in the Kremlin is widely thought to be corrupt, untrustworthy, and a one-man show is rapidly approaching its final curtain .
 According to the World Health Organization, Russia ranked 97th in average life expectancy in 2019 . Russia is ranked in 97th place in the world, according to the WHO .
 The outcome of the 2020 U.S. presidential election was a blow to autocrats everywhere, says Julian Zelizer . Further, he says the outcome of this year's election will be a blow for autocrats .
 Trump's belly flop demolished the myth he helped create that relentless egotism is a political winner . Trump helped create the myth that relentless self-entrepreneurism is an effective political weapon .
 Many of Trump’s most outspoken international admirers have also suffered losses or are under siege . Many of the most outspoken supporters of the president have also lost their support in recent years .
 Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel, Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil, Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Turkey, Viktor Orban in Hungary, and France’s Marine Le Pen in France, are among the candidates .
 The Philippines is one of the few countries where a charismatic strongman still has an appreciative audience . The country's charismatic strongmen still has a large audience .
 Authoritarians are skilled at shaping public perceptions and checkmating potential opponents . Authoritarian leaders are skilled in shaping public perception and check-minding opponents .
 Their ranks are split between those who insist that they are democrats and those who openly scoff at even the most basic democratic norms . Those who insist they are democratic, however, are "illiberal" ones, they say .
 In a dangerous and amoral world, leaders must be able to impose order, repel threats, and foster national greatness, they say . All of them assert that in a dangerous world leaders must act decisively . Leaders must impose order and protect their nation, they write .
 Authoritarians have provided cover for one another through their influence in multilateral bodies and by insisting that governments not be criticized by outsiders for doing whatever they wish within their countries’ borders . In recent years, authoritarians are providing cover for each other through influence in international bodies .
 National sovereignty, they assert, is a sufficient defense against any allegation . National sovereignty is sufficient defense, they say, as well as national sovereignty .
 Few are above using force to harass political rivals and disrupt protests . Few are against using force against political rivals .
 Their goal is to convince women and men yearning for freedom to surrender that aspiration . Their goal in so doing is less to change minds than to convince them to surrender .
 There was a period late in the Cold War when it was fashionable to conclude that Soviet-style governments would last forever because of their willingness to quash dissent before it could take hold . This was the case in the 1980s, when it became fashionable to say Soviet-like governments would
 If history moves like a locomotive, in a single direction, it will become tomorrow’s reality . If history is moving like a trainee, it could be tomorrow's reality . Today's trends will be tomorrow”s reality, says author .
 If history’s course swings back and forth like a pendulum, a reversal can be expected . But if the human desire for change causes history to swing back, it's expected to be reversed .
 People today are more connected and demanding than ever before, governing is harder than it has ever been, says David Cameron . Cameron: "Because people today are ... more connected, demanding, it's harder to govern than ever .
 Compared to in the past, younger generations have easier access to education, more awareness of one another, less respect for traditional hierarchies . Younger generations have an ingrained belief in their own autonomy .
 Technology has created in many a thirst for speed and a dearth of patience . Technology has also created a thirst and a lack of patience for patience in the world . The world has been gripped by a new breed of impatience .
 Citizens increasingly question what leaders say and are drawn to voices that reject present conditions and promise something better . Citizens increasingly seek leaders who say something better than what they say . Citizens are drawn in by voices that say they want something better.
 These factors have fueled the rise of demagogues, but they can also undermine the staying power of authoritarian regimes old enough to embody the status quo . Demagogues are fueled by factors such as the rise in authoritarianism .
 There is a limit to how long an autocrat can sustain popularity simply by comparing himself to a despised predecessor . The autocrat's popularity can only be sustained if he compares himself to his predecessor .
 In Russia, Putin is rarely contrasted anymore with the hapless Boris Yeltsin . In Venezuela, few remember the ineffectual civilians who governed before Hugo Chavez . In Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega can hardly justify his broken promises by pointing to Anastasio Somoza .
 Hungary’s Orban has ruled for more than a decade, and ‘Turkey's Erdogan has . Erdogan for nearly two, so neither can easily escape responsibility for the beleaguered condition of his country .
 Some of the more vulnerable heavy-handed governments are already facing intensifying pressure from below . "Some of the most vulnerable heavy handed governments already face intensifying pressures from below"
 In Belarus, a growing number of citizens consider President Alexander Lukashenko to be a Russian puppet and want him to leave . The protest movement has emerged because of the Belarusian president's alleged Russian influence .
 In Cuba, for the first time since 1959, neither of the Castro brothers holds power . The street demonstrations last July were the largest in decades . In Cuba last July, the street demonstrations were largest in years .
 Although it is true that repression may work for a time, that strategy has to fail only once . Although it may work, repression may not last for a long time, it does not last one .
 The ouster of a strongman in Manila was followed by similar departures in Chile, South Africa, Zaire, and Indonesia . The Coming Democratic Revival ment led rapidly to democratic transitions throughout central Europe .
 In a world where most people are able to peer beyond national borders, a trend of any kind can gather strength quickly . Ina world where people can peer beyond borders, the trend of social media trends can grow quickly .
 The techniques the current generation of phony democrats rely on may already be suffering from overuse . It helps as well that the techniques are already being used .
 In their lexicon, ‘constitutional reform’ is code for evading term limits, diminishing the clout of parliaments, and seizing control of the courts . “Constitutional reform” is code code for avoiding term limits and diminishing the power of parliamentarians .
 They issue emergency decrees not to safeguard the public, but to criminalize opposition and silence the press, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin's government has been accused of criminalizing opposition and silencing the press .
 They employ patriotic appeals to equate pro-democracy agitation with foreign subversion . Pro-democracy activists have been accused of being subverted by the West .
 These efforts no longer fool anyone, which makes them easier to discredit and oppose . Although still harmful, these efforts still fool anyone—which makes it easier to oppose .
 Despite the battering that democracy has endured, most people want to strengthen, not discard, their democratic systems . Even more important, despite the damage democracy has suffered, people want it strengthened, not discarded .
 Support for democracy has increased since the mid-1990s in more countries than it has declined in, a German scholar says . The support for democracy remains steady overall at roughly 75 percent in the United States .
 Research institution Afrobarometer reports that those surveyed this year in 34 African countries still overwhelmingly prefer democracy when compared to single-party or one-man rule .
 Minority of Africans see China as a better model for their countries than the U.S. This is true even for the minority of Africans who see it as a model for themselves .
 Democracy has recently made modest gains in some tough neighborhoods . Democracy has survived almost nonstop chaos in Lebanon . Arab attitudes are less clear .
 Today, more talented women and men are striving in more places on behalf of democratic principles than ever before . Today's talented women are striving for more places to stand for democratic principles .
 The National Democratic Institute is a nongovernmental United States organization that supports democratic institutions overseas . The Institute is working with around 28,000 local partners in more than 70 countries on five continents .
 Despite democracy’s struggles, popular participation in shaping public agendas is up, not down . Despite democracy's struggles, democracy is up and down, says Julian Zelizer .
 A record percentage of today’s young adults grew up in relative freedom . Strides toward gender equality have contributed to this rising level of commitment .
 They consider self-expression a right to be exercised regularly and regardless of obstacles . Self-expression is a right, regardless of the obstacles, they say .
 Not all such ideas are likely to prove both practical and beneficial, but the energy they attract is evidence of a hunger that no dictator can satisfy .
 Joe Biden is better positioned than any U.S. president in 20 years to argue on behalf of democracy . Joe Biden has a better chance to argue for democracy than any other president in the last 20 years .
 George W Bush saw himself as a champion of freedom, but he wrapped that mission around his invasion of Iraq . Denigrators equated his stance with violent American overreach .
 Barack Obama was less outspoken than he might have been in advocating democratic ideals . Wary of the association, Obama was afraid to be seen as a politician .
 Biden faces international pro-freedom constituency that has learned to be skeptical about U.S. leadership . Biden faces an international constituency that is anxious for Washington to regain its voice on matters of liberty and human rights .
 In his inaugural address, Biden characterized his election as a victory not of a candidate or a cause but of democracy itself . Biden: "Democracy itself is the foundation of democracy"
 He has since stressed the benefits of political freedom . Condemned specific acts of repression in such places as Cuba, Ethiopia, Hong Kong and Myanmar .
 One good way to begin would be to draw a clear line separating past U.S. military interventions from support for democracy . The U.N. should draw a line between past military interventions and support for democratic rights .
 The distinction is important because many observers at home and abroad still confuse the two . The distinction between the U.S. and China is important .
 The United States mission in Afghanistan was prompted by the 9/11 terrorist attacks . The U.S. mission was launched toward the end of 2001 .
 The invasion of Iraq 16 months later was triggered by faulty intelligence concerning that country’s weapons programs . Iraq was invaded by the U.S. 16 months after the invasion .
 In neither instance was the buttressing of democracy a primary motivating factor . Neither experience should discourage the United States from pursuing future civilian initiatives on democracy’s behalf .
 There are, after all, numerous examples of successful nonmilitary American engagement in support of freedom . There are many examples of nonmilitary engagement in supporting freedom .
 The Coming Democratic Revival Plan, the Point Four Program, Radio Free Europe, the Alliance for Progress, the Peace Corps, and overseas technical assistance on topics as varied as public health and digital access .
 Projects such as these create, at modest expense, a reservoir of respect that can serve the U.S. well in times of crisis . Projects such a modest expense can help the United States well in crisis .
 Washington should invest far more in them than it does, because that is how democracy is best promoted, not a pointed gun . Washington needs to invest more in democracy-boosting programs like this, says Julian Zelizer .
 The Biden administration should also defend the American example while acknowledging that U.S. democracy, although the world’s oldest democracy, remains a work in progress .
 Numerous commentators point to the bitterness surrounding recent U.S. elections to suggest that the country’s democracy is unraveling and therefore no longer a suitable model for others . The bitterness surrounding the recent elections suggests that the United States is not a model for other nations .
 Despite widespread fears and false allegations, the 2020 balloting was free of both significant locally engineered fraud and disruptions traceable to foreign disinformation campaigns . The 2020 elections will be held in 2020 .
 The high voter turnout was a sign of robust democratic health, as were the actions of courts and state ofhcials to uphold the results . The high turnout is a sign that democracy is in robust health, the authors say .
 Less than one-fourth of ‘Trump voters approved of the tactics that the protesters employed, and a recent effort to organize a follow-up demonstration fizzled .
 The debates on election standards and early and mail-in voting mostly involve issues that were not even under consideration a decade or two ago . The debates currently underway regarding election standards are mostly about issues that weren't under consideration in the past .
 The question is whether the country has made progress toward more liberal electoral norms can be preserved and enhanced, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The important question now is not whether the progress has been made but whether those gains can be enhanced .
 A positive answer will only strengthen the country’s democratic system, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 U.S. leaders should speak about American democracy with humility . dictators overseas who claim that the United States’ long experiment with freedom is nearing its end will be proved wrong . United States should speak with humility, but dictators overseas are wrong .
 Biden should launch a multipart strategy aimed at sparking a renewal of faith overseas in the power of collaboration among free governments, workers, enlightened corporations, and civil society . Even while working to set the record straight about U.S. democracy, Biden should try to set a new world of
 His core message, exemplified by his planned Summit for Democracy, is for a comeback . He has planned a summit for Democracy for the first time in his career .
 The U.S. must show the way by integrating its commitment to democracy into all aspects of its foreign policy . For this strategy to attract followers, the United States must show how democratic democracy can be integrated .
 In national security decision-making, when other Biden 1s better positioned interests appear to conflict, any American efit of the doubt should be given president in 20 years to whenever possible .
 The most courageous democratic leaders, whether of countries large or small, should be acknowledged, supported, and invited to the White House, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S. should hold countries accountable to the principles proclaimed in multtlateral declarations and charters . Through the un and regional bodies, the United States should strive to hold nations accountable to these principles .
 Biden and his team should stress the economic advantages of democracy . Biden should also stress the benefits of democracy, the vice president says . Biden's office should stress that democracy is a source of economic growth .
 In the late 1990s, Hillary Clinton assured people everywhere that democracy would enable them not only to vote without fear but also to better provide for their families . Hillary Clinton: Democracy will enable people to better live their lives and provide for families .
 Aside from the oil-rich Arab states, most prosperous nations were free . Most prosperous nations in the world were free, including the Arab nations .
 China’s domestic rise and subsequent increase in foreign commercial engagement have, to some minds, undercut this thesis . In the time since, China's domestic rise has been seen as a major factor in the country's economic success .
 Per person income in the authoritarian People’s Republic is around one-third of that in democratic Taiwan . Even today, however, even today, per person income is around a third of that .
 authoritarian leaders have masqueraded as modernizers, building great works that invariably double as advertisements for themselves . Since ancient times, authoritarian leaders masquerade as modernisers, they have built great works of art .
 Current examples include Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman . Current examples of such leaders include Egypt's President Abdel Sisi and the Saudi crown prince .
 There are flaws in the notion that a single all-powerful leader is best for driving progress . There is obvious merit in looking forward, but there are flaws, says David Cameron .
 The Coming Democratic Revival sink its teeth into virtually every part of the economy, thereby inhibiting opportunities for the private sector . In Egypt, Sisi has allowed the military to control virtually every aspect of the country's economy .
 Saudi Arabia is overly dependent on oil revenue and continues to spend vast sums on vanity projects . Saudi Arabia remains overly dependent upon oil revenue . The kingdom is spending vast sums of money on vanity .
 Turkey's "economic miracle" touted by Erdogan has given way to rising poverty, joblessness, currency devaluation, and debt . Meanwhile, in Turkey, the “economic miracle’s’ economic miracle” is gone, leaving poverty and joblessness .
 Erdogan's troubles intensified after 2016, when he assumed emergency powers . The troubles intensified when Erdogan assumed emergency power .
 U.S. officials must also deal aggressively with problems that can chip away at support for democracy, says CNN's John Sutter . United States officials must deal aggressively, he says, to get the message right .
 Few factors do more damage to the appeal of free institutions than the perception that leaders who claim to be democratic are ripping off their countries . For instance, few factors damage more damage than that perception .
 The message from Washington must be that open government is the remedy for, not the breeding ground of, crooked, self-serving regimes . Open government is remedy for not, not, but breeding ground for, crooked regimes .
 Many demagogues confuse the issue by arguing that only a single powerful leader can clean house . The point is harder to establish than it should be, because many demagogue confuse it with the issue .
 Putin's favorite tactics is to accuse opponents of corruption, arrest them in front of government cameras, and then prosecute them in puppet courts . One of Putin's favorites is to use puppet courts to prosecute opponents in Russia . Putin has been accused of corruption in the past by his government .
 Zuzana Caputova of Slovakia and Maia Sandu of Moldova are showing that free institutions can be used to purge graft through honest investigations, judicial reform, and incentives to reduce bribery at every level . Real democrats, such as Presidents Zuzan Caputsova of
 U.S. should mobilize a global effort to seize overseas assets of rulers who have been pillaging their countries and return them to those countries . Meanwhile, the United States should seize the assets of those rulers, return them back to their countries .
 Democracy’s caretakers can thwart greedy foes and win lasting friends . By serving as agents of justice, they can thwart greed and win friends . Democracy's health careers are agents for justice .
 Democracy’s future is linked to how well societies handle the promise and perils of cyber-capabilities and emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence . The Biden administration must act, too, on its understanding of the future of democracy .
 The last time a new technology raised such profound questions was at the dawn of the nuclear age, the last time it raised such questions was in the 1960s . A new technology raises questions about the future of nuclear power .
 A small cadre of diplomats, scientists, and military strategists devised ways to prevent the worst outcomes . The solutions were necessarily top down. Back then, diplomats and scientists had to come up with solutions .
 Any successful approach must incorporate better cyberdefenses but also more transparency for consumers, responsibility from high-tech companies, scrutiny from legislatures, input from academia .
 Over time, answers must take into account the interests of all stakeholders . Millions of entrepreneurs and billions of consumers who live in nondemocratic states must be considered .
 As the world develops new rules for the digital road, it is essential that the U.S. join with allies to prevent authoritarian states from dictating those norms .
 Biden can accomplish much by rallying friends of freedom from across the globe, highlighting the tangible and moral benefits of open government . Biden can also push for fairness in the regulation of new technologies .
 Past efforts to do so have stumbled when democracy’s advocates have done a poor job of framing the issue . Past efforts have stumbled in the past when democracy's advocates did not do a good job framing it .
 If the alternatives presented are freedom or repression, freedom clearly wins, says the author . "Freedom clearly wins. If the alternative presented is freedom, freedom wins," he says .
 Popular demagogues feed eagerly on condescension that many in academia, the arts, and the press exhibit toward the less well educated and others they deem culturally backward . As has been shown in recent years, demagogue feeds eagerly on the condescension .
 The notion that despots care most about the welfare of the average family is nonsense, says David Cameron . Cameron: "They should not be allowed to create that impression"
 For democracy to prosper, its champions must do a better job of defending and justifying their beliefs in an inclusive manner . Democracy must be defended and defended in a way that it can be defended by its champions .
 Progress in the democratic resurgence is less likely to be sudden than gradual . Progress is more likely to have to be spotty than universal . The time is now for the Democratic resurgence to begin .
 Vaclav Havel counseled freedom’s friends against impatience . Havel: In his later years, he counseled his friends not to be impatient .
 If democracy can be compared to a flower, he said, gardeners may use fertilizer and water to speed its growth . But they will only cause harm if they become anxious and yank at the stem from above .
 The importance of patience, however, is no excuse for idleness or cynicism . patience is not an excuse for cynicism or idleness, says CNN.com .
 Small-d democrats cannot compete successfully with the likes of China and Russia by mimicking their methods, for that would concede the match before it begins . Small-D democrats will not be able to compete successfully in China or Russia .
 Democracy has its faults, but so, too, does every variety of despotism . Democracy has faults but so does despotisms, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Democracy’s assets are superior, however, because they demand the best from everyone . Democracy's assets are grounded in respect for human rights, individual freedom, and social responsibility . Democracy is superior because it demands the best of everyone and is grounded in human rights .
 By contrast, dictators seek only obedience, and there is nothing inspiring about that . The dictator seeks only obedience to his people, not obedience .
 After too many years of handwringing, the time is right for democratic forces to regain the initiative, says Julian Zelizer . The time is the right for democracy, he says .
 In every region, the generation coming of age is smart, outspoken, and fearless . The generation coming from all corners is smart and outspoken, says CNN.com .
 People are demanding more, while authoritarian leaders are tiring and running out of answers . Worldwide, people have demanded more from authoritarian leaders, according to CNN .
 Facebook and Twitter suspended the accounts of President Donald Trump for posts praising the rioters . The accounts of the president were suspended after he posted a picture of the rioting .
 Amazon, Apple, and Google effectively banished Parler, an alternative to Twitter that Trump’s supporters had used to encourage and coordinate the attack, by blocking it from Web-hosting services and app stores .
 PayPal and Stripe stopped processing payments for the Trump campaign . Accounts that had funded travel expenses to Washington, D.C., for Trump's supporters also stopped .
 The speed of these technology companies’ reactions stands in stark contrast to the feeble response from the U.S. governing institutions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Congress still has not censured Trump for his role in the storming of the Capitol . Congress has not yet censured him for his part in the Capitol storm .
 Its efforts to establish a bipartisan, 9/11-style commission failed amid Republican opposition . The White House has been criticized for its lack of oversight .
 Law enforcement agencies have been able to arrest some individual rioters on social media . They have been tracking clues they left on Twitter about their participation in the riot .
 A handful of large technology companies rival them for geopolitical influence . That is starting to change, as a handful of tech giants rival each other .
 The aftermath of the January 6 riot serves as the latest proof that Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, and Twitter are no longer merely large companies; they have taken control of aspects of society, the economy, and national . IAN BREMMER is President of Eurasia Group .
 The Technopolar Moment security that were long the exclusive preserve of the state. Security that were once the exclusive . state. security that was long a preserve of . state .
 Chinese technology companies such as Alibaba, ByteDance, and ‘Tencent.’ are among the most popular Chinese tech companies in China .
 Nonstate actors are increasingly shaping geopolitics, with technology companies in the lead . Technology companies are leading the way in the world's most powerful state actors .
 Europe's companies do not have the size or geopolitical influence to compete with their American and Chinese counterparts . And although Europe wants to play, it has not been able to compete in terms of geopolitical influence .
 Most of the analysis of U.S.-Chinese technological competition is stuck in a statist paradigm . Most of it is stuck with a statist view of the relationship between the two countries .
 It depicts technology companies as foot soldiers in a conflict between hostile countries . Technology companies are foot soldiers for the U.S. government in the conflict .
 Technology companies are not mere tools in the hands of governments . But technology companies can be trusted to be trusted by governments, experts say .
 None of their actions in the immediate aftermath of the Capitol insurrection, for instance, came at the behest of the government or law enforcement . None of the actions in that aftermath of that uprising came at any request from the government .
 These were private decisions made by for-profit companies exercising power over code, servers, and regulations under their control . For-profit firms exercise power over codes and servers under control .
 These companies are increasingly shaping the global environment in which governments operate . They are also shaping the world's economic environment .
 They have huge influence over the technologies and services that will drive the next industrial revolution . They will determine how countries project economic and military power, shape the future of work, and redefine social contracts .
 It is time to start thinking of the biggest technology companies as similar to states . It's time for the biggest tech companies to think of themselves as like states .
 They bring resources to geopolitical competition but face constraints on their power to act . They face competition from other countries but face limited power to do so .
 They maintain foreign relations and answer constituencies, including shareholders, employees, users, and advertisers . They answer to constituencies, such as shareholders and employees .
 Not all technology companies operate in the same way. It’s time they started developing them, for not all tech companies operate the same . It's time they start developing them.
 These categories illuminate the choices facing the biggest technology firms as they work to shape global affairs . The choices facing them will be the choices of the tech giants .
 Analysts, policymakers, and the public would do well to understand the competing outlooks that determine how these new geopolitical actors wield their power . The interplay among them will define the economic, social, and political life of the twenty-first century, writes Peter Bergen .
 To understand how the struggle for geopolitical influence between technology firms and governments will play out, it is important to grasp the nature of these companies’ power . Big Tech is watching what governments are trying to influence .
 The tools at their disposal are unique in global affairs, which is why governments are finding it so hard to rein them in . Governments are struggling to rein in the use of these tools, which are unique to them .
 This isn’t the first time that private corporations have played a major role in geopolitics . Earlier giants could never match the pervasive presence of today’s technology firms .
 It is one thing to wield power in the smoke-filled rooms of political power brokers . It is another to directly affect the lives of billions of people across the globe .
 Today’s biggest technology firms have two critical advantages that have allowed them to carve out independent geopolitical influence . Technology firms have been able to create independent geopolitical powerhouses .
 First, they do not operate or wield power exclusively in physical space . Second, they are not operating or wielding power exclusively within physical space. Third, they wield power only through physical space, they say .
 They have created a new dimension in geopolitics -- digital space -- over which they exercise primary influence . The U.S. has created a 'digital space' over the world, says President Barack Obama .
 People are increasingly living out their lives in this vast territory, which governments do not and cannot fully control . Governments do not fully control. People are living out of their lives .
 "The implications of this fact bear on virtually all aspects of civic, economic, and private life," says author of the book . The implications of such a decision should be considered in the future, he says .
 In many democracies today, politicians’ ability to gain followers on Facebook and Twitter unlocks the money and political support needed to win office . Politicians gain followers online and on social media in order to win election .
 The tech companies' actions to deplatform Trump after the Capitol Hill riot were so powerful . That is why the technology companies’ actions to . deplatform . Trump was deplatformed by the tech companies .
 For a new generation of entrepreneurs, Amazons marketplace and Web-hosting services have become indispensable for launching a successful business . Facebook’s ad-targeting tools, Apple’�s app store, and Google's search engine have also become indispensable .
 In their private lives, people increasingly connect to each other through algorithms . In their public lives, they increasingly connect with one another through algorithms. People increasingly connect on algorithms .
 The little red Facebook notifications deliver dopamine hits to your brain . Google’s artificial intelligence algorithms complete sentences while you type . Amazon's methods of selecting which products pop up at the top of your search screen affect what you buy .
 In these ways, technology firms are guiding how people spend their time, what professional and social opportunities they pursue, and, ultimately, what they think . Technology firms are also guiding how you spend your time and what you think .
 Social, economic, and political institutions continue to shift from the physical world to digital space . This power will grow as social, economic . institutions shift to digital . space, social, political institutions .
 Technology companies are increasingly providing a full spectrum of both digital and real-world products that are required to run a modern society . The second way these technology companies differ from their formidable predecessors is that they are providing more of a range of products that need to be run by modern society, says
 Private companies have long played a role in delivering basic needs, from medicine to energy . Today’s rapidly digitizing economy depends on a more complex array of goods, services, and information flows .
 The future competitiveness of traditional industries will depend on how effectively they seize new opportunities created by 5G networks, a1, and massive Internet-of-Things deployments .
 Internet companies and financial service providers already depend heavily on the infrastructure provided by these cloud leaders . The cloud leaders are cloud-powered by Amazon, Google and Microsoft .
 Google’s parent company, Alphabet, dabbles in health care, drug development, and autonomous vehicles . The company also owns the world's leading search engine and operating system .
 Amazon's sprawling e-commerce and logistics network furnishes millions of people with basic consumer goods . Amazon is a global leader in the retail industry, with more than 50 million customers .
 In China, Alibaba and Tencent dominate payment systems, social media, video streaming, e-commerce, and logistics . Alibaba also dominates payment systems and social media platforms .
 Digital Silk Road aims to bring to emerging markets the undersea cables, telecommunications networks, cloud capabilities, and apps needed to run a digital society . They also invest in projects important to the Chinese government .
 Private-sector technology firms are also providing national security . The role has traditionally been reserved for governments and defense contractors .
 Russian hackers breached U.S. government agencies and private companies last year . Microsoft, not the NSA or Cyber Command, first discovered and cut off the intruders .
 Of course, private companies have long supported national security objectives . Of course private companies are long supporting national security .
 Before the biggest banks became “too big to fail,” that phrase was applied to the United States defense company Lockheed Corporation during the Cold War . The phrase was used to refer to the company's defense company .
 Lockheed just made the fighter jets and missiles for the U.S. government . Lockheed has made the jets for the United States .
 The biggest technology companies are building the backbone of the digital world and policing that world at the same time . The biggest tech companies are also building the backbones of that world .
 Technology firms cannot decouple themselves from physical space, where they remain at the mercy of states . The Technopolar Moment will be discussed in the U.S. and beyond .
 The code for the virtual worlds that these companies have created sits in data centers that are located on territory controlled by governments . Virtual worlds are created by companies that sit on data centers located on countries' borders .
 As technology grows more soshaping, states and regulators are constrained by outdated ; ; laws and limited capacity . But as technology grows, state and regulators will increasingly constrained .
 Google reports that over one billion hours of video are consumed on YouTube, its videostreaming platform, each day . Over 1 billion hours are consumed each day, Google reports .
 In its next phase, this ‘datasphere’ will see cars, factories, and entire cities wired with Internet-connected sensors trading data . Cars, factories and even entire cities will be wired with sensors .
 As this realm grows, the ability to control it will slip further beyond the reach of states . The ability of states to control the realm grows further beyond their control .
 Technology companies provide important digital and real-world goods and services . States that cannot provide those things risk shooting themselves in the foot if their draconian measures lead companies to stop operations .
 China created the so-called Great Firewall to control the information its citizens see . The United States’ spy agencies established the ECHELON surveillance system to monitor global communications .
 Fines for failing to take down illegal content are a nuisance for businesses, not an existential threat . Fines are not a threat to businesses, but a nuisance, not existential threat, according to experts .
 Governments realize they could sabotage their own legitimacy if they go too far . And governments realize that they could . sabotage themselves if they went too far, they say .
 Even before the pandemic, public opinion polls in the United States showed that what once was the most admired sector in the country was losing popularity among Americans .
 Global trust in social media companies has also been hit hard during the pandemic . Trust Barometer published by Edelman, a public relations consultancy . Social media firms were also hit hard by the virus .
 Getting tough on Big Tech is one of the few things on which both Democrats and Republicans agree . But the fact that there hasn't been a major crackdown yet is telling . It's telling that Big Tech isn't getting tough on the issue yet .
 In the United States, a combination of congressional dysfunction and Silicon Valley’s potent lobbying power will likely continue to preclude expansive new regulations that could pose a serious threat to the digital giants . In the U.S. Congress is likely to continue to rule out new regulations .
 The lack of homegrown cloud, search, and social media conglomerates makes passing ambitious legislation easier in Europe . It is different in Europe, where the lack of home-grown cloud and search companies makes it easier .
 Recent round of regulatory crackdowns has sent shares of China's own technology heavyweights reeling . And it is certainly different in China, where recent crackdowns have sent shares reeling .
 In Brussels and Beijing, politicians are trying to channel the power of the biggest technology companies in pursuit of national priorities . In both Brussels and China, politicians want to channel power of technology companies to pursue national priorities, say experts .
 The cloud, a1, and other emerging technologies set to become even more important to people's livelihoods . It is far from certain that the politicians will succeed .
 The Eu, alarmed that it has not given rise to digital giants the way the U.S. and China have, appears intent on finding out . Eu is concerned that it hasn't given rise in digital giants like those of China and the United States have .
 It is at the forefront of democratic societies pushing for greater sovereignty over digital space . The government is pushing to greater sovereignty .
 In 2018, the EU passed a sweeping data protection law that restricts transfers of personal data outside the 27-member bloc and threatens steep fines on companies .
 A new regulatory package advancing in Brussels would give the European Commission new powers to fine Internet platforms over illegal content and control high-risk applications . EU bureaucrats could also break up technology companies that EU bureaucrats deem too powerful .
 The Eu and influential member states, such as France, are also calling for technology-focused industrial policies . The Technopolar Moment pooling data and computing resources .
 Europe is betting that it can corral the technology giants and unleash a new wave of European innovation . Europe, acting from a position of weakness, is betting on corraling the tech giants .
 Technology companies are the digital systems that companies rely on . Europe will have only acceleractors in and of themselves in and out of itself . Technology companies will be key to Europe's geopolitical decline .
 The outcome hinges on whether a handful of large-scale cloud platforms can continue to drive innovation . Whether a group of companies operating under greater government supervision can still produce cutting-edge digital infrastructure .
 It is expensive to create and maintain digital space on a massive scale . It is difficult to create digital space and maintain a digital world at a cost of $1 billion .
 Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Microsoft plowed a combined $109 billion into research and development in 2019 . The tech giants are expected to spend $100 billion a year on research .
 If European states want greater control of the technology sector, they’re going to have to invest much more money . European states are going to need to invest more money to control the tech sector, says David Cameron .
 Money is only part of the picture for governments to develop digital capabilities . But even if governments were willing to finance these digital capabilities themselves, money is also a key question .
 They would struggle to bring together engineering and other talent required to grow cloud infrastructure, a1 applications, and other systems that make these technologies work at scale . They would likely struggle to get together engineering, other talent .
 Achieving and maintaining global leadership in fields such as cloud computing or semiconductors requires huge and sustained investments of financial and human capital . The company says it is committed to investing in cloud computing and semiconducting technology .
 It requires close relationships with customers and other partners across complex global supply chains . It also requires close . relationships between customers and partners .
 Today’s modern semiconductor plants can cost in excess of $15 billion apiece . The plants require legions of highly trained engineers to set up and run them .
 Governments would struggle to muster the resources needed to deliver these technologies at the scale required to power the global economy . Governments—and even groups of small firms working together—would struggle to produce these technologies .
 Next decade will test what happens as politics of digital space and physical space converge . The next decade will see how digital and physical spaces converge .
 Governments and technology companies are poised to compete for influence over both worlds . The need for a better framework for understanding what companies’ goals are and how their power interacts with that of governments in both domains .
 Technology companies’ orientations are no less diverse than those of the states with which they compete . Technology companies' orientation is no different from the states they compete in, says CNN Tech .
 Strands of globalism, nationalism, and techno-utopianism often coexist within the same company . The company is based in New York City, New York .
 Which outlook predominates will have important consequences for global politics, society . Which outlook will have consequences for society, say experts .
 First are the globalists—firms that built their empires by operating on a truly international scale . The globalists are globalists, they say, who built their empire by operating internationally .
 Apple, Facebook, Google create digital space, allowing their business presence and revenue streams to become untethered from physical territory . These companies create and populate digital space .
 Each grew powerful by hitting on an idea that allowed it to dominate an economically valuable niche and then taking its business worldwide . Each of these companies were successful by taking their businesses worldwide .
 Alibaba, ByteDance, and Tencent emerged at the top of China's massive domestic market before setting their sights on global growth . The likes of Alibaba and Bytedance emerged at top of the domestic market .
 Chinese firms have benefited from policy and financial support from Beijing . But it is still a cutthroat, profit-driven approach to global expansion that is driving innovation at these firms .
 The national champions are more willing to alien themselves explicitly with the priorities of their home governments . Then there are the national champions, which are more .
 These firms are partnering with governments in various important domains, including the cloud, a1, and cybersecurity . These firms have partnerships with governments across the globe .
 The Technopolar Moment secure massive revenues by selling their products to governments . They use their expertise to help guide these same governments’ actions . They secure FOREIGN AFFAIRS .
 Huawei and smic are China's core national champions in 5G and semiconductors . Huawei is also a major chipmaker in the country's chip industry .
 Chinese President Xi Jinping named Alibaba and ‘Tencent, along with search engine Baidu and voice recognition company iFlytek, to China's “national al team’ in 2017 .
 More than perhaps any other country, China has enlisted its technology giants during the pandemic . China leans heavily on digital services, including videoconferencing and telemedicine, to enforce lockdowns and restrictions .
 China has tapped Chinese technology firms to manage reopenings by providing digital health passports . It has also engaged in “mask diplomacy” by shipping badly needed medical supplies to needy countries to enhance soft power .
 Even historically globalist U.S. companies are feeling the pull of the national-champion model .
 Microsoft’s growing role in policing digital space on behalf of the U.S. and allied democracies is leading it in that direction . Microsoft is targeting misinformation spread by state actors (particularly China and Russia) and international criminals .
 Amazon and Microsoft are also competing to provide cloud-computing infrastructure to the U.S. government . Amazon is also competing with Microsoft and Amazon to compete with Amazon .
 Andy Jassy was a member of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, a blue-ribbon advisory panel that published a major report earlier this year . The report is having a strong influence on the evolution of the United States’ national al strategy .
 Some of the world’s most powerful technology firms are headed by charismatic visionaries . They see technology as a potentially revolutionary force in human affairs .
 This camp centers more on the personalities and ambitions of technology CEOs than the operations of the companies themselves . This camp is more focused on personalities of tech CEOs .
 Elon Musk, the ceo of Tesla and SpaceX, is the most recognizable example of his open ambition to reinvent transportation, link computers to human brains, and make humanity a “multiplanetary species” by colonizing Mars . Elon Musk is one of the world's most recognizable
 The U.S. government is providing space lift capacity to the United States government . But he is chiefly focused on dominating near-space orbit and creating a future in which technology companies help societies evolve beyond the concept of nation-states .
 Mark Zuckerberg, the CEO of Facebook, has similar tendencies, even if he has become more open to government regulation of online content .
 Diem, a Facebookbacked digital currency, had to be scaled back dramatically after financial regulators almost universally raised concerns . Diem is a Facebook backed digital currency that was almost universally criticized by regulators .
 Governments retain a far stronger grip on finance than on other domains in digital space . Thanks to the dominance of the U.S. dollar, governments still have a strong grip on the digital world .
 Vitalik Buterin and the entrepreneurs building on top of his ecosystem get their way . Vitalik says he's not worried about the future of the Bitcoin network . He says that's not true for long if Vitalik and his team build on the ecosystem .
 Ethereum, the world’s second most popular blockchain after Bitcoin, is rapidly emerging as the underlying infrastructure powering a new generation of decentralized Internet applications . It is the backbone of the world's second-most popular blockchain .
 Ethereum’s design includes smart contracts, which enable the parties to a transaction to embed the terms of doing business into hard-to-alter computer code . Smart contracts are hard to alter, and can only be changed with a smart contract .
 Entrepreneurs have seized on the technology and surrounding hype to cook up new businesses . They include betting markets, financial derivatives and payment systems that are almost impossible to alter or abolish .
 China still has its globalists and national champions, albeit with a more statist tilt than those in the U.S. China's government has a more libertarian tilt than that of the United States .
 The party reined him in after he gave a speech in October 2020 criticizing financial regulators for stifling innovation . But he was reined in after a speech criticizing its financial regulators .
 Beijing now has Ma and Alibaba on a much tighter leash . Ma is a cautionary tale for any would-be techno-utopians in China who might consider challenging the state .
 China depends on the digital infrastructure provided by the likes of Ma to boost productivity and living standards . The ccp’s long-term survival depends on Ma to ensure its survival .
 China's authoritarianism enables it to be more forceful in its regulation of digital space and the companies that build and maintain it . Beijing ultimately faces the same tradeofts as Washington and Brussels .
 If it tightens its grip too much, it risks harming the country itself by smothering innovation . The U.S. risks harming its own innovation, says David Cameron .
 In the first scenario, the national champions win, and the state remains the dominant provider of security, regulation, and public goods . In the second scenario, national champions of the state win, the state will be dominant provider .
 Systemic shocks, such as the covip-19 pandemic, and long-term threats, like climate change, entrench government authority as the only force that can resolve global challenges . The public backlash against the power of technology firms, coupled with a public backlash, entrenches government
 A bipartisan push for regulation in the United States rewards ‘patriotic’ companies that deploy resources in support of national goals . The U.S. government is pushing for regulation of companies that support national security efforts .
 Beijing and other authoritarian governments double down on cultivating their own national champions . China pushing hard for self-sufficiency while competing for influence in important global swing markets, such as Brazil, India and Southeast Asia .
 China's private technology sector becomes less independent, and its technology companies no longer go public on international stock exchanges . China's technology companies do not go public, and their technology companies are less independent .
 U.S. allies and partners find it much harder to balance ties with Washington and Beijing . United States allies find it hard to balance their ties with Beijing and China . China's relationship with the United States has been strained in recent years .
 The EU's push for digital sovereignty sputters and the U.S.-Chinese cold war makes national security in the technology space a dominant priority . Europe’s technology sector has little choice but to follow Washington's agenda .
 As the U.S. and China decouple, companies that can recast themselves as national champions are rewarded . The United States and China are divorcing, and China is divorcing .
 Washington and Beijing both funnel resources to technology firms to align them with their national goals . Beijing and Washington funneled resources to tech firms that aligns with national interests .
 Amazon and Microsoft might not find it hard to adapt to this new order, as they are already responding to growing pressure to support national security imperatives . Amazon is responding to the growing pressure on the tech giants to back national security .
 Both companies already compete to provide cloud services to the U.S. government and intelligence agencies . Both companies offer cloud services for the United States government .
 Apple and Google could find working with the U.S. government more uncomfortable . The former has balked at government requests to crack encrypted smartphones . Google pulled out of a project with the Pentagon on image recognition .
 Facebook might have the hardest time navigating a landscape that favored national champions if it is seen as providing a platform for foreign disinformation . Facebook might also offer useful assets for the government, such as cloud computing or military applications .
 This would be a more geopolitically volatile world, with a greater risk of strategic and technological bifurcation . The world would be more volatile and more technologically destabilised, says David Cameron .
 Taiwan would be a major concern, as U.S. and Chinese companies continue to rely on the ‘Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company’ as a major supplier of cutting-edge chips .
 Washington is already moving to cut off leading Chinese technology firms from ‘Taiwan and Tsmc . Beijing is being dragged further into the U.S. orbit, Beijing says .
 The potential for a military conflict with the U.S. that escalates beyond ‘Tatwan would be too great, and the damage to China's international standing and business environment would be far too severe . It remains unlikely that China would choose to invade Taiwan over semiconductors
 A world of national champions would also impede the international cooperation needed to address global crises . A pandemic disease more lethal than covip-19 or a surge of global migration induced by climate change would be a problem .
 It would be ironic if technology nationalism made it harder for governments to address these problems, given the role of such crises in shoring up the state’s position as the provider of last resort .
 In the second scenario, the state holds on but in a weakened condition, paving the way for the ascendancy of the globalists . In the first scenario, a weakened state will be weakened, leaving the state vulnerable to the rise of globalists, the author says .
 Regulators accept that governments will share sovereignty over digital space with technology companies . Regulators have been unable to keep pace with technological innovation .
 Big Tech beats back restrictions that could curtail its overseas operations . Big Tech argues that the loss of market opportunities will harm innovation and, ultimately, create jobs .
 Rather than accept a technological cold war, companies pressure governments to agree on a set of common rules that preserve a global market for hardware, software, and data .
 Apple and Google would arguably have the most to gain from this outcome . Google and Apple are both likely to be affected by the outcome of the vote .
 Apple could continue to offer its own unique technology ecosystem catering to elites in both San Francisco and Shanghai . Instead of being forced to choose between a U.S.and a Chinese-dominated Internet, Apple could offer a unique tech ecosystem .
 Google’s advertising-heavy revenue model would thrive as people in democracies and authoritarian countries alike consumed products and services that commodified every piece of personal data . Google would thrive if its advertising model continued to thrive .
 ByteDance would be free to serve up viral videos to a global audience . TikTok has helped it achieve a valuation north of $140 billion . It would supercharge its algorithms and its global revenues .
 China would find it easier to trend in the direction of a national champion as ideological competition between Washington and Beijing intensifies .
 Their worst fear is that the U.S. and China will continue to decouple, forcing them to choose sides in an economic war that will raise barriers to their attempts to globalize their businesses .
 Beijing is pulling back from industrial policy designed to convince companies they can thrive as national champions . For Beijing, it means preserving the independence and autonomy of the private sector .
 A world in which the globalists reign supreme would give Europe a chance to reassert itself as a savvy bureaucratic player . Europe is capable of designing the rules that allow technology companies and governments to share sovereignty in digital space .
 Washington and Beijing would still be the two dominant global powers . Failure of the former's industrial policy push and the latter’s quest to elevate national champions would loosen the two powers’ grip on geopolitics, increase the demand for global governance, and create more opportunities .
 This is a world with somewhat weaker American and Chinese governments but one that offers both countries their best chance to cooperate on urgent global challenges . China and the U.S. governments are weaker than the world's weaker governments . This is one of the few weaker governments in the world, but
 In the final scenario, the oft-predicted erosion of the state finally comes to pass . The final scenario is that the state's erosion of its sovereignty is finally coming to an end .
 The techno-utopians capitalize on widespread disillusionment with governments that have failed to create prosperity and stability . They draw citizens into a digital economy that disintermediates the state, drawing citizens into digital economy .
 Confidence in the dollar as a global reserve currency erodes or collapses . Confidence of the dollar erodes—or collapses--or collapses .
 Cryptocurrencies prove too much for regulators to control, and they gain wide acceptance . They undermine governments’ sway over the financial world . Cryptocurrency is too much to control .
 The disintegration of centralized authority renders the world substantially less capable of addressing transnational challenges, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 For technological visionaries with vaulting ambitions and commensurate resources, the question of patriotism becomes moot . The question is moot for tech visionaries such as Google and Facebook .
 Facebook substitutes for the public square, civil society, and the social safety net, creating a blockchain-based currency that gains widespread usage . The social network will be replaced by the social network .
 The implications of a world in which techno-utopians call the shots are the hardest to tease out . People are so accustomed to thinking of the state as the principal problem-solving actor, the author says .
 The erosion of the U.S. government’s authority would not give techno-utopians free rein . And the Chinese state would also need to suffer a collapse in domestic credibility, he says .
 The less that governments stand in their way, the more techno-utopians will be able to shape the evolution of a new world order, for good and for ill . The less government stand in the way is the less they can shape their own world order .
 A generation ago, the foundational premise of the Internet was that it would accelerate the globalization that transformed economics and politics in the 1990s . The Technopolar Moment was that the Internet would accelerate global economic and political relations .
 Many hoped that the digital age could foster the unfettered flow of information, challenging the grip of authoritarian holdouts who thought they could escape the so-called end of history .
 The world's largest technology firms are assessing how best to position themselves as Washington and Beijing steel themselves for protracted competition . Right now, the world’s largest tech firms are looking at how they can best position themselves .
 The United States believes that its foremost geopolitical imperative is to prevent its displacement by its techno-authoritarian rival . The U.S. believes that it will not be displaced by its technological rival .
 China's top priority is to ensure that it can stand on its own two feet economically and technologically before a coalition of advanced industrial democracies stifles its further expansion . China wants to ensure it can't be stifled by a coalition that stifles further expansion of the country .
 Big Tech will tread cautiously for now to make sure it does not further compound government insecurity about losing authority . Big Tech is treading cautiously to avoid further government insecurity .
 As U.S.-Chinese competition grows more entrenched, these firms will wield their leverage more proactively . The firms will use leverage to gain leverage in the United States and China .
 If they manage to establish themselves as ‘the indispensable companies’, they’ll push for greater government subsidies and preferential treatment over rivals .
 They will press for greater decoupling, arguing that their vital work needs maximum protection from adversarial hacking . They will also press for more protection from hacking .
 Globalists will argue that governments will be unable to sustain economic and technological competitiveness over the long haul if they turn inward and adopt a bunker mentality .
 American globalists will note that big Asian and European companies, far from exiting China, are boosting their presence there . Washington will hurt only itself by forcing American companies out of the world's largest consumer market .
 While national champions and globalists duke it out over who will shape government policy, the techno-utopians will use traditional companies and decentralized projects to explore new frontiers in digital space, such as the metaverse .
 They will strike an understanding tone when the U.S. government hauls them before Congress every now and then, per usual, to denounce their egos and power . But they will strike a understanding tone, taking minimal steps to appease policymakers but deploying aggressive lobbying efforts to undermine any efforts
 This does not mean that societies are heading toward a future that witnesses the demise of the nation-state, the end of governments, and the dissolution of borders . This doesn't mean that society is heading toward an end to governments or the end to borders, it says .
 There is no reason to think these predictions are any more likely to come true today than they were in the 1990s . There are still no reasons to think they will come true in the future .
 It is no longer tenable to talk about big technology companies as pawns their government masters can move around on a geopolitical chessboard . But it is simply not tenable, it's simply no longer acceptable to talk .
 As U.S.-Chinese competition plays an increasingly dominant role in global affairs, they will hold growing leverage to shape how Washington and Beijing behave . And as they play a dominant role, they have growing leverage .
 Only by updating our understanding of their geopolitical power can we make better sense of this brave new digital world . We need to update our knowledge of their power to make sense of their influence in the digital world.
 The Biden administration has been in touch with the tech community for years . It's now one of the most important, if least understood, policy issues on the agenda .
 Digital currencies are driving tremendous innovation that has the potential to make whole economic sectors more efficient . Digital currencies have potential to transform the world's economies . Digital currency is driving innovation that could make entire sectors more productive .
 They pose various national security and financial threats and could even diminish U.S. influence abroad . But they also pose various . national security . threats and may even diminish . influence abroad.
 Digital currencies often reflect a policy view that government should have less control over money . Digital currencies are so potentially transformative is that their software design often reflects a particular policy view . The software design of digital currencies reflects a view of government control of money .
 Early adopters routinely imbued their use of digital currencies with political and philosophical meaning . Digital currencies often have political, philosophical meaning in their currency's use .
 Bitcoin values embedded in the code still come with every purchase . And even if many people buying Bitcoin today are just looking to make a profit, the values are still embedded in Bitcoin .
 JUSTIN MUZINICH is a Distinguished Fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations . He says reduced government control of money is key to reducing government spending .
 He previously served as Deputy Secretary of the U.S. Treasury . He has been in charge of the Department of Energy since 2007 .
 It can undermine the ability of authorities to respond to economic crises or fight cybercrime and financial crime . It can also undermine authorities' ability to fight financial crime and cybercrime, among other basic services that citizens across the political spectrum expect .
 The enormous potential for upside as well as downside has driven the policy debate around digital currencies to extremes . The debate has been driven by the potential of upside and downside for digital currencies .
 On one side, opponents of digital currencies see them mainly as tools for illicit finance . Opponents have called on the government to curb their spread . Some have called for a ban on private-sector coins .
 On the other side are evangelists who see digital currencies as revolutionary and have pushed for the private market to determine their fate . On the opposite side, evangelists say digital currencies should be regulated .
 The U.S. needs a balanced approach to public policy, says John Avlon . Avlon: The market's ability to innovate without sacrificing the government's capacity to perform essential functions . The United States needs to be able to compete with the market, he says .
 In other words, policymakers need humility to recognize that markets will be best at separating useful innovation from hype . Policymakers must also have confidence to adopt critical safeguards, says David Gergen .
 Biden administration should establish guardrails in the areas where these currencies pose the greatest collateral risk . Government’s ability to set monetary policy, ensure financial stability, and fight illicit finance is at risk .
 The U.S. should lay the groundwork to launch a digital dollar or bless a privatesector solution that ensures the dollar’s preeminent role in international payments . At the same time, the United States should lay groundwork for the digital dollar .
 This two-track approach would chart a shrewd path between the fruitless extremes of banning digital currencies and allowing the market to operate unhindered . It would chart the path between banning digital currency and letting the market operate without regulation .
 Beijing recently cracked down on the mining of Bitcoin . China and other countries are forging ahead with sovereign digital currencies .
 Uncertainty about what the U.S. will do has added to the cloud of regulatory risk that hangs over the industry .
 The sooner the U.S. takes common-sense steps to provide policy clarity, the sooner innovation will be able to thrive . The United States needs to take steps to ensure policy clarity for innovation .
 Digital currencies come in public and private-sector variants . Digital currencies are cheaper, faster and more secure than traditional currencies . They come from public-private-sector versions .
 Sovereign digital currencies, such as China's digital yuan, are government issued . Digital yuan gives holders a direct claim on the central bank . Sovereign digital currency currencies are government-issued by the Chinese government .
 Sovereign digital currencies are validated by a central bank . Like transactions with normal currencies, transactions with sovereign digital currencies must be validated by the central bank. Transactions with sovereign currencies are valid by the bank .
 Sovereign digital currencies can even enable ordinary depositors to have accounts directly with central banks . Digital currencies can potentially increase, rather than decrease, government control of money .
 Private-sector digital currencies, by contrast, generally rely on decentralized blockchain technology to settle accounts between users . Private sector digital currencies use the same technology as private-sector currencies .
 Bitcoin and Ether are currencies that fluctuate in value relative to the U.S. dollar . Facebook’s Diem and usp Coin are pegged to a fiat currency and designed not to fluctuate .
 The blockchain technology that undergirds these currencies comes in a number of variations . It generally allows a community of users to validate transactions on a ledger instead of relying on a central authority .
 A certain number of coin holders might have to validate a transaction before coins can move from one user to another . Coin holders might also have to confirm a cryptographic key, or confirm a key .
 Network users perform the formerly centralized job of a central bank . Regardless of the exact process, network users do the formerly central bank's job .
 Since 2018, sending Bitcoin from one digital wallet to another has cost an average of about $4.5 . Sending Bitcoin to another digital wallet has cost average of $4,000 .
 A decentralized system is not inherently cheaper than centralized ones . But decentralized systems are not necessarily cheaper than those of centralized ones.
 One reason that sending Bitcoin is cheaper than sending dollars is that Bitcoin avoids much of the infrastrucruciness of the central banking system . Some of this infrastructure, such as anti-money-laundering systems, serves a vital function . Bitcoin avoids many of the infrastructure,
 Other costs associated with the legacy payments system stem from inefficiencies that could be eliminated through competition . But other costs of the system could also be reduced through competition, experts say .
 If the challenge posed by cryptocurrencies forces the legacy payments system to cut costs, that will clearly be good for the U.S. as a whole . The challenge poses a challenge to the American payments system .
 In addition to offering lower fees, cryptocurrencies are giving rise to a new generation of decentralized business models . Cryptocurrency is becoming a model for a new kind of business model . Bitcoin is a form of payment system that allows users to use their own money to make money .
 Blockage-enabled file-storage businesses allow anyone who joins a network to rent spare hard-drive capacity directly to others on the network . Instead of relying on Dropbox or Amazon Web Services in the middle, businesses can rent spare capacity .
 Other businesses allow the sharing and monetization of social media content without Facebook or Instagram as an intermediary .
 In what is known as “decentralized finance,’ the blockchain can facilitate lending without a bank . And in what is called “Decentralsized finance’s” it can also be used to make money without banks .
 Lots of business models might be reimagined with a community of users managing a network rather than a central company . A network of users might be re-imagined as a social network .
 How successful emerging technologies will be at replacing legacy systems is always difficult to predict . But the market will do a much better job of determining this than the government, it says .
 Decentralization is not just another example of a new technology upending entrenched businesses, some say . It's not just a new way of upending businesses, as some cryptocurrency evangelists argue . But it's a way of getting around the world, as well as disrupting businesses,
 America’s Crypto Conundrum ogy will have to adapt. True, companies threatened by blockchain technol . True, True, firms threatened by bitcoin technol. But it's not the only one of the world's biggest problems.
 Cryptominations are not just a way of getting around the world's biggest companies . But they're also promising to displace private-sector incumbents with cryptocurrencies . Bitcoin is a form of digital currency that could be used to compete with traditional incumbents .
 They can undermine some essential government functions valued on both sides of the aisle . The risk that a limited public policy framework should address is that it should address .
 One of the biggest risks posed by cryptocurrencies is that they could weaken the U.S. Federal Reserve's ability to set monetary policy .
 A cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin could conceivably become a common enough medium of exchange that it puts a meaningful portion of the money supply beyond the Fed’s control . Although such a scenario is unlikely, it is unlikely that it would be impossible to keep control of the Fed from Bitcoin .
 Most cryptocurrencies usually have predetermined formulas for coin growth or limits on the total number of coins . Most allow a certain group of decision-makers, such as a majority of coin holders, to alter these protocols .
 Coin holders, rather than central bankers, could end up deciding to increase or decrease the amount of digital currency in circulation . As a result, coin holders could decide how much digital currency is circulating .
 Bitcoin and its cryptocurrency brethren are mostly held as investment assets in the U.S. Despite being labeled “currencies, Bitcoin is mostly held in the United States . Bitcoin is worth $1.2 billion in value, according to experts .
 Bitcoin is a substitute for assets such as gold or equities, sometimes as a hedge against inflation . Goods and services are not priced in Bitcoin, so most holders are using it as a substitute . Bitcoin is not available in Bitcoin .
 The Internal Revenue Service has said that any transaction involving digital currency is a taxable “realization event” —meaning that users need to pay tax on any gain in the value of Bitcoin between when they bought it and when they used it to purchase something .
 For tax purposes, Bitcoin is treated like stock, which makes it impractical to use as currency . Bitcoin is now treated like a stock, making it impossible to use it as a currency .
 The price of Bitcoin has varied widely in just the last year . It has ranged from less than $15,000 to a high of $60,000 per coin .
 Anyone pricing goods and services in Bitcoin would either have to accept this volatility risk or change their prices to maintain purchasing power in dollars . As a result, anyone pricing goods in Bitcoin has to accept the volatility risk .
 Not all digital currencies face the same obstacles to widespread use, however, however . Digital currencies like Bitcoin and PNCG are not the only ones to be able to use .
 They are stable, as their name suggests, because they are tied to the value of a fiat currency . The currency is tied to a value of the currency, so they are stable .
 There are no gains to be taxed when stablecoins are used in transactions, nor is there a price risk for merchants who denominate their goods and services in a stablecoin .
 The total value of stablecoins has grown from about $10 billion to over $100 billion in the last year . Over the last 12 months, stablecoins have grown from $10billion to $100billion in value .
 Large platforms such as Facebook are behind these currencies makes them even more likely to achieve widespread use as a medium of exchange . And the fact that large platforms such a Facebook is behind them makes them more likely, Facebook says .
 This would not necessarily pose a risk to the Fed’s ability to set monetary policy, as long as stablecoin platforms deposit a fixed dollar amount in a reserve account for every stablecoin that is in circulation .
 If a stablecoin were to achieve widespread use and then change its reserve requirement from, say, $1 per coin to ten cents, the money supply could increase .
 The decision would be made not by the Fed but by whatever group is permitted to alter the protocol . A private governing association or some proportion of coin holders, for example, could make the decision .
 Foreign powers could gain influence over the U.S. money supply, for instance, by acquiring a majority of that particular stablecoin . Not only would that take important monetary policy dectsions out of the hands of the government, it could allow foreign powers to gain influence .
 Policymakers should take proactive measures to prevent private-sector digital currencies eroding the Fed’s control over monetary policy . Such possibilities remain remote, but in a world where it is difficult to predict how technology will develop, policymakers should take steps to prevent them .
 Non-stablecoins remain more attractive as an asset than as a medium of exchange . In particular, they should step up the enforcement of tax rules, including those requiring the payment of capital gains tax .
 Congress's effort to include properly tailored cryptocurrency tax reporting language in recent legislation is a good step in this direction . Congress's efforts to include proper tailored cryptocurrency reporting language is a step forward .
 Policymakers should also require that stablecoins always maintain a fixed reserve ratio, so that they will not impede the Fed’s ability to set monetary policy even if they achieve widespread use .
 In addition to complicating monetary policy, cryptocurrencies could create risks within the financial system, as Powell warned earlier this year .
 America’s Crypto Conundrum through exchanges that are broadly accessible to the public . But the regulatory regime around them is unclear . They trade on secondary markets, both over the counter and over-the-counter . The regulatory regime is unclear around the world .
 There is considerable uncertainty within the industry over which regulatory regime, if any, applies to which currency, applies . Lawyers differ on this question, and there is much uncertainty over which currency applies .
 Even if a cryptocurrency were to fall clearly in the crTc’s jurisdiction, a second set of ambiguities would remain . Even if it falls clearly into the jurisdiction, it would be difficult to determine whether it is in the jurisdiction .
 The crrc can regulate futures markets for Bitcoin, but it has limited powers when it comes to cash markets . It has more limited powers, just the ability to punish fraud and manipulation .
 The same exchange might facilitate trading in both futures and cash markets for Bitcoin . But the crTc would have regulatory authority only over the former .
 Cash markets could be subject to different regulations in all 50 states, which would be confusing to consumers and bad for American competitiveness . Entrepreneurs will do less business in the U.S. if they have to comply with 50 different legal regimes there but only a single regime in other countries .
 Federal regulators may be able to find creative ways to assert jurisdiction, depending on the nuances of individual digital currencies . Federal regulators could find creative way to enforce jurisdiction .
 Congress needs to ensure that someone has clear regulatory authority . Cash markets for digital currencies can slide through a gap in regulatory coverage between the sEc and the crTc .
 Congress need not be heavy-handed; setting price controls to stop speculation is not the government’s job . Setting price controls is not government's job, it's not to set prices .
 Beyond jurisdictional questions, cryptocurrencies also raise financial stability concerns . Cryptocurrency is a form of form of currency that could be used in Bitcoin transactions .
 Stablecoins have few rules governing reserve or liquidity management for stablecoins . For example, few rules govern reserve or liquidation management .
 Coin holders may have trouble exchanging their coins for dollars . They may assume more risk than they realize . Coin holders could be at risk of losing their coins .
 The popular stablecoin Tether, for instance, initially claimed that its coins were backed by dollars but later disclosed that it had invested its reserves in a variety of risky assets .
 As long as these currencies are not widely held, such risks will be borne solely by individual coin holders . The risks are not known to be borne by individuals, such as individual coinholders .
 Existing regulatory frameworks could be partially adopted for cryptocurrencies, such as money markets . These are solvable problems that policymakers are discussing, say experts .
 Perhaps the most immediate risk posed by cryptocurrencies stems from the anonymity they allow . ILLICIT FINANCE: Cryptocryptanism is a form of identity theft .
 The United States does not permit large numbers of dollars to move both anonymously and electronically . The U.S. does not allow large amounts of money to move anonymously or electronically .
 It requires that banks and money transfer businesses collect identifying information and perform some due diligence for high-risk transactions . Western Union is among the most popular transfer companies in the world .
 Suspicious transfers and those over $10,000 must be reported to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network . The network is devoted to fighting illicit finance .
 These regulations haven't put financial criminals out of business, but they have created many obstacles for them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Financial criminals haven't been able to escape the financial industry .
 Suitcases of cash are cumbersome and risky, and electronic payments are difficult to anonymize . Electronic payments can be difficult to identify, especially in the United States .
 Most digital currency ledgers do not require any identifying information beyond a cryptographic key . Unlike bank accounts, most digital currency leadsgers don't require identifying information . Bitcoin users can buy a digital currency with a digital bank account .
 This makes illicit activity much easier, even though anonymous flows can be tracked on a blockchain ledger that occasionally facilitates recovery from criminals . This is despite the fact that the blockchain ledger can be used to record transactions .
 U.S. banking laws allow the government to require identifying information for some digital currency accounts . But only at financial institutions, such as the currency exchange platform, that are already taking steps to be good corporate citizens .
 The government has less clear authority to require identification of users who hold their currency on a thumb drive, for instance .
 Some private companies are developing technology that would help identify the users of anonymous accounts . As long as banking laws permit anonymity, there is only so much they can do . Some private firms are developing FOREIGN AFFAIRS .
 Tracing digital currency transactions across countries and through previously unused, unhosted wallets is extremely difficult . Traces are difficult to trace across the world .
 Congress needs to pass legislation to limit the harmful effects of anonymity . Large anonymous transfers of cryptocurrency that would be illegal within the banking system should be banned .
 Anonymity isn't all bad, however, and policymakers could preserve it under certain circumstances . Policymakers could preserve anonymity under certain situations .
 ID verification would make it easier for governments to track opponents and potentially seize their assets . For instance, in authoriernaps the most tarian countries, ID verification is a risk posed by the risk posed .
 Policymakers must balance the interest of promoting freedom abroad against the need to ensure security at home . Policymakers need to balance promoting freedom overseas with ensuring security in the country, says the author .
 1D requirements for digital currency transactions under $10,000 would be scrapped . One way to do this would be to forgo requirements for transactions under that amount . The move would be a step further down the way the U.S. government has dealt with the issue .
 The median savings of a US. family is under $10,000, and it is far less for families in most autocratic countries . Such an exception would allow most families to meaningfully protect their assets . It would also make it much more difficult to buy expensive weapons with digital currencies
 Such an exception could also allow anonymity for smaller day-today transactions, consistent with the use of cash . Such a change of law could also be consistent with using cash .
 One obstacle to limiting anonymity is the lack of a centralized authority to oversee ID verification . A centralized authority would be needed to verify ID verification, experts say .
 By their very nature, decentralized digital currencies resist this type of oversight . By their nature, they resist this kind of oversight. By the very nature of decentralizing digital currencies, they can't be trusted by authorities .
 Digital currency exchanges or other private companies could maintain lists of wallets whose users have been verified . Programs running these currencies could automatically check users against such a list .
 Policymakers should maintain a degree of humility, however, and not be too prescriptive about how to regulate a fast-evolving industry . Policymakers must not be prescriptives, however .
 If policymakers require 1D verification, the market will find solutions that are compatible with decentralization and that minimize disruption .
 Requiring ID verification could end up driving some digital currency users to offshore exchanges and wallets beyond U.S. jurisdiction .
 These coins might be less likely to comply with 1p verification rules and therefore more likely to attract illicit users . Because their brands are so closely tied to anonymity, these coins might not comply with verification rules .
 Such an outcome would give authorities tracking illicit finance a place to focus their efforts . Yet such an outcome wouldn't necessarily be all bad, it would give them a new focus .
 The overwhelming majority of digital currency users are not doing anything illegal . Many would probably accept ID requirements similar to those needed for cash deposits or stocks . Many of the users are likely accepting ID requirements .
 Users who balk at these requirements will have signaled something useful to law enforcement . Users who shift their transactions to anonymity-enhanced coins will have signal something useful .
 The spread of offshore digital currencies is a problem that the G-7 and G-20 could tackle through coordination they already carry out on other financial issues . The G-8 and G20 could coordinate on the kind of coordination that they already do on other issues .
 A number of countries have signaled a willingness to crack down on the use of digital currencies for illicit activity . Digital currencies are already a topic of discussion when these multilateral groups meet .
 The United States should actively engage in shaping these discussions and push other countries to adopt regulations similar to those it adopts at home in order to prevent forum shopping .
 The final category of risks posed by digital currencies is geopolitical . A digital currency can be used to make money in the form of a digital currency .
 The U.S. must consider the risks to the international role of the dollar if it does not launch its own digital dollar .
 This danger is often framed too narrowly as a worry that China's digital yuan could threaten the dollar’s reserve status . This is not the case that the digital yuan threatens the dollar's reserve status. This is the case of a digital yuan becoming a major global reserve currency.
 Beijing wants to increase the share of international payments in yuan at the expense of the dollar . Beijing has made no secret about its desire to increase international payments by yuan .
 Mu Changchun, the digital currency chief at China's central bank, has spoken publicly about China’s desire to reduce “dollarization” in the international economy . He has also spoken about reducing ‘dollarization' in the global economy .
 China’s ambition to use the digital yuan to project economic power seems clear . Considered alongside its vast infrastructure investment project, known the Belt and Road Initiative, known as the Belt & Road Initiative .
 U.S. must weigh Beijing’s ambitions against its capabilities, experts say . Yet the United States must weigh China's ambitions against capabilities, they say . Beijing's ambitions must be weighed up against Beijing's capabilities .
 China faces a host of structural disadvantages, including a managed exchange rate and a lack of economic transparency . It will be difficult for its sovereign digital currency to threaten the dollar’s reserve status anytime soon .
 Some will embrace the digital yuan, and others may be induced or forced to use it as a condition of doing business with China . Washington must be prepared to hold Beijing to account .
 Most people will likely think long and hard before ditching the dollar for the digital yuan at a scale that would threaten the dollar’s reserve status . But wary of capital controls and weaker property rights in China, most people are likely to think long hard .
 The real world factors that have historically constrained China's fiat currency will also constrain its digital currency . China's digital currency will be constrained by the same factors as its fiat currency, say experts .
 A more significant but largely overlooked risk of the digital yuan is that it could help Beijing facilitate sanctions evasion . The digital yuan could be used to help Beijing evade sanctions evasion, say experts .
 U.S. stops weapons sales to North Korea, for instance, by imposing secondary sanctions that prevent Americans from doing business with North Korean military . The United States also stops Americans doing business not just with North Korea but also with any foreign entity .
 No bank can afford to lose access to the U.S. financial system, virtually none will facilitate payments for North Korea’s military purchases .
 The digital yuan could provide North Korea with a way around the banking system . North Korea could use the digital yuan as a way to get around the world's banking system, experts say .
 A foreign company that does no business in the United States wants to sell to a North Korean military entity could open accounts with the Chinese central bank . Money could flow between them via the central bank without touching any commercial banks, avoiding the bite of United States sanctions .
 The U.S. must be clear-eyed about the risks posed by the digital yuan . But the threat to the dollar-based international system is much broader than China, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They flow through a patchwork of different national systems, touching multiple commercial banks in a process that adds cost and time . The process is complicated and costly .
 If central banks were to agree to provide foreigners direct account access, adopt common standards, or even share technology, international payments could become more seamless and cost-effective than the current dollar-dependent system .
 With the exception of China, most countries are in the early stages of developing central bank digital currencies . The United States is engaged in international discussions aimed at setting standards for the underlying technology . It will be able to shape those standards .
 The Federal Reserve is currently exploring possibilities for the technology that would enable a digital dollar, including by working with the Massachusetts Institute of 'Technology'
 Even if it does not adopt a digital dollar, the U.S. may be able to bless a private-sector digital currency . Private-sector currencies can facilitate low-cost international payments .
 A properly regulated stablecoin might meet the need for efficient dollar transfers, depending on how the international landscape develops . A stablecoin could be a better way to transfer money between countries .
 The United States must also consider the domestic policy implications of a digital dollar . The U.S. should consider the impact of the digital dollar on its own currency .
 Providing the public with direct access to accounts at the Fed could make it easier to integrate the five percent of Americans who are currently unbanked into the country’s financial system .
 A digital dollar could also raise privacy concerns if the government has insight into individual spending decisions . It could lead to government overreach if deposits are promised in exchange for conformity with a controversial social policy .
 Fed accounts could cause banks to lose deposits, diminishing their ability to make loans and hurting economic growth . In addition, the accounts could also cause bank deposits to drop from deposits .
 There are ways to mitigate these risks, such as using private-sector intermediaries that do not share spending information with Washington, limiting what the government can do .
 The U.S. will have to balance these domestic considerations with the need to ensure that international dollar transactions are powered by technology that is efficient, resilient, and interoperable with technology being developed by other central banks .
 This could be achieved through a digital dollar or a properly regulated private-sector alternative, such as a stablecoin . A stablecoin could be used to create a stable currency .
 America’s Crypto Conundrum for decades provided stability for the United States and its allies . Washington will need to adjust to—and shape—the global shift toward central bank digital currencies . But to secure the global role of the dollar, which has .
 If digital currencies continue to gain traction, the debate over how to regulate them will only get louder . The debate over regulating digital currencies will only continue to grow louder .
 Digital currencies touch so many policy areas, they cut across the normal decision-making silos of the U.S. government . Digital currencies are creating potential for bureaucratic sticking points and risking an uncoordinated, patchwork approach .
 Various agencies have a stake in the issue, including the Treasury Department, the sec, the crtc, the Federal Reserve, the Justice Department, and the State Department . Within the executive branch, various agencies are involved .
 In Congress, several committees have an interest in digital currencies, including those on banking, finance, agriculture, agriculture and foreign relations .
 Biden administration should convene a high-level group like the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets . The group includes treasury secretary, the Fed chair, the sec chair, sec chair and the crtc chair . Add the attorney general and secretary of state or their deputies .
 Congress could also set up a bipartisan task force to seek consensus across committees . Congress also could set up task force seeking consensus across committee .
 Most Americans want their government to be able to respond to economic downturns, to prevent broad financial instability, and to fight terrorism and other types of crime . Most Americans also want to see the government be prepared to prevent financial instability and terrorism .
 Most wish to benefit from the innovative potential of new technologies such as digital currencies . But most also wish to see the potential of digital currencies such as Bitcoin .
 Both these things can't be achieved only with common-sense guardrails . Digital dollar or a properly regulated private-sector alternative are key to success .
 Decisions about the government’s control of money must be shaped not just by software developers, but by elected representatives . The U.S. government must be accountable to the American people, Sen. Rand Paul says .
 Push back against Beijing’s growing global influence will be Washington's national security focus, alongside transnational threats such as climate change and the covip-19 pandemic . The administration's public statements, its early national security planning documents, and its initial diplomatic forays have all suggested
 American politicians have periodically suggested that Russia's days as a true global power are numbered . Ever since the end of the Cold War, U.S. politicians have suggested that Russian power is waning .
 Michael Kofman is Director of the Russia Studies Program at CNA and Senior Fellow at the Center for a New American Security . He says Russia successfully intervened in the Syrian war and interfered in the 2016 U.S. presidential election .
 ANDREA KENDALL-TAYLOR is a Senior Fellow and Director of the Transatlantic Security Program at the Center for a New American Security . She says the U.S. needs to work with Russia and the EU to avoid a repeat of the crisis .
 The Myth of Russian Decline inserted itself into the political crisis in Venezuela and the civil war in Libya . The myth of Russian decline inserted itself in the Venezuelan crisis and Libya civil war .
 Russia’s shrinking population and resource-dependent economy are not as consequential for the Kremlin as many in Washington assume . Much of the evidence for it is not as important as many assume .
 The United States should not expect that Russia will abandon its course of confrontation once President Vladimir Putin leaves office . Nor should the U.S. expect that Putin will automatically abandon his course of confrontations once he's out of office .
 Putin's foreign policy enjoys widespread support among the country’s ruling elite . His legacy will include a thicket of unresolved disputes, chief among them that over the annexation of Crimea .
 Washington cannot afford to fixate on China while hoping to simply wait Russia out . Put simply, Washington can't afford to wait for Russia to get ready .
 Rather than viewing Russia as a declining power, U.S. leaders should see it as a persistent one, they should have a frank conversation about the country's true capabilities and vulnerabilities .
 Rethinking American assumptions about Russian power would allow policymakers to address what will be a period of prolonged confrontation with a capable adversary .
 Expectations of Russian decline contain important truths, say experts . Expectations are based on Russian decline, they say .
 The country's economy is stagnant, with few sources of value other than the extraction and export of natural resources . The country’s economy is stagnating, with little of value .
 The entire system is rife with corruption and dominated by inefficient state-owned or state-run enterprises . International sanctions limit access to capital and technology, and international . sanctions also limit access .
 Russia struggles to develop, retain, and attract talent . The state chronically underfunds scientific research; and bureaucratic mismanagement hinders technological innovation .
 Russia lags behind the U.S. and China in most metrics of scientific and technological development . As a result, Russia is lagging considerably behind the United States and China .
 Military spending has largely plateaued in the last four years . The population is forecast to decline by ten million people by 2050 . Military spending is expected to continue to rise .
 With such a dismal outlook, it is natural to assume that Russia’s capacity for disruption and hostility on the international stage will soon diminish, too . The Kremlin will simply run out of resources for its aggressive foreign policy, too, says Alex Vatanka .
 Its economic, demographic, and military potential will remain substantial, rather than entering a precipitous decline . The U.S. is not entering a decline, but its economic and demographic potential is still substantial .
 Consider the country’s economy, which, stagnant as it may be, is still larger and more resilient than many believe . Consider the fact that the U.S. economy is still growing and resilient than you think .
 Russia's Gpp of $1.2 trillion is comparable to that of Italy or Texas, analysts say . Analysts like to point out that Russia's $1 trillion Gpp is equivalent to Italy's $2 trillion . Russia is the world's largest economy .
 Russia would be the second-largest economy in Europe and the sixth-largest in the world . Factor in purchasing power parity, and it balloons to $4. trillion, would make Russia the world's second largest economy .
 Russia’s economy is nowhere near as small as conventional wisdom holds, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . Russia's economy is not small, but it is growing, says Sutter.com .
 Real disposable incomes are ten percent lower today than they were in 2013, wiping out nearly a decade of growth . Real incomes are 10 percent lower than in 2013 than in 2007 .
 Macroeconomic indicators are stable enough to allow Moscow to project power well into the future . But macroeconomic indicators have been stable enough for Moscow to remain in power .
 After Russia's annexation of Crimea and occupation of eastern Ukraine in 2014, international sanctions and falling oil prices caused its economy to tumble . The Russian economy has been hit hard by international sanctions, falling prices and international oil prices .
 The Myth of Russian Decline reined in its spending and adapted to lower oil prices, creating budget surpluses and a growing war chest . In the years since, however, the government has been able to keep a surplus of money .
 A new policy of import substitution, devised in response to international sanctions, has breathed new life into the agricultural sector . Agricultural exports now rake in more than $30 billion annually .
 Kremlin has reoriented trade away from the West and toward China, currently its number one trading partner . China is currently Russia's number one trade partner .
 Trade with China is expected to exceed $200 billion by 2024, twice what it was in 2013 . China trade with the U.S. is set to grow to $200billion by 2024 .
 Oil and gas sales continue to account for about 30—40 percent of the government's budget . A shift away from fossil fuels will sting, but a shift away will sting . The government is shifting to a more sustainable approach to energy production .
 Russia produces energy at such a low price that other exporting countries are likely to get squeezed well before it sees its budget crimped . Other exporting countries will likely get squeezed before Russia sees it crimped, analysts say .
 Russia's oil production will peak in the coming decade, some think it may have done so already . Russia’s capacity to export easily extractable oil will hit a ceiling, experts say .
 Russia ranks among the top ten worldwide in researchand-development spending . Russia lags behind the U.S. in technological innovation, but still ranks in the top 10 worldwide .
 Russia has developed its own analogs to Facebook, Google, and other popular online platforms, all of which are fairly successful within Russia . Russia has a struggling but viable technology sector and has its own own analog to Facebook .
 Among the most common misconceptions about Russia is that the country’s demographic outlook will dramatically constrain its future capabilities . Russia's demographic outlook is expected to constrain the country's future capabilities, experts say . The country's military has been in decline for decades .
 Such demographic determinism has historically failed to predict Russia's fortunes . Russia's economic fortunes have never been able to predict its future .
 Russia would remain the most populous country in Europe and Eurasia by a wide margin . Even in the latter case, Russia would still be the largest country in the world .
 It may lag behind highly developed Western countries in life expectancy and mortality rates, but it has substantially narrowed those gaps since the 1990s . It has also narrowed its gaps in mortality rates and life expectancy .
 More important, the relevance of demographics to state power needs rethinking . The relevance of the state's demographics to power needs to be rethinking, says the author of the book .
 Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Nigeria would be among the world's most powerful states . Were it otherwise, countries such as Bangladesh and Indonesia would be more powerful states, say experts .
 Russia has shown considerable improvement since the 1990s, with reduced mortality, increased lifespans, and improved fertility rate . On this front, Russia has increased its fertility rate and mortality rate .
 Until 2015, it steadily rose on indexes such as the uN’s Human Development Index and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's labor productivity measures . The U.N. has published a list of countries ranked in the world's most developed countries .
 Russia's overall situation has considerably improved from a demographic crisis in the 1990s and predictions of demographic doom in the early years of this century . An economic recession has since slowed down this trend, and undone some of the progress .
 Brain drain remains a major problem, with many of Russia's brightest leaving the country . Brain drain is still a problem in Russia, with most of its brightest leaving .
 Russia benefits from substantial immigration by job seekers from the former Soviet republics . Even as many middle-class Russians who are essential to the knowledge economy leave, Russia benefits .
 Russias demographic profile is composed of mixed indicators that show qualitative improvements alongside quantitative decline . Russia's demographic profile shows that the country's demographics have improved in recent years .
 The demographic outlooks for many of the United States’ allies and partners are equally problematic, if not more so . Meanwhile, the demographic outlook for the U.S. allies and . partners is equally problematic . The United States has a long history of demographic problems, including a lack
 Russia will remain a military force to be reckoned with, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia will be a major force in the Middle East, says Putin .
 Military power has historically been a Russian strength, compensating for the country’s relatively undiversified economy, technological backwardness, and lack of political dynamism . Russia's military power has been a strength in the past . Russia has been criticized for its lack of a strong economy
 The Myth of Russian Decline is in part why Russia man man man . Russia has had to sustain prolonged competitions with economically stronger states in the past . It is part of why Russia is still strong in the world .
 After its nadir in the early post-Soviet era, Russian military power has been revived . Russia will only improve in the coming decade, even as U.S. policymakers turn their attention to China .
 The strongest conventional military in Paseaont Europe, reforged following a period of military reforms and investments since 2008 . Aside from NATO, it also fields hoping to simply wait the strongest conventional .
 Russian military is at its highest level of readiness, mobility, and technical capability in decades . Russian military at highest level in decades, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Nato remains superior on paper on paper, but much is contingent in war . Nato's apparent superiority does not guarantee victory or ability to deter Russia across the range of possible conflicts .
 Russia also has a flexible array of special forces, mercenaries, and military intelligence operatives . Russia also fields an array of military personnel and special forces .
 This is before considering the country’s status as a leading power in space or its extensive cyberwarfare capabilities, which were recently demonstrated by the so-called SolarWinds breach . Russian hackers penetrated and spied on several United States government agencies .
 Analysts have estimated that Russia spends somewhere between $150 billion and $180 billion per year on defense . That figure is considerably more than the market exchange rate figure of $58 billion suggests .
 Half of Russia’s annual defense budget is spent on procuring new weapons, modernizing old ones, and researching military technology . Russia spends a far greater share than is spent in these areas by Western militaries .
 Some Russian expenditures remain hidden, obscured, or classified . Those estimates are conservative estimates .
 Using generous budgets, the Russian military-industrial complex has developed many next-generation weapons . These include hypersonic missiles, directed-energy weapons, electronic warfare systems, advanced submarines, and advanced submarines .
 Russia is well positioned to remain a dominant actor in the post-Soviet space . In practice, however, it will challenge U.S. interests in other regions such as the Middle East .
 Russia retains airlift and sealift capabilities needed to deploy its troops at some distance from its borders . Russia retains the airlift capabilities needed for deployment . Russia also retains airlifts and sealifts necessary to deploy troops in the region .
 Russia's defense spending looks stable despite the triple shock of recession, low oil prices, and international sanctions . Its defense spending is stable at current levels, despite economic recession, and sanctions .
 Russian military still sees itself as a relative underdog, but it has grown more confident that it can deter NATO even without nuclear weapons . The outcome of a prolonged war between Russian and NaTo forces is difficult to predict .
 U.S. should stop dismissing Russia as a mere “disrupter” and recognize it as a serious military adversary in both ability and intent . The United States and its allies should not dismiss Russia as an ‘disruptor’
 Tied up in the narrative of Russian decline is the notion that the U.S. primarily has a Putin problem . Once the Russian president leaves office, his country’s foreign policy will grow less assertive, he says .
 Putin can legally remain in office until 2036, thanks to a referendum that he pushed through last year . Putin can serve two more six-year terms after his current term expires in 2024 . Putin pushed through a referendum last year that allows him to serve as president until 2024 .
 Russian president's longevity is common for leaders like Vladimir Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . Research shows that such longevity is often common for such leaders like the Russian president .
 In the post-Cold War era, autocrats who, like Putin, had made it to 20 years in office, were at least 65 years of age, and had concentrated power in their own hands ended up ruling for 36 years, on average . In the past 20 years, aut
 Research on longtime authoritarian leaders also suggests that once Putin does depart, there will be little prospect for substantial political improvement .
 Most of the regimes that such longtime leaders create persist, or a different dictatorship emerges . Most often, the regimes they create persist or a new regime emerges .
 The odds that democratization will follow a regime like Putin’s are less than one in ten . Putin is a personalist, personalist leader who has clung to power for 20 years or more .
 Extending term limits, as Putin did after last year’s referendum, is also a bad sign . Extending the term limits in Russia is also bad sign, as is extending term limits . Putin did this in a referendum last year, but it's not a good sign,
 According to data from the Comparative Constitutions Project, 13 leaders around the world pursued term-limit extensions in the period from 1992 to 2009 . 13 leaders in the U.S. sought term-limits extensions .
 In all but one case, their regimes either are still in power or transitioned to a new authoritarian regime after the leader’s departure . In all of the cases, the leader's regime has either been in power .
 The Myth of Russian Decline is not to suggest that Russia is doomed to authoritarianism or that a change in the president would not matter . This is not the case of Russia's authoritarianism .
 An authoritarian leader undermines civil society and hollows out institutions that could constrain their power . The empirical record shows that authoritarian leaders create barriers to the emergence of democracy . But, as a result, it's important to resist authoritarian leaders' efforts to undermine civil society .
 A mere change in leadership would likely matter only at the margins . Likewise, a mere change of leadership would not matter only in the margins of a change of leader .
 Unless Putin’s departure ushers in a significant turnover in the ruling elite, key pillars of Russian foreign policy will remain incompatible with the values of the U.S. and its allies . The notion that Russia maintains the right to a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space
 The contours of Russian foreign policy, and thus the Kremlin’s intent to undermine U.S. interests, will endure long after Putin leaves office . Simply put, American policymakers must prepare for the possibility that the contours .
 The U.S. should think of Russia not as a declining power but as a persistent one . Russia is willing and able to threaten national security interests for at least ten to 20 years . The United States should be wary of Russia's ability to threaten its national interests .
 Even if China proves to be the more significant long-term threat, Russia will remain a longterm challenger, too . Russia is a “good enough” power, as the political scientist Kathryn Stoner has put it .
 The former Soviet space remains a tinderbox, still reckoning with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which should be thought of not as an event but as a process, as the historian Serhii Plokhy says .
 Washington must consider the prospect of another Russian-Ukrainian war, a military conflict resulting from political unrest in Belarus, or crises akin to the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war . Washington would like to focus on the Indo-Pacific .
 Compared with China, Russia poses a more significant danger to the U.S. homeland . Compared with Russia, Russia also poses a greater threat to the United States .
 China remains the United States’ preeminent nuclear threat, despite China’s growing arsenal of strategic nuclear weapons . The U.S. remains the pre-eminent threat against China .
 The same goes for Russia's ability to reach the continental U.S. with long-range conventional missiles . Russia has a long range of conventional missiles capable of reaching the continental United States .
 Russia also has more troops stationed abroad than does China, with bases in the Caucasus, Central Asia, Europe, and the Middle East . Russia's military in regular proximity to the United States and other forces .
 Kremlin can endanger U.S. interests on the cheap, it's worth underscoring that it can endanger United States interests . It's also a reminder that Russia can endanger the United States on a cheap .
 Russia's military interventions in Ukraine, Syria, and Libya have been limited and inexpensive . Russia's intervention in Libya, Ukraine and Libya has been limited, inexpensive and limited . Russia has been criticized for its intervention in Syria and Libya .
 It is perhaps in these domains, cyberwarfare and attacks on liberal democracy, where Russia is likely to pose the most sustained threat . Russia poses the most serious threat to the liberal democracy in the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Russia has refined a low-cost toolkit that allows it to bolster authoritarian regimes, amplify illiberal voices in established democracies, poison information ecosystems, subvert elections and other democratic institutions . The toolkit allows Russia to bolster other authoritarian regimes and amplify ill-iberal voices .
 Moscow believes that weakening democracy can accelerate the decline of U.S. influence, it will persist in its efforts on this front . Moscow believes weakening democracy is a sign that it will continue to try and influence the United States .
 Other states have taken note of Russia’s success in this sphere and have begun to emulate it, as shown by China's adoption of Kremlin-style information warfare during the pandemic .
 Moscow is increasingly finding common cause with Beijing . Beijing is a key ally in Russia's anti-China policy .
 In effect, the two governments have formed a strategic partnership, exchanging technical and material support to offset Western pressure . The two countries focus their resources on competing with the United States rather than with each other .
 "The impact of this alignment will be greater than the sum of its parts," he says . "It will amplify the challenge to United States interests that each state poses individually," he adds .
 The challenge will be not just properly prioritizing China and Russia in U.S. strategy, but recognizing that the problems presented by the two countries are not necessarily discrete and separable . The challenge, therefore, will be to be to prioritize Russia and China in the United States strategy
 Washington must move past the myth that Russia is a beleaguered or cornered state, lashing out in recognition of its own demise . Washington needs to move past that myth and focus on rights to Russia, not its own problems .
 Russia's leaders consider Russia to be the center of power in its own region and an assertive player globally . In truth, there is little evidence that Russia's . leaders see their country in this way .
 Events such as the bungled U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan only reinforce Moscow’s perception that it is rather the United States that is in decline . The bungled United States withdrawal of Afghanistan only reinforces Moscow's perception of decline . Moscow is a key ally of the U.
 Ignoring that view will create false expectations for Russia's behavior, leaving the U.S. and its allies poorly positioned to anticipate Russian actions . Ignoring the view will leave the United States and its . allies ill-positioned to anticipate Russia's actions .
 Washington and its allies can cut off a major source of Moscow’s influence abroad . Cybersecurity as a national security priority, strengthening critical infrastructure, improving information ecosystems, and rooting out corruption .
 The administration should think of Russia not as a extend to cyberspace and space, but as a set up the necessary guardrails for a prolonged confrontation . Meanwhile, the administration’s efforts to pursue arms control and strategic stability with Russia should continue .
 U.S. must resist overly focusing on China to the point of neglecting other important issues, such as Russia . Moving forward, however, Washington must resist over-focusing on China .
 The Interim National Security Strategic Guidance discussed China in considerable depth while allocating barely a few sentences to Russia . It was released in March as one of Biden administration's earliest national security analyses .
 Future strategic documents, such as the upcoming National Security and National Defense Strategies, should correct this imbalance . The U.S. needs to be able to use the U.N. Security Council to address the problem .
 Reallocating money to East Asia is unlikely to make a marked difference in the military balance vis-a-vis China . But it will create unnecessary risks in Europe, Biden administration says .
 China and Russia could be involved in simultaneous conflicts with each other . That is particularly true considering the possibility of a crisis involving the other states .
 Washington must hedge against such a scenario and ensure that Europe does not become the weak link in its strategy . Washington needs to ensure Europe doesn't become a weak link to its strategy.
 The alliance has recently begun updating its official guiding document, and Washington must ensure that Russia, not China, remains the clear priority . The alliance's official document has recently been updated .
 The United States should continue to encourage its European allies and partners to shoulder more of the burden for deterrence and defense on the continent . The U.S. should also continue to push for European allies to shoulder the burden of deterrence, defense .
 Finally, Washington must be bolder still in its efforts to defend democracy against outside subversion . Washington must make bolder efforts to protect democracy against subversion, says Julian Zelizer .
 Russia is developing its own brand of digital dictatorship, designed in part to undermine democracy worldwide . Russia's digital ambitions may be overshadowed by China's, but yet Russia's own digital dictatorship is growing .
 International 'Telecommunication Union' aims to ensure that it is not Beijing and Moscow that write the digital rules and norms of the future . Addressing that threat also requires working with likeminded democratic partners in international organizations .
 Americans may try to console themselves that at last they can turn their backs on this troubled region . U.S. is now energy self-sufficient and thus much less dependent on Middle Eastern oil .
 Washington has learned the hard way not to attempt to remake the region in the U.S. image . Washington has also learned not to try to remake it in the United States’ image, writes Peter Bergen .
 If U.S. leaders are tempted to make war there again, they will find little public support . And if they do it again they will likely find little support .
 Nevertheless, pivoting away from the broader Middle East is easier said to done than done . Nevertheless, pivot to the broader Mideast is not easy .
 If Iran continues to advance its nuclear program to the threshold of developing a weapon, it could trigger an arms race or a preemptive Israeli strike that would drag the United States back into another Middle Eastern war .
 Israel and Washington's Arab allies depend on the United States for their security . Israel and the U.S. depend heavily on its allies in the Middle East .
 Failing states such as Syria and Yemen remain a potential breeding ground for terrorists who can strike the U.S. and its allies . The United States and allies are at risk of a terrorist attack, experts say .
 U.S. no longer depends on the free flow of oil from the Gulf, a prolonged interruption there could send the global economy into a tailspin . And although the United States no longer relies on the Gulf oil, it could be a prolonged disruption .
 Like it or not, the U.S. needs to devise a post-Afghanistan strategy for promoting order in the Middle East . The U.N. should devise a strategy to promote order even as it shifts its focus to other priorities .
 In crafting that strategy, there is a precedent that can serve as a useful template . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the White House .
 Henry Kissinger and the Art of Middle East Diplomacy (Knopf, 2021) is from which this essay is adapted . Henry Kissinger is the author of Kissinger's book, Kissinger and Mideast Diplomacy: The Art of Diplomacy .
 Kissinger in his office in Washington, D.C., August 1978 nent strategist, Henry Kissinger . Kissinger was a key figure in the White House's post-Kissinger administration . Kissinger is considered a national hero .
 Kissinger presided over a successful effort to build a stable Middle Eastern order, one that lasted for 30 years . Kissinger served as secretary of state to U.S. Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford .
 Kissinger managed to achieve that while the U.S. was withdrawing all its troops from Vietnam and pulling back from Southeast Asia . Kissinger managed the feat while the United States was withdrawing from Vietnam .
 It was a time, like today, when diplomacy had to substitute for the use of force . Diplomacy had to be substituted for force, and diplomacy must substitute for force .
 It coincided with the Watergate scandal, which plunged the United States into a deep political crisis and forced Nixon from office . The Watergate scandal created a potential vacuum in U.S. leadership on the world stage .
 Kissinger’s diplomacy managed to sideline the Soviet Union and lay the foundations for an American-led peace process that effectively ended the conflict between the Arab states and Israel . Even though it failed to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Kissinger's diplomacy helped end the Cold War .
 An equilibrium in the regional balance of power is insufficient for maintaining a stable order, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "An equilibrium in regional balance-power is not enough to maintain stable order"
 Policymakers should be circumspect in peacemaking efforts, prioritizing stability over end-of-conflict deals . They should also avoid underreaching, because that can destabilize the order, too, too .
 There is little appetite in Washington to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . Biden administration should resist the temptation to neglect the issue, writes Aaron Miller .
 Kissinger learned that conflicts that appear dormant can erupt into full-blown crises at unexpected moments . Kissinger learned the hard way, as Kissinger learned from Kissinger .
 A Kissingerian strategy of incremental steps is the best way to avoid yet another conflagration in this combustible region . Dealing with one of the central conflicts in the Middle East by employing a Kissingerian .
 It was order, not peace, that Kissinger pursued, because he believed peace was neither an achievable nor desirable objective in the Middle East . Peace was neither achievable nor even a desirable objective, Kissinger said .
 Kissinger’s view: preserving Middle Eastern order required the maintenance of a stable balance of power . Kissinger: In Kissinger's view, preserving Mideast order required stability of power in the Middle East .
 Kissinger sought to replicate that approach in the Middle East when he had the opportunity to do so in the region . Kissinger sought the same approach when he was able to work in the Mideast . Kissinger's approach to the region has been successful, he says .
 He understood that equilibrium in the balance of power was not enough . But he understood that an equilibrium in power not enough, he said . He said: "An equilibrium is not enough. It's not enough."
 For the order to be sustainable, it also had to be legitimate, meaning that all the major powers within the system had to adhere to a commonly accepted set of rules . The order must also be legitimate .
 The rules would be respected only if they provided a sufficient sense of justice to a sufficient number of states . Those rules would only be respected if they were respected by a sufficient proportion of states, the author says .
 Kissinger argued that a legitimate order did not eliminate conflict, but it did limit its scope . Kissinger: A legitimate order, Kissinger argued, did not end conflict but limit it's scope .
 Wilson's idealism that sought a peace to end all wars had led to appeasement and Hitler’s conquest of Europe, he says . This conclusion also came from what he observed during World War II, when the Wilsonian idealism had instead led to war .
 Eras like the period he had studied turned out to be the most peaceful because statesmen involved were not preoccupied with brokering peace, he says .
 The eighteenth-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant was another influence on Kissinger’s Mideast policymaking . The former Secretary of State of State Kissinger was influenced by Kant's work .
 Kissinger took away from the philosopher’s essay “Perpetual Peace” Kissinger said conflict between states would lead over time to the exhaustion of their powers . Kissinger: Conflict between states will lead to exhaustion of powers .
 In other words, peacemaking was a gradual process that could not be rushed . Peacemaking is a gradual, gradual process, not a quick fix, says U.S. President Obama .
 Kissinger assumed that the Arabs were not ready to reconcile with the Jewish state . Israel was unable to make territorial concessions they demanded without jeopardizing its existence, Kissinger says .
 Israel withdrew in small, incremental steps from Arab territory it had occupied in the 1967 Six-Day War . Peace process provided for Israel to withdraw in small-scale steps from the Arab territory .
 The legitimizing principle for this approach was enshrined in UN Security Council Resolution 242, which provided for an exchange of territory for peace . UN Resolution 242 provided for a peace deal in return for territory .
 Kissinger’s FOREIGN AFFAIRS Order Before Peace strategic approach . Equilibrium and legitimacy in pursuit of order and incrementalism in the pursuit of peace were the basic concepts of Kissinger's .
 He managed to negotiate three interim agreements among Egypt, Syria, and Israel and laid the foundations for the subsequent peace treaties that Israel forged with Egypt and Jordan .
 Kissinger tried and failed to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . His process began to unravel when President Bill Clinton ignored Kissinger’s emphasis on caution .
 President George W Bush launched his ill-fated invasion of Iraq, destabilizing Kissinger’s order by making it possible for revolutionary Iran to challenge U.S. dominance in the Sunni Arab world .
 Kissinger’s approach to the Middle East is particularly relevant in the present moment . Kissinger's approach to Mideast is particularly pertinent in the current moment, he says .
 The United States is pulling back from the region in an obvious parallel to the U.S. withdrawal from Southeast Asia in Kissinger’s time . Kissinger's time in the region was similar to the time Kissinger spent in Southeast Asia .
 The aftermath of a botched, longrunning war meant there was a strict limit on Washington's ability to deploy force in the Mideast . Then, as now, the aftermath of that war meant a limit on U.S. forces in the Middle East .
 Kissinger knew that a stable equilibrium depended on the U.S. backing up its diplomacy with the credible threat of military action . Kissinger: "A stable equilibrium" depends on the United States backing up diplomacy .
 He squared this circle by relying on and working with capable regional partners, he said . He said: "I'm not going to be able to do this again."
 In September 1970, the Palestine Liberation Organtzation sought to overthrow King Hussein in Jordan .
 Three Soviet-backed Syrian armored tank brigades supported the organization's attempt by occupying the northern Jordanian city of Irbid . The attempt was made by the Syrian government .
 Fearing they would advance on Amman, Hussein called on Washington to intervene . Hussein called for intervention from Washington to help .
 The United States, however, could not do so quickly and risked getting stuck there if it did . The U.S. would not be able to get out of the country quickly .
 Kissinger, on Hussein’s urging, turned to Israel to deter the Syrians . Nixon's eventual support of Israel led Kissinger to turn to Israel, Kissinger says .
 Prime Minister Golda Meir ordered the Israel Defense Forces to mobilize on the Golan Heights and on the Jordanian border adjacent to Irbid . Meir was the prime minister of Israel during the time .
 Kissinger deployed two U.S. carrier battle groups off the Lebanese coast and ordered a third into the Mediterranean . Kissinger also deployed two battle groups in the Mediterranean to deter the Soviet Union .
 The Jordanian army inflicted heavy losses on the Syrian tank brigades, and the Syrians withdrew . Emboldened by Israeli and American backing, the Jordanian army suffered heavy losses .
 Within days, the crisis was over, without one American boot on the ground . Within days of the crisis, it was over .
 Kissinger harnessed regional allies in dealing with Egypt's nationalist leader Gamal Abdel Nasser . Kissinger also harnessed the support of regional allies to deal with the Nasser regime .
 In dealing with Nasser’s Soviet-backed gambit, Kissinger eschewed regime change, a policy pursued by France and the U.K. during the 1956 Suez crisis with disastrous results . Kissinger eschews regime change in dealing with the crisis .
 Israel in the heartland of the Middle East and Iran and Saudi Arabia in the Persian Gulf . Israel and Iran are the heartlands of the region .
 The détente that Nixon and Kissinger developed with the Soviet Union bolstered that balance . It involved a joint commitment by the two superpowers to maintain stability in the region .
 Kissinger recognized that Washington had to address the Arab states’ demand for justice in the aftermath of the Six-Day War . The Arab states lost significant territory to Israel in the war .
 Neglecting to do so would threaten the legitimacy of the new Middle Eastern order, says the U.S. diplomat .
 He assumed that as long as the superpowers maintained an equilibrium in the regional balance of power, justice could be delayed . Nevertheless, he said that justice was delayed until the balance was restored .
 The Israeli prime minister badly miscalculated, as the outbreak of the 1973 Yom Kippur War demonstrated . The Israeli government was forced to withdraw from Israel in order to avoid further bloodshed .
 Kissinger relied on Israeli and U.S. intelligence assessments that Egypt would never risk war . In the lead-up to that conflict, Kissinger said Egypt would not risk war because Israel would defeat it .
 Kissinger ignored Nasser's successor, Anwar al-Sadat, when he warned repeatedly that he would go to war if Egypt’s aspirations to regain the territory it had lost were disregarded . That analysis led Kissinger to ignore Nasser”s successor .
 In 1973, Egypt invaded the Sinai Peninsula and Syria attempted to retake the Golan Heights on the holiest day on the Jewish calendar . Kissinger sprang into action with the confidence that his study of the nineteenth-century European order provided .
 His objective was to adjust the prewar arrangements in a way that the Middle East’s major players would view as more just and equitable . He wanted the arrangements to be more equitable and more just .
 He also wanted to position the United States to be the predominant manipulator of the competing forces in the region .
 Kissinger encouraged Israeli counteroffensives to back his diplomacy with force . Kissinger: Order before peace is order before peace .
 The Egyptian president demanded that Israel stop its assault on Israel . When that military pressure helped persuade the Egyptians and the Soviets to accept his cease-fire conditions, he called on Israel to pull back .
 In particular, he prevented the Israel Defense Forces from destroying the Egyptian Third Army, which had surrounded at the end of the war .
 Kissinger seized on the plasticKissinger $ peace process ity of the moment to launch his peace . Was designed to buy time process with the aim of keeping Eeypt . the largest and militarily most powerful 4 Arab state . from joining any future Arab war coalition .
 Israel and the Arab countries have been at odds for years over Israel-Arab relations . That would render another war between the two countries impossible .
 An unmistakable parallel exists between Kissinger’s approach to Egypt and the way that Metternich and Castlereagh handled France after Napoleon's defeat . Kissinger incorporated it into the new order rather than punishing it, thereby converting it from a revolutionary state into a status quo power .
 Kissinger would likely use a similar blueprint in dealing with Iran, the country that most clearly threatens what is left of his U.S.-led Mideast order . Kissinger would use the same blueprint to deal with Iran today . Kissinger: "Today, Iran is the country most clearly threatening
 President Obama would seek to persuade Iran to abandon its quest to export its revolution and instead return to more state-like behavior, he says . He would want Iran to return to a more stately state .
 Iran’s revolutionary impulses are contained and balanced by an alliance of Sunni states cooperating with Israel and the U.S. Washington should pursue a new equilibrium in which Iran's revolutionary impulses contain and balanced, says Peter Bergen .
 Kissinger believes the U.S. needs to act as the balancer, positioning itself closer to all the contending Middle Eastern powers than they are to one another . Kissinger: Once Iran decides to play by the rules, the United States needs to play as a balancer .
 Kissinger was operating in an environment of retrenchment, Kissinger was deeply aware of the dangers of overreach . Kissinger was aware of a potential for overreach in the world .
 Diplomacy: American statesmen rarely understand or respect the rules of the game that his conception of international order requires . And as he detailed in his monumental book Diplomacy, published in 1994, U.S. statesmen often don't respect that rule .
 Their idealism is often driven by a sense of divine providence, especially when it comes to the Middle East .
 They imagine that pursuing peace and nation building is not only desirable but achievable . The only problem is coming up with the right formula, they say .
 Herein lies the dilemma at the heart of U.S. diplomacy in the Middle East .
 Kissinger understood that the maintenance of order requires a credible effort to resolve the region's conflicts . But the scale of the statesman’s ambition can end up destabilizing that order, he says .
 Nixon’s first instinct was to work with the Soviet Union to impose peace on their recalcitrant Middle Eastern clients . Consider how Nixon's first instinct to try to get peace with the Soviets was to try and impose peace .
 Kissinger flew to Moscow to negotiate the terms of a cease-fire with the Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev . In the middle of the Yom Kippur War, Kissinger flew off to Moscow . Kissinger was a key figure in negotiations to end the war .
 This threatened to upend Kissinger’s more modest strategy for a cease-fire followed by direct Egyptian-Israeli negotiations . Kissinger's strategy was more modest than his more modest approach .
 Nixon sent this message just as he was ordering the firing of Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor . Nixon was able to do so because he was firing Cox just before Cox was fired . Cox was a special prosecutor for Watergate .
 The ensuing “Saturday Night Massacre” led coneressional leaders to initiate the impeachment of the president . Two top officials from the Justice Department resigned rather than carry out Nixon’s order . Nixon was impeached by the House of Representatives in 1973 .
 Kissinger was able to pursue his own priorities in the Middle East . Kissinger had all the attention on U.S. domestic politics, but focused on his priorities .
 When negotiations between Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin broke down in February 1975, Ford wanted to convene a conference in Geneva with the Soviet Union to impose a comprehensive peace settlement on Israel and Arab neighbors .
 Kissinger headed that initiative off in favor of a return to his shuttle diplomacy . His shuttle diplomacy brought Egypt and Israel closer to their eventual peace deal . Kissinger headed off that initiative with his return to diplomacy .
 U.S. presidents who came after Nixon and Ford also tended to pursue their idealistic objectives for the Middle East with insufficient concern for maintaining the regional order that Kissinger had established .
 President Jimmy Carter resurrected the idea of working with the Soviet Union in reconvening the Geneva Conference to impose a comprehensive peace . The Soviet Union would have been willing to work with President Carter .
 Sadat headed off the American president with his trip to Jerusalem in November 1977 . This time it was Sadat who headed off U.S. President George W. Bush .
 At Camp David a year later, Carter pursued a separate Egyptian-Israeli peace deal . The deal would have included a resolution of the Palestinian problem . Carter pursued the deal at Camp David instead of Camp David .
 Clinton acceded to Ehud Barak’s insistence on an attempt to reach a deal to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict at Camp David in July 2000 . Clinton abandoned the Kissingerian step-by-step process that Rabin had introduced in the Oslo accords .
 The Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat understood that Barak and Clinton intended to impose a final resolution on the Palestinians, and he refused to go along . Arafat: "The Palestinian leader understood that . He understood that [Barak] and [Clinton's] intention to impose] a
 The second Palestinian intifada was a violent conflagration that lasted for five years . It led to the deaths of thousands, and destroyed all trust between the two parties . It was a short step from there to the outbreak of the second Palestinian Intifada and the ensuing Israeli crackdown
 U.S. Presidents Barack Obama and Donald Trump would later both try and fail to produce conflict-ending agreements . Nevertheless, both presidents failed to reach a resolution of conflict .
 The result was a disaster, serving mostly to pave the way for an Iranian bid for dominance in Iraq and across the region . The result is a disaster for the Iraqi government, and for Iran .
 Bush shifted the U.S. objective in Afghanistan from counterterrorism to counterinsurgency . Bush also shifted the United States objective in the country from terrorism to nation building .
 Kissinger was determined to avoid overreaching in the Mideast . Kissinger was keen on avoiding overreach in the Middle East . He was determined not to overreach .
 There were several instances when his caution and skepticism led him to underreach . But there were also instances when he underreacted .
 President Joe Biden also faces in the Middle East now that he has ended the war in Afghanistan . That is the danger that he also faces . Biden faces the same danger as President Obama did in Afghanistan.
 Five days before he announced the expulsion, Kissinger had sent a message to Kissinger expressing his desire to dispatch a special envoy to Washington . Kissinger had expressed interest in sending an envoy to the White House .
 It would take seven months for Kissinger to arrange a meeting with Hafez Ismail, Sadat’s national security adviser . Kissinger would have to wait seven months to meet with Ismail .
 Egyptian envoy says his country is ready to move quickly, ahead of the other Arab states . He would even countenance an Israeli security presence remaining in Sinai provided that Israel recognized Egyptian sovereignty in the area .
 Ismail met Kissinger again in May but came away from the meeting believing that only a crisis would change Kissinger’s calculus . Ismail: "Only a crisis will change Kissinger's calculus"
 Kissinger had a more active response from Kissinger would have headed off the war . Kissinger's response to the war would have been more effective, but it's unknown .
 "What is clear is that he underreached because of his mistaken confidence in the stability of the equilibrium that he had established," he says . "What was clear was that he was underreaching because of the stability that he'd established"
 Israel launched direct negotiations to produce Israeli withdrawals from Arab territory after the war . That is why he resolved to address the justice deficit by launching direct negotiations .
 The PLo was then an irredentist nonstate actor deploying terrorist tactics in an effort to overthrow the Hashemite Kingdom in Jordan and replace the Jewish state . Justice for the Palestinians, however, was not on Kissinger’s agenda, because they were represented by the PL
 Jordan's role in addressing Palestinian claims was overlooked in 1974 . Jordan's president missed opportunity to promote Jordan in 1974 to address Palestinian claims . Jordan is Jordan's most populous Arab state .
 At the time, Jordan had a special relationship with the West Bank Palestinians, who were its citizens . Jordan has had a long-standing relationship with Palestinians .
 Hashemite Kingdom also had functioning government institutions, including a reliable army and an effective intelligence organization . Order Before Peace, Hashemites had functioning military and intelligence institutions .
 Jordan could have ensured the implementation of any agreement reached with Israel, as it has done with its own peace treaty obligations . Unlike the pLo, which entered the peace process in 1993 with no government institutions, Jordan has no such institutions .
 A confederation between a Palestinian state on the West Bank and the Hashemite Kingdom on the — East Bank could have evolved . And from there, a confederation could have emerged, a state of Palestine could have developed .
 Kissinger would to avoid overreaching in have had to pursue disengagement she Middle East agreement between Israel and Jordan after he concluded the agreements between Israel, Egypt and Israel and Syria . Kass Inger was determined to achieve that .
 King Hussein was eager to regain a foothold in the West Bank, and the Israelis were willing to engage and even show some flexibility . King Hussein wanted to recapture a foothold, and Israel showed flexibility .
 He encouraged Hussein to deal directly with the Israelis, which he did . The king did . Hussein encouraged him to do so .
 Kissinger warned the Israelis that if they didn't respond, they would end up having to deal with the pLo . Kissinger's prediction was a prescient prediction . Kissinger: If Israel didn't act, it would be a disaster .
 Israelis and Jordanians were unable to reach an agreement . Without U.S. engagement, the Israelis and the Jordanians would have been unable to come to a deal .
 Arab League declared the PLo “the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people’s people” in October 1974 . The Arab League put an end to the chance of resolving the Palestinian problem in a Jordanian context . In October 1974, at its summit in Rabat, Morocco
 He didn't view Jordan as a major player in the Middle East, and thought that meant he did not need to make diplomatic exertions on its behalf . Although he liked the king, he didn't think Jordan was a major Mideast player, he said .
 Egypt removed Egypt from conflict with Israel was his overriding strategic objective, he says . He devoted himself to a second Egyptian-Israeli agreement, instead of an agreement .
 Pursuing a Jordanian option would have interfered with that endeavor, would have possibly provoked conflict between Jordan and the PLo . The PLo would have brought up the question of who would control Jerusalem .
 Kissinger’s missteps and achievements can provide valuable lessons for Biden as he deals with the Middle East in the aftermath of the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan . Biden's Middle East experience can be valuable lessons, he says .
 The goal of Biden's Middle East diplomacy should be to shape an American-supported regional order in which the U.S. is no longer the dominant player, even as it remains the most influential .
 At its core, that order will need a balance of power maintained through U.S. support for its regional allies, namely Israel and the Sunni Arab states .
 Biden will also need to work with actors willing to play constructive roles in stabilizing the Middle Eastern order . Biden will need to also work with those willing to help stabilise the Middle East .
 Egypt’s Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in Gaza, with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep ‘ayyip Erdogan in Syria, with Saudi Arabia’S. bin Salman in the Gulf, and with all of them to contain Iran’�s
 "Few of these allies and partners will comport themselves according to U.S. values," says President Obama . "Few will ...comport themselves ... according to United States values"
 Kissinger’s experience in the Middle East demonstrates that the U.S. will need to promote a sufficient sense of justice and fairness to legitimize the emerging order . The United States needs to promote justice and fairness, Kissinger says .
 Promoting a peace process that ameliorates the IsraeltPalestinian conflict will be important in addressing the region’s grievances . Promoting the peace process will be an important part of the solution to the region's grievances .
 In 2014, as vice president, he witnessed firsthand the unwillingness of Israeli and Palestinian leaders alike to take reasonable risks for peace, he says . He does not imagine that he will find immortality by trying to force them to do so, he writes .
 Israel's left-right coalition government could not survive a peace process requiring establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, Bennett says . He accepts Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett’s argument that the government would not survive .
 Like Kissinger in 1974, he sees the Palestinian problem as Israel’s to deal with and will tend to brush aside any pressure to try to resolve it . And like Kissinger in the 1970s, he will often brush aside pressure to solve it .
 Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has lost all credibility among the Palestinian people . Hamas, with its doctrine of violent resistance, is gaining popularity . Mahmoud Abbas is losing credibility among Palestinian people, while Hamas is gaining popular .
 The Taliban victory in Afghanistan will boost Hamas’s argument that its strategy is the only way to liberate Palestinian territory . Hamas's Hamas strategy will boost its argument that it is only way of liberating Palestinian territory, the author says .
 For the first time, Israeli government is permitting Jewish prayer on what is known as the Temple Mount to Jews and Haram al-Sharif to Muslims . The move is a highly inflammatory move . Palestinian deaths from confrontations with the Israeli army are rising at an alarming rate .
 Even a jailbreak by six Palestinian prisoners in September risked sparking another uprising . The tinder is so dry that even a simple jailbreak could spark another uprising.
 For years, U.S. policymakers have warned that the IsraeliPalestinian status quo is unsustainable . Yet it seems to sustain itself, and yet it does .
 Experts cautioned against moving the U.S. embassy to Jerusalem, but when ‘Trump did it, nothing happened,’ they said .
 It feels just like the 1970s, when, for years, Sadat threatened war, and nothing happened . It feels like the '70s when, years before, nothing happened, until one day it did . "It feels like it's just like it did in the 70s
 Biden will need to encourage incremental Israeli-Palestinian peace process to rebuild trust . Kissinger did in his efforts to remove Egypt from the conflict with Israel .
 Bennett has proposed economic changes, such as permitting more Palestinians to work in Israel, as an initial step . Bennett proposes economic changes such as allowing more Palestinian work as a result .
 Moves such as that alone, however, will be insufficient to give credibility to a process that has been so denigrated by past failures, writes CNN.com.
 The effort requires a political process, too, albeit a modest and realistic one . It could include a long-term cease-fire in Gaza and transfer of some more territory in stages to full Palestinian control in the West Bank .
 In the aftermath of the pullout from Afghanistan, Biden is unlikely to overreach in the Mideast . Biden is likely to avoid overreach .
 Kissinger could tell him it would also be a mistake for him to turn his back on it, Kissinger could say . Kissinger could also tell him, but it would be also a mistake to turn it back on .
 Humanity’s continued addiction to fossil fuels and its voracious appetite for natural resources have led to runaway climate change, degradation of ecosystems, and ushered in the slow death of the world's oceans . Humanity's continued addiction has led to a slow death in the oceans, says the
 It is shocking that the multilateral system has failed to respond more forcefully and has instead merely tinkered at the margins . Given these risks, it is shocking it has not responded to the risks .
 U.S. and European Union have adopted measures to slow the pace of global warming . Nothing guarantees that they will adhere to those pledges . Such steps do little to encourage decarbonization in China, India, and other major emitters .
 These efforts also fail to address other facets of the looming catastrophe, not least collapsing biodiversity . These efforts are also failing to address the threat of collapsing biodiversity, says author .
 The natural world obeys no sovereign boundaries, and neither does the worsening ecological crisis . "The natural world obeyes no sovereign borders," says the author of the book .
 What the world needs is a paradigm shift in U.S. foreign policy and international relations . The world needs a shift that is rooted in ecological realism, says Stewart Patrick .
 The International Order Isn’t Ready for the Climate Crisis moves cooperation on shared environmental threats to center stage . FOREIGN AFFAIRS: International Order isn't Ready for Climate Crisis .
 All governments, starting with Washington, must designate the survival of the biosphere as a core national interest and a central objective of national and international security . The survival of a biosphere is a national security issue, says Washington .
 A shift to planetary politics will require a new understanding of the duties of sovereign states, says David Cameron . The shift will require serious commitments to sustainable development and investment, he says .
 World leaders will need to adopt a new ethic of environmental stewardship . World leaders need to expand their conceptions of sovereign obligations to include a responsibility to protect the global commons, says David Cameron .
 Governments, businesses, and communities will need to value and account for the earth's natural capital rather than taking it for granted and exploiting it to depletion . Governments must value the natural capital, rather than exploiting it, according to experts .
 National governments need to overhaul and strengthen the institutional and legal foundations for international environmental cooperation . Finally, national governments must also strengthen the legal and institutional framework for international cooperation .
 Any such effort will fall short unless Washington is in the vanguard . The U.S. is in a position to lead this charge, the author says . The United States should lead the effort .
 The devastating environmental impact of human activity is hardly a secret . It's not a secret. The devastating impact on human activity has hardly been a secret, scientists say .
 A parade of recent reports from groups such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the World Wide Fund for Nature document the scope of our assault on the planet . They portend a future of searing heat, raging wildfires, acidifying oceans, violent storms, rising seas, and
 Human activity has imperiled biodiversity as people despoil lands and waters, introduce invasive species, and harvest natural resources unsustainably . Meanwhile, human activity is imperiling biodiversity, as well as land and water .
 Extractive industries, such as agriculture, ranching, logging, and mining, have scarred the surface of the planet . In some places irreparably, some places have been scarred by the extractive industries .
 Every year, the world loses an area of tropical forest the size of Costa Rica . The world loses a tropical forest every year . The forest is the largest in the world .
 Some one million plant and animal species face near-term extinction . Today, some one million plants and animals face extinction. Today, around one million species face extinction .
 Hundreds of millions of people around the world face mounting food insecurity and a lack of reliable water supplies . Food insecurity is a major problem for many of them .
 Despite a declining fertility rate, the human population will not plateau until at least 2060 . The rise of aspiring middle classes around the world will add to the ecological strains .
 As we plunder the planet, we risk rendering it uninhabitable—a crisis that cries out for global solidarity and collective action . The world is at risk of turning it into a wasteland .
 Most countries continue to treat ecological challenges as second-tier foreign policy priorities . Yet most countries still treat them as second tier foreign policy issues, such as geopolitical competition and arms control .
 The fate of the planet largely depends on a hodgepodge of uncoordinated national pledges driven by short-term domestic political and economic considerations . The world's fate depends on the pledges made by national pledges, says David Frum .
 The global environmental crisis requires a new statecraft built around the proposition that every other state concern—from national security to economic growth—depends on a healthy, stable biosphere . National security, economic growth, national security and economic growth depend on a stable biospheric environment .
 This revitalized framework would not jettison the core concept of national interest . It would broaden it to include environmental security and conservation . This would be the first time the U.S. has expanded the concept of environmental security to conservation .
 Foreign policy traditionalists may recoil at such a reframing, worried about distracting diplomats from the threats that have directly affected the survival of states throughout most of history .
 Biden declared climate change to be a top-tier threat to the United States . He directed federal agencies to lead an unprecedented, whole-of-government response to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
 It must simultaneously collaborate with foreign partners on a multilateral response to slow and reverse environmental collapse . The U.S. must also work with partners in the region on a multi-nation response to environmental collapse, experts say .
 If the U.S. is serious about spearheading the global response to the planet’s ecological emergency, it should start by working with other countries to remold traditional concepts of sovereignty . What's MINE is YOURS.
 Washington can begin this process by explicitly endorsing the idea that countries have a responsibility to protect the earth . The U.S. should not engage in any activity that might fundamentally alter or damage environmental systems .
 No such consensus exists today, as demonstrated by the row that erupted between Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro and French President Emmanuel Macron in 2019 .
 According to Bolsonaro, Brazil has an absolute right to develop the Amazon as it sees fit . Brazil has a right to the Amazon to develop as it wants, Bolsonar says . Brazil's new president says he will not rule out developing the Amazon .
 Macron retorts that all of humanity has a stake in the rainforest’s survival . Macron retorted that all . humanity has an interest in rainforest's survival .
 Brazil is an indispensable carbon sink, irreplaceable oxygen source, and precious repository of plant and animal life . The world is a stakeholder, not a bystander, and cannot remain silent as Brazil despoils this vital carbon sink .
 More leaders and societies must come to accept Macron’s view and reject that of Bolsonaro . More leaders must accept Macron's view, and reject Bolsonararo's proposal .
 Territorial sovereignty should not constitute a blank check to plunder collective resources, says the U.N. State of the Union . The U.U.S. government should not be able to plunder its own territory, it says .
 As all the member states of the United Nations agreed at the World Summit in 2005, for instance, governments have a responsibility to protect their inhabitants from mass atrocities . Governments have a duty of protecting their inhabitants, the U.N. says .
 If they fail to do so, they may forfeit the right to avoid foreign intervention . The U.S. has a right to not engage in foreign intervention in the Middle East .
 The twin crises of climate change and collapsing biodiversity warrant a similar adjustment . Climate change and collapse biodiversity need to be dealt with, say experts .
 Under an existing international principle known as “the no-harm rule,’ sovereign states already have a general obligation not to damage the environment in areas beyond their jurisdiction .
 These questions are becoming trickier as potential sources of damage become more complex, experts say . "These questions are getting trickier," they say .
 As the planet’s ecological emergency deepens, countries must expand the definition of the global commons to include all critical ecosystems and natural cycles . The global commons is shared resources managed as part of humanity's common heritage . We need to expand it to include natural ecosystems and ecosystems .
 They must agree to forswear all activities that threaten the integrity of the biosphere, open themselves up to external scrutiny . allow others to monitor and verify their compliance, and face sanctions and other penalties if they violate this commitment .
 Protecting the expanded commons will require putting a price on nature . Protecting this expanded commons may require putting an end to the use of nature .
 For too long, humans have invested in produced capital and human capital while running down the natural capital that sustains life and provides the foundation for all prosperity . Human capital is produced capital, human capital (education, health care) and produced capital .
 We have taken the natural world for granted and assumed that The natural world obeys n0 technological innovation and market sovereignity . We have assumed that technological innovation would free us from the resource constraints of a finite planet .
 According to the UN Environment Program, the planet’s total stock of natural capital has declined by 40 percent on a per capita basis since 1992 . The UN says natural capital stocks in the world have declined by about 40 percent since 1992.
 Reversing this trend will require reworking the current understanding of wealth to include the value of the world’s natural assets and the myriad benefits they provide .
 In January 2020, the World Economic Forum estimated that over half of global output—$44 trillion per year—is highly or moderately dependent on benefits from nature that are increasingly in jeopardy . Over half of the global output is highly or moderate dependent on the benefits of nature .
 Another study, published in 2014, has placed the total annual value of the planet’s ecosystem services at between $125 trillion and $145 trillion . The value of ecosystem services, such as water filtration, nutrient cycling, pollination and pollination, is between between $
 Most environmentalists resist placing a monetary value on nature, citing its intrinsic worth . Most environmentalists, however, say nature's intrinsic worth is worth .
 Failure to take ecosystem services for granted encourages firms to exploit them to exhaustion . But failing to do so encourages firms and individuals to take ecosystems for granted, it will be exploited .
 Gpp, the conventional measure of wealth and progress, does not account for natural capital, making it a poor indicator of well-being and long-term productive capacity . A related problem is the fact that Gpp does not include natural capital . Gpp is a poor measure of well
 The international community must work to develop metrics that can account for environmental assets . International community must also develop metrics to account for assets, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Approximately 89 countries, including all the members of the Eu, have released natural capital accounts . The accounts are intended to keep track of such assets and promote transparency .
 Governments devote only $68 billion annually to global conservation and sustainability . That's about what citizens spend every year on ice cream . By contrast, governments spend $68billion annually on conservation and conservation .
 National authorities can also use taxes and fees to ensure that the prices of goods and services accurately capture the social value of the natural assets involved in their production .
 Measures such as catch share schemes can effectively combat overfishing . Catch share schemes, whereby communities have a secure right to harvest a capped number of fish in a specific area .
 A robust framework for natural capital accounting could also justify compensating developing countries rich in biodiversity, such as Bolivia and Indonesia, to protect or restore local ecosystems .
 There are small-scale precedents for this kind of investment . Authorities pay landowners to preserve watersheds or give tax breaks to farmers who plant carbon-sequestering crops .
 The global financial system must also play a bigger role in environmental stewardship . Global financial system needs to play a larger role in environment stewardship, says Simon Tisdall .
 Some national financial regulators are moving toward mandating corporate disclosures of exposure to climate risks . The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is moving to mandating such disclosures .
 International financial institutions encourage partner governments to inventory their natural capital assets and adopt policies and laws to protect them . International Monetary Fund and the World Bank now encourage partner countries to inventory and protect these assets .
 BlackRock, Goldman Sachs, and other major players have pledged to integrate sustainability into their investment decisions .
 Environmental advocacy organizations can hold companies accountable by exposing hollow commitments . Consumer boycotts and other forms of civic activism can persuade them that harming nature is a threat to their bottom lines .
 Planetary politics cannot succeed without multilateral institutions and global governance . Multilateral institutions can foster the unprecedented international cooperation demanded by the intertwined climate and biodiversity crises . Planetary politics can succeed without international cooperation, says the author .
 The UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change envisions catastrophic warming unless the world takes immediate, dramatic steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . There is no conceivable way for the world to meet the emission targets established by the un’s 2015 Paris climate accord, however .
 Governments should make expanding carbon sinks a centerpiece of their contributions to the Paris goals . Governments should expand such carbon sinks as part of their contribution to the climate goals, says David Cameron .
 One path forward would be to reform global trade rules to allow countries committed to decarbonization to discriminate against countries that insist on conducting business as usual, without running afoul .
 The most effective solution would be for wTo members to adopt a blanket climate waiver that permits socalled border adjustments for carbon in the form of taxes on imports and rebates on exports .
 Eu countries would be able to penalize imports of carbon-intensive cement from Russia and Turkey . This would allow them to reward other trading partners that use greener production methods .
 Such an arrangement would encourage the formation of ‘climate clubs,” made up of countries committed to reducing emissions . Such clubs would be eligible for nondiscriminatory treatment, the authors say .
 Poor countries need the backing of international partners to come up with policies and incentive structures that will encourage private actors and communities to conserve nature . Poor countries must also have policies and incentives to help conserve nature, say experts .
 Extractive industries often damage ecosystems of developing nations that rely on the export of primary goods and have weak environmental regulations . Extractives industries, such as timber and mining, often damage the ecosystems of countries with weak environmental laws .
 Countries should strengthen the international legal framework for biodiversity conservation, particularly the Convention on Biological Diversity . Simultaneously, countries should strengthen their legal framework, particularly, to protect biodiversity .
 The treaty has failed to slow the loss of ecosystems and species, but some hope is on the horizon . Some hope is that the treaty will save the species from extinction .
 In late 2020, Costa Rica and France established an intergovernmental group known as the High Ambition Coalition for Nature and People . The group seeks to permanently protect 30 percent of the planet’s terrestrial and marine surface by 2030 .
 Scores of governments have committed to the so-called 30x30 target . The target is slated for approval at the cBp’s conference in the spring of 2022 . It is slated to be approved at the conference in spring of this year's conference .
 The Biden administration has already embraced 30x30 as a domestic goal . There is no reason why it should not join the global campaign .
 The CBD should be submitted to the United States Senate for its advice and consent . It should also end the U.S. outlier status as the only country in the world that has refused to ratify the CBD .
 The Biden administration should also work to engineer the successful conclusion of a UN high seas biodiversity convention, which 1s currently in the final stages of negotiation .
 The high seas are a remarkable source of biodiversity and protect humanity from the worst effects of climate change by absorbing enormous amounts of heat and carbon dioxide . High seas are also a source of vital biodiversity and are a great source of carbon dioxide and heat from the sea .
 The International Order Isn’t Ready for the Climate Crisis dramatically, as new technologies permit their unprecedented exploitation and a patchwork of regulations fail to protect them . But their health is declining .
 Washington is well placed to broker agreements on new rules to govern marine protected areas, environmental impact assessments, and the sharing of benefits from marine genetic resources .
 The U.S. should throw its support behind the Global Pact for the Environment . The pact would help bring coherence to the fragmented legal order of environmental protections . It has been the subject of UN discussions since 2018 .
 There is no overarching international legal framework or organization governing global environmental matters . In contrast to the global trading system, the wro has pride of place as a rule-setter .
 Hundreds of overlapping and conflicting multilateral treaties promote cooperation on specific issues, such as endangered species and hazardous waste . Instead of tackling environmental concerns one at a time, environmental concerns could be effectively tackled one at one time, experts say .
 The Global Pact would codify a sovereign obligation to ensure that state and private actions do not harm other countries or the global commons . It would establish a fundamental human right to aclean and healthy environment .
 The pact would elevate prevention and provide a measure of restorative justice . It would endorse the principle that polluters should pay for environmental degradation . Polluters should be paid for environmental damage, it says .
 Convention would include provisions for periodic reporting, establish rules for liability, and provide mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of transboundary environmental disputes . To hold governments accountable, the convention would include periodic reporting .
 multilateral negotiations on the pact collapsed in the spring of 2019, thanks in part to opposition from the ‘Trump administration’ Despite overwhelming international support, multilateral talks on the deal collapsed .
 The Biden administration should disavow its predecessor’s position and join efforts to negotiate a nonbinding political declaration on the global environment as a prelude to an eventual global pact . Biden administration must disavow predecessor's position .
 The cBD, a high seas convention, and the Global Pact are among the issues standing in the way of U.S. ratification of the cBD . The Global Pact would be ratified by the United States in the U.N.
 The Biden administration should seize this moment to help shape the evolving legal framework of international environmental cooperation . The experience of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which the U.S. championed and now mostly treats as customary international law, is encouraging .
 The global ecological emergency is the greatest collective-action challenge we have ever faced . We need to bridge the gap between the two sides of the divide .
 Bringing humanity back into balance with the biosphere will require a fundamental shift in how the polltics and purposes of foreign policy are conceived . The U.S. needs to be able to bring humanity back to balance with biosphere .
 The first map, a geophysical one, captures the world in its natural state, revealing a startling array of biomes and ecosystems . Rainforests and savannas, steppes and taigas, mountains and glaciers, river valleys and deserts, icecaps and tund
 The second map, a geopolitical one, depicts the earth’s terrestrial surface carved into independent territorial units indicated by precise lines, each colored distinctly from its neighbors . The map was created by the Swiss Institute of Geology for Geology .
 National sovereignty is not going anywhere, but a new international approach could help close the distance between the political and the natural world . National sovereignty will not be going anywhere in the U.S.
 If a crisis of this magnitude cannot reshape how countries formulate their national interests, definitions of international security, or approaches to the global economy, perhaps nothing will . Perhaps nothing will change the way countries formulate national interests .
 It cries out, instead, for a commitment to our role as stewards of the only planet we have, it cries out .
 With the New Deal, Washington took the unprecedented step of creating new industries and millions of jobs . Washington took an unprecedented step to create new industries, millions of new jobs .
 This spending rescued countless Americans from poverty and ultimately fueled the remarkable postwar economic boom . This spending saved countless from poverty, ultimately fueled a remarkable postwar boom .
 By the 1980s, a new bipartisan consensus had taken hold, one that saw small government and low taxes as the key to economic prosperity . By the 1990s, it had become a bipartisan consensus that saw low taxes and small government .
 In 1941, Roosevelt declared that every American deserved “freedom from want” and that it was the government’s responsibility to lead the way . Roosevelt declared in 1941, "Every American deserved freedom from want"
 Nicholas Wapshott’s new book, Samuelson Friedman, tells the story of the victory of 1980s free-market libertarianism over the midcentury welfare state . FELICIA WONG is President and CEO of the Roosevelt Institute .
 Samuelson was a Keynesian, best known for his work on the so-called neoclassical synthesis . He advocated a measure of government intervention in the economy . The Keynesian was known for advocating government intervention .
 Friedman was a one-time New Dealer who by the 1950s had become perhaps the most pugilistic and passionate libertarian libertarian of his day . Friedman, by contrast, was a former New Dealer .
 Amid a global pandemic, there is much to learn from the SamuelsonFriedman saga . There are lessons to be learned from the case, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As in the 1960s and 1970s, assumptions of a previous era are falling away . Today, as in the 60s and 70s, the assumptions of an earlier era have fallen away .
 The smallgovernment, low-tax economy that Friedman and others imagined and brought into being is finally slipping from power . Friedman: The small government, low tax economy that he imagined and others brought in being is losing power . He says it's a sign that the small government is no longer
 Experts from across the political spectrum are increasingly admitting that these assumptions have proved false . The American public is questioning old beliefs that markets are best when they are free and governments are small . The U.S. public is increasingly questioning these assumptions .
 With these deeply held convictions under assault, leaders have a crucial opportunity to design a more equitable economy . Leaders have a chance to design an economy that is more equitable than any other .
 Wapshott begins his book in the mid1960s, with the story of Newsweek editor Osborn Elliott’s quest for new columnists who could outshine the magazine's stodgy rival Time .
 Perhaps great economists commenting on the news of the day would appeal to his younger audience . Perhaps he would like to have a younger audience listening to his stories .
 Elliott felt lucky to secure Samuelson, the greatest theoretical economist of his time . Elliott felt fortunate to secure the Nobel Prize for the best theoretical economist .
 He was also the author of what has become the best-selling economics textbook of all time . Economics was first published in 1948 and titled simply Economics .
 Samuelson was seduced by the idea of reaching Newsweek's 14 million weekly readers . He had been made a full professor at the Massachusetts Institute of ‘Technology at the age of 32 .
 Samuelson and Friedman joined Newsweek in 1966 and wrote for the magazine until the early 1980s . The two men wrote for Newsweek until the 1980s.
 Throughout their tenure, both thinkers covered the central economic debates of the time . They covered the appropriate level of taxation and the role of the Federal Reserve .
 The two fundamentally disagreed over central elements of economic theory . Wapshott: Market Prophets a market system could regulate itself without external intervention .
 Friedman believed that his unfettered version of capitalism, free from nearly all forms of government interference, was synonymous with both economic and political freedom . Friedman: "I believe that capitalism is synonymous with freedom"
 Samuelson Friedman subscribes to the ereat man theory of intellectual history . Friedman: "Ereat Man theory" is a theory of history .
 In Wapshott’s narrative, the two economists represent almost the entirety of the debate between Keynesianism and monetarism . Keynesianists are shorthand for active government management of the economy through fiscal policy . monetarists are libertarians who say central banks and the money
 The intellectual networks to which Samuelson and Friedman belonged get short shrift . Friedman: "The intellectual networks" are getting short-shift. The networks' intellectual networks are being ignored .
 Friedman, along with Friedrich Hayek, Ludwig von Mises, Karl Popper, and others, was a founder of the Mont Pelerin Society . Hayek and others developed and propagated the idea of neoliberalism . Friedman, for instance, was one of the founders of the
 Such networks provide vital intellectual, social, and political support to their members, helping their ideas gain acceptance and legitimacy . Such networks are vital intellectual and social support for members of society .
 Samuelson and Friedman wrote a book about the Nobel Peace Prize winner's work on the idea of the Nobel Prize for Peace .
 The larger problem is that Wapshott fails to give readers a sense of the times, he says . He says he's trying to get readers to understand the modern world .
 Many middleclass white Americans rejected Samuelson's vision of federal government intervention in favor of Friedman's simple and well-ordered system of free enterprise . The resulting chaos led many middleclass whites to reject government intervention .
 Much of the anxiety stemming from the changes crystallized in 1964, when the Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater ran on an anticommunist, economically conservative platform, opposing the welfare state and the Civil Rights Act .
 Goldwater cast federal civil rights laws as yet another instance of unjust state interference in private affairs . Goldwater directly linked Friedman’s smallgovernment ideas to white southern opposition to desegregation .
 By the end of the 1960s, the civil rights movement had also begun to explicitly link race and economics, but in the opposite direction . The movement was also explicitly linked to race and economic issues .
 The 1960s and 1970s pitted Samuelson's New Deal-era vision of government vs. Friedman's business-focused worldview . Friedman’s business-oriented worldview during an era of intense social upheaval . The New Deal era was a period of intense political upheaval .
 According to that version, the right political, moral, and economic answer was wherever supply met demand . That's according to the version of the story . The answer is wherever supply meets demand .
 The theory’s monetarism was similarly elegant and apolitical . The policy of using the money supply to influence the whole economy instead of relying on complicated legislative decisions around taxing .
 The inflation of the 1970s remains a cautionary tale that still animates U.S. politics . The inflation was a major factor in American politics in the 1980s .
 conventional wisdom holds that the inability of Keynesianism to explain so-called stagflation was the major reason for Samuelson's fall and Friedman's rise . David Frum argues that the failure to explain stagflation, a period of paradoxically low growth and high inflation, was the
 Inflation averaged about seven percent annually throughout the decade . Inflation was not supposed to be possible if unemployment was high and growth sluggish . Unemployment was high, growth sluggish and inflation was low .
 Otherwise, too much money would chase after too few goods, causing prices to rise even more . Otherwise, prices would rise even further .
 Wapshott’s narrative is strongest here, revealing just how complicated and long running the inflation debates of the 1970s were . The inflation debate is the subject of a new book, "Inflation of the 70s"
 Samuelson and Friedman argued about whether stagflation was caused by high wages propped up by union contracts, the costs of the ongoing Vietnam War, or shocks to global supply of oil .
 The causes of the inflation of the 1970s remain the subject of fierce debate . Even today, the causes of inflation remain a subject of debate .
 The solution to inflation was to raise taxes and maintain high levels of public spending . Samuelson's proposal was remarkable for contemporary economists accustomed to thinking of interest rates as the only inflation cure .
 Friedman, for his part, continued to advocate a combination of lower public spending and careful control over the money supply . Friedman: Lower public spending, careful control of money supply is necessary .
 By the early 1980s, Samuelson’s argument for greater spending had lost . By the mid-1980s, the argument for more spending was lost .
 Sharply higher interest rates and a focus on inflation rather than employment became the order of the day . Sharply high interest rates were the reason for the increase in interest rates . The central bank's focus was on inflation, not employment .
 Ronald Reagan built his political career on a false, racially coded campaign against so-called welfare queens . Reagan won the presidency on a Friedman-inspired promise to cut taxes and cut taxes . Reagan's campaign against welfare queens was based on a stereotype of Black single mothers raking in government checks
 Once in office, he cut taxes on the wealthy (while raising them for working people) and fought against trade unions . He also fired striking air traffic controllers, firing striking striking air controllers .
 The postwar Keynesian welfare state was dead, at least in the U.S. The welfare state is dead, the author says . It's a sign that the welfare state isn't coming back to life in the United States .
 Friedman called Volcker’s 20 percent rate increase “monetarism lite,’ had long advocated steady and algorithmically determined changes in the money supply, with no discretion left to the Federal Reserve chair .
 Simple theories, where simplicity itself is the virtue and the appeal, are rarely easy to implement . But simple theories, such as simplicity itself, are often difficult to implement, say experts . Simple theories are often hard to implement.
 Even the highest of economic priests bitterly disagree, constrained by their own prior assumptions . Even the most powerful in the world, they disagree with their own assumptions .
 The rupture that broke Keynesianism and brought Reaganomics to power took more than a decade . It is easy to reduce to a simple clash of economic titans the rupture was the rupture . The rupture was not simple but it was a rupture in the 1980s .
 Today’s economic paradigm shift has also taken place over time, having begun long before the emergence of covip-19, Wapshott documents .
 Understanding the current upheaval means examining the policy failures that led to the 2008 financial crisis and the subsequent recession . Understanding this is important to understand the current financial crisis, the author says .
 Americans’ veneration of private capital faltered with the collapse of the financial giants Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers . The collapse of these financial giants led to a sharp decline in private capital wealth .
 Everyday people quickly came to believe that these institutions no longer had their best interests at heart . Everyday people came to think that they had the best interests of the country .
 According to Gallup polling, public confidence in the banking system dropped from 53 percent in 2004 to 22 percent 1n 2009 . Public confidence in banking system has never recovered, according to poll .
 COvID-19 economic recovery plan is “quite different” from previous ones . Brian Deese, the director of the Biden administration’s National Economic Council, has made it clear that the plan is different from previous plans .
 The American Rescue Plan prioritizes providing funds directly to unemployed Americans and struggling states and cities . The stimulus package was passed by Congress in March .
 This new paradigm is notably more complicated than Friedman's monetarism . Friedman's monetary policy is now more complex than his monetary policy .
 Most mainstream economists reject the idea of money in circulation . Most reject it for its relentless focus on the amount of money that is in circulation.
 The emerging framework is about encouraging the federal government to play various roles meant to promote the health of the U.S. economy and society . Instead, it's about encouraging federal government roles to promote health .
 Public institutions, advocates argue, should make and enforce strict rules to prevent corporate monopolies, invest in green energy, and spend more on health care, childcare, and education .
 Government should also seek to close racial gaps in wages, wealth, housing, education, health, and other areas . Government should deliberately seek to do so to close gaps in wage and wealth gaps .
 The $4 trillion allocated for the caREs Act and the American Rescue Plan includes an unprecedented amount of government support for low-income and working-class Americans, parents with young children .
 Although the relief is temporary, it kept the worst effects of the recent economic downturn at bay in ways that were unthinkable only a few years ago . The relief has been temporary .
 The pandemic may be the final nail in Friedmanomics’s coffin, but a durable world of higher taxes and government management of the economy has yet to emerge . Samuelson might have recognized and even embraced a new world of government management, he says .
 Whether this new paradigm takes root the way Keynesianism did in the 1940s or Friedmanesque market fundamentalism in the 1980s will depend on many factors, including whether it takes root .
 A small but powerful group of climatedenying politicians might continue to bury their heads in the sand about the immediate need to cut carbon emissions . The U.S. Senate will hold a hearing on the issue on Tuesday .
 The government’s talent pipeline and institutional resilience might not be sufficient to implement the ambitious programs currently under consideration . The government may not be enough to implement ambitious programs .
 The government itself might be unable to regain the trust of Americans . Americans may be suspicious and distrustful of federal action .
 If U.S. leaders persevere, this model will open up vast new social and political possibilities . The model is a model for the future, but it could open new social possibilities, experts say .
 International economic cooperation might aspire to solve genuine public problems, such as tax evasion or the lack of pandemic preparedness, rather than merely lower trade barriers for multinational corporations . Market Prophets international tax evasion and pandemic .
 More working-class Americans might finally have access to economic security rather than living paycheck-to-paycheck . Working-class may finally have economic security .
 Washington could incentivize a transition to a low-carbon economy in time to stave off the worst effects of climate change . Washington could be incentivized to encourage a transition .
 The U.S. might become a country whose idea of freedom is not primarily based on market transactions but instead built on the promise of a more egalitarian and democratic future . And perhaps most important, the United States might also become a nation that's not just about money transactions .
 July, two of South Africa’s largest cities— Johannesburg and Durban— descended into civil unrest and mass looting . Johannesburg was the scene of mass looting and civil unrest in July 2013 .
 For almost five days, I worried about my family as I watched television and social media footage of people breaking into shops and raiding them for food and other basic items . For nearly five days people were unable to find food and basic supplies .
 I live in Australia, but my relatives are split between the areas hardest hit by the unrest . I'm not sure if my relatives will be able to live together in Australia or Australia .
 Panic buying caused food shortages, and news of looting set off class anxieties . Even in places that were unaffected by the violence, panic buying caused shortages .
 When you live in a society as unequal as South Africa, the sense that the country might explode at any minute is palpable . South Africa's inequality is always palpable, and the sense of the country's vulnerability is palpable in South Africa .
 SISONKE MSIMANG is the author of The Resurrection of Winnie Mandela . In the midst of the chaos, a short video of a tiny boy, aged eight or nine, is shown of Mandela .
 He was stopped by two women as he walked out of a shop that had just been looted . He had been stopped by both strangers expressing motherly concern .
 The women asked the boy what he had taken, and he held up a small plastic bag for inspection . He held up the bag for their inspection .
 He had been heartbreakingly frugal, taking only what his conscience would allow . He had taken only what he would allow. He had to take what he could afford .
 Visibly moved, the women sent him on his way, his little frame disappearing into the darkness . The women were visibly moved .
 The turmoil reflected the stark inequality that has long divided the country, and it laid bare the economic precariousness that characterizes most people's lives . Driven by the sudden availability of items that are unaffordable for most people .
 People took what they could as quickly as they could, sometimes trampling others . People trampled others in the process, trampling them .
 Instead of a revolution, the week turned into a large-scale grab for goods . Instead of revolution, it was a grab for the goods . The week was a week of chaos, but not a revolution .
 It was easy to see these events as a metaphor for the rampant corruption that has come to define South African politics . South Africa's corruption has become a symbol for rampant corruption, says CNN.com .
 The country’s democracy is not on the brink of failure, as some Western commentators have opined . Some Western commentators opined. The country's democracy isn't on the verge of failure. It is not a failure, it is a failure.
 South Africa has regular free and fair elections, a noisy public sphere, an independent judiciary, and sophisticated media . All of which remain intact . South Africa's free elections and noisy public spheres remain intact, says David Cameron .
 ANC has failed to meaningfully improve the lives of most South Africans, even as many within its ranks have grown rich . Yet the ANC has not been able to improve the country's lives, even though it has grown rich.
 Many South Africans have been left wondering when they will ever get economic justice . And so decades after attaining political freedom, many South Africans are left wondering if they'll ever get justice .
 South Africa's multiracial, left-wing government has failed to transform the apartheid economy . This paradox is the subject of Steven Friedman’s new book, Prisoners of the Past . South Africa has been elected again and again with an overwhelming majority and a strong mandate for change
 Friedman writes with the nuance and insight of an insider . Friedman is a well-known South African columnist and academic .
 The post-apartheid order established in 1994 suffers from many of the same problems as the old order it sought to replace . His answer is that the new order is not the same old order that was set up .
 The strength of Prisoners of the Past is its insistence that even though South Africa is exhibiting many morbid symptoms, the country’s real problem is that the old is not dying . South Africa's real problem, according to the book, is that it's not dying. Prisoners
 Friedman examines the resilience of apartheid South Africa . Friedman examines how the old order has repeatedly prevented the new one from delivering on its promises of racial justice .
 Nelson Mandela's brand of charm is known as “Madiba magic’s” an affectionate nod to his clan name . Nelson Mandela emerged from prison in 1990, people began to refer to him as ‘Madiba Magic’
 Mandela believed he could conjure the nation’s freedom out of thin air . The phrase reflected a collective belief that Mandela was able to conjure South Africa's freedom . Mandela died in 1994 at the age of 94 .
 To a large extent, the aANc has kept its promises to white South Africans even as it has broken many of its pledges to the country’s Black people .
 Mandela calmed the nation, urging restless Black youths not to retaliate against white people . Mandela: "We are not going to go to war" Mandela urged young people not to attack white people in South Africa .
 The political settlement its leaders negotiated with de Klerk’s government prioritized moving on . At the time, it seemed like a prerequisite for peace . And so the political settlement was a priority for the country's future .
 Ramose says the decision to wipe the slate clean conflicted with the tenets of African philosophy . The Sotho proverb holds that debts do not expire with the passage of time and can be resolved only through redress and restoration . Ramose: "Molato ga o bole" is
 Friedman rejects these views, which root the current crisis in legal strictures, arguing that the fault lies neither with the constitution nor with the negotiations that produced it . Friedman: The fault lies not with constitution nor the negotiations which produced it, but with negotiations that made it .
 Friedman spends considerable time examining how elites have guided South Africa’s economic trajectory . Friedman: South Africa's economic trajectory has been guided by elites .
 In the 1990s, the white political elite maintained its grip on the economy even as it lost political power by accommodating a small number of new Black businesspeople . In the 90s, he recounts, he says, "The white power was maintained even though it was losing power"
 Predictably, these new Black economic elites were closely aligned with the anc.c. The new Black . economic . elites are closely aligned . with the . ancreditors of the Black .
 ANC leaders were the only Black people with whom white elites had had previous professional interactions . And when the ANC passed new affirmative action laws mandating that all large financial transactions include partnerships with Black-owned firms .
 Cyril Ramaphosa was the ANC’s chief negotiator during the transition to democracy . He led the team that drafted the new constitution, and now serves as South Africa's president . He acted as the ANC's chief negotiator and led the drafting of the constitution .
 Ramaphosa worked closely with members of the old white guard in the early 1990s . He was able to convert his political networks into lucrative financial relationships within a few years of entering the private sector in 1996 . He has been in the public sector since 1996 .
 Forbes has estimated that by 2015, his net worth had soared to $450 million . Forbes estimates that by that time, he had a net worth of more than $500 million .
 As Friedman points out, the current president cannot be compared with the rapacious European settlers who arrived in the Cape of Good Hope in the mid-seventeenth century . He says his stratospheric ascent was enabled by the same patronage and corruption that elevated the previous era's elites .
 Jan van Riebeeck was the founding father of South Africa's Afrikaner community . He was sent to the Cape by the Dutch East India Company in 1652 after being found guilty of abusing his position .
 Cecil Rhodes was forced to resign as prime minister of the Cape Colony over allegations that he gave a government catering contract to a friend . More than two centuries later, the mining magnate Cecil Rhodes faced allegations of corruption .
 By the 1980s, the apartheid regime had effectively elevated corruption to state policy . Friedman explains how the South African government was able to effectively elevate corruption to policy .
 Members of the white economic elite sought to cultivate personal bonds of criminality with new political leaders . It came as little surprise then that when the ANC took office, members of the elite sought out criminality with them .
 In mapping this lineage of elite corruption, Friedman charts the continuities between the old order and the new . Friedman illustrates the powerful ways in which path dependence has warped the country’s economy .
 At times, Friedman depicts path dependence as an inevitable and seemingly unwitting process . At times it is the outcome of the march of history rather than of deliberate contestation . Friedman: "Path dependence is an inevitable process"
 There is nothing accidental about the economic approach taken by the anc.c. Yet there was nothing accidental, it was not an accident .
 At other times, Friedman overstates the nefarious intentions of Black elites . Friedman overstated the intentions of the Black elites, Friedman says .
 The notion that the new Black leaders simply weren't interested in changing the status quo is an oversimplification . Elites may have converged on a similar set of objectives over time, but the notion that they were simply not interested is oversimplified .
 In order to escape apartheid, Black South Africans had to promise not to seek full compensation and redress . Black South Africa had to have a promise not seeking full compensation .
 Their aim was to build a strong Black middle class that would drive economic growth . The aim was the build-up of a strong black middle class, they say .
 Friedman describes the path dependence that Friedman describes describes . But partly because of this dependence, Friedman says, this goal was never realized .
 Instead, the middle class grew painfully slowly, and eventually, it stopped growing altogether . The middle class actually grew slowly, but it didn't grow as fast as it did .
 As overall economic growth has stagnated and unemployment has remained stubbornly high in recent years, the new middle class has grown restless . As overall growth stagnates and unemployment remains high, the middle class is restless .
 Poor South Africans, who constitute a much greater share of the population, seldom articulate their demands in purely racial terms . Poor South Africa, however, rarely articulate demands in terms of race, rather than race .
 Middle-class narratives of racial injustice continue to dominate because of South Africa's history . South Africa has a history of racial inequality in its history .
 Friedman shows how whereas the middle class and the elite have a stake in the economy, the lower classes are excluded from the formal economy altogether . Friedman: The lower classes, especially the unemployed, have been excluded from formal economy .
 South Africa is only slightly more racially integrated than it was before the end of apartheid . The country is even more economically unequal than before apartheid ended .
 B Du Bois argued that the problem of the twentieth century would be the color line . The color line is the issue of the century, he said .
 South Africans have begun to understand that while the color line still matters, the poverty line has become more salient as the country has been dominated by a new multiracial group of economic insiders .
 South Africans must once again sit across the table from one another to negotiate a new deal . Not a political deal, as they negotiated in the 1990s, but an economic one, to ensure the country’s How Apartheid Endures riches are shared more evenly among its poorest citizens
 Still, cynicism has no place in South Africa's future; its people simply cannot afford it . South Africa is not ready for cynicism, but its people are desperate for its future .
 Friedman’s call for a new economic pact might feel distant, but for the excluded majority, it is a tantalizing possibility . Friedman's call for an economic pact with the U.S. is not a distant possibility .
 Thanks to the First Amendment, they can mostly do so with impunity . The First Amendment allows them to do so without fearing that the government will punish them .
 In most contexts, the First Amendment prohibits the government from restricting speech because of its message . In most cases, the government cannot restrict speech because it conveys a message . The First Amendment does not prohibit speech being restricted because of message .
 It precludes the government from criminalizing falsehoods that don’t cause serious harm, it says . The government should not criminalize falsehoods, it argues .
 Americans enjoy broad freedom to say things that aren't true . As a result, Americans enjoy freedom to speak freely in the U.S. as a result .
 He is a member of the Aspen Institute's Commission on Information Disorder . He is on the Commission of Information Disorder Commission .
 In an era in which misinformation is often described as a scourge, this freedom takes on a darker hue . But in an era of misinformation, it takes on an even darker hue.
 What previously seemed like a feature of the country’s constitutional system can begin to seem like a bug . It can also begin to become a feature that can be a bug in the U.S. Constitution .
 In attributing the current informational crisis to a proliferation of lies, however, the book largely overlooks the role that governments, the media and technology companies are playing as agents and amplifiers of misinformation .
 Sunstein argues that the U.S. should regulate lies more aggressively than it does . Sunstein acknowledges that in most contexts, it is better to allow false speech to be corrected in the marketplace of ideas .
 Even a government operating in good faith will not always be able to separate truth from fiction . Some governments will use the authority to police speech to suppress dissent instead . It is usually better to trust the marketplace, he says .
 There is also a risk that falsehoods that are suppressed, rather than confronted head-on, will fester and become more dangerous, says CNN.com .
 Some falsehoods threaten serious harms that are not likely to be corrected organically in public discourse, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Some falsehoods ... threaten serious harm," he says .
 With respect to these falsehoods, policymakers must consider regulatory responses . Policymakers must consider regulating regulatory responses to the falsehoods .
 The United States Constitution is not always an obstacle to regulatory intervention, Sunstein says . Sunstein observes that the Constitution does not always always be a barrier to regulation .
 The First Amendment permits defamation suits, although it does place some limits on them . First Amendment allows defamation suits but places some limits .
 It doesn't preclude the government from prosecuting someone for committing perjury or impersonating a government officer . The government can also prosecute someone for impersonating an official .
 The First Amendment allows the government to punish people who lie . In all these spheres, the government allows the First Amendment to be used to punish those who lie.
 The First Amendment should be understood to permit the regulation of lies in other spheres, Sunstein says . Sunstein: First Amendment allows government to regulate lies in all spheres .
 For example, the government should be able to regulate misinformation that threatens public health . Government should also regulate misinformation threatening public health, says CNN.com.com .
 It should be able to regulate doctored videos, even if they aren't defamatory, it says . It should also regulate the content of the video, even though it's not defamed, it's a good idea .
 These kinds of lies, Sunstein writes, cause serious harms that cannot always be prevented or remedied by responsive speech . Sunstein: "Lies" cause serious harm that cannot be prevented by responsive speeches .
 People may rely on false claims about public health before the claims can be exposed as false, experts say . People rely on public health claims before they can't be exposed, they say .
 A video may change the public’s perception of a public figure even if it is later shown to have Liars in High Places been doctored .
 The government should be able to respond to this kind of falsity by prohibiting certain kinds of speech . It should also require social media platforms to label the lies as such or by requiring them to .
 First Amendment doctrine, Sunstein argues, too narrowly limits the government’s ability to tackle harmful falsehoods . Sunstein: The First Amendment is too narrow to limit government's ability to deal with harmful truths .
 Many reporters, editors, and media lawyers regard the decision in this case as synonymous with press freedom . But Sunstein says Sunstein is not so enthusiastic .
 It's too difficult to hold people accountable for lies that do real damage, he argues . It makes it too difficult for people to be held accountable for their lies, he says .
 He also takes issue with the Supreme Court’s more recent decision in United States Alvarez Alvarez . Alvarez was the subject of a lawsuit against the U.S. Supreme Court .
 The 2005 Stolen Valor Act was a federal statute that criminalized lying about receiving military decorations or medals . That case, from 2012, invalidated the 2005 act .
 The Court’s decision was based in large part on the concern that imposing penalties for false speech might chill true speech . Sunstein shares to an extent with Sunstein, but he shares the concern .
 In the name of defending the truth, he suggests, the Court merely ceded more ground to falsehoods . He suggests that the court merely cedes more ground .
 Sunstein says Americans are living in “an age of deception,’ an era in which lies have become ubiquitous . Sunstein: Americans are now living in an era where lies are ubiquitous .
 He is especially concerned about what he sees as the proliferation of defamatory lies about public officials, public institutions, and public figures .
 Lies about other public figures can ruin people's lives . Lies about public figures, such as musicians, actors, and athletes, can ruin lives .
 He argues false statements falling short of libel are harming individuals and society . He argues that false statements are harming society .
 He does not supply evidence that lying is more common today than it used to be, he says . He doesn't supply evidence of lying being more common than it was in the past .
 Social media allows liars to disseminate their lies more quickly and broadly . Sunstein is especially concerned about all of this because social media allows lies to be disseminated quickly .
 He casts the social media companies more as heroes XNdGHua / NOSYALAd AUVN than villains . But he is principally worried about the liars, not the social networks .
 The companies, in his view, are doing “excellent work” —even if they should do more, he says . They should fact-check political ads, strengthen their prohibitions against misinformation .
 Sunstein has a similarly rosy view of the government’s relationship to lies . Sunstein also has a similar view of government's relationship with lies .
 He does briefly mention that United States President Donald Trump pushed misinformation about the 2020 presidential election . He also mentions that the president pushed misinformation on the 2020 election .
 The lies of government officials are mostly beyond the scope of his inquiry . But the lies of the government officials will mostly be beyond his inquiry, he says .
 There’s no mention of false claims that Iraq was hiding weapons of mass destruction, that Muslims in New Jersey cheered the 9/11 attacks, that the CIA did not use torture, that drone strikes have not resulted in civilian casualties .
 Sunstein says he’s especially focused on falsehoods that undermine the democratic process . Sunstein: It's difficult to understand why a tabloid's lies about a celebrity imperil democracy, whereas official lies do not .
 Social media companies, too, bear a great deal more responsibility for the age of deception than Sunstein acknowledges . Sunstein says social media companies also have responsibility for deception .
 Facebook, Twitter and YouTube platforms make decisions about which kinds of interactions to allow on their platforms can have an impact on users' behavior .
 Ad targeting policies can determine how broadly misinformation spreads and whether the misinformation can be corrected by others . And their policies relating to ad targeting can determine the extent of misinformation spread .
 Social media companies, like governments, have important roles to play in addressing the problem of misinformation . Social media like governments have important role in addressing misinformation .
 Sunstein is wrong to conceive of them only as firefighters, not also as arsonists . Sunstein: Sunstein wrong to think of them as firefighters and not also arsonists. But Sunstein says they're not only firefighters .
 Sunstein’s policy proposals are worth considering . Still, Sunstein's policy proposals were worth considering.
 His prescriptions concerning content moderation are modest but reasonable . His prescriptions for moderation in the media are modest and reasonable .
 The Supreme Court's case law relating to false speech usefully pulls apart the various factors that courts should weigh in deciding whether regulating misinformation in any given context would be consistent with the First Amendment .
 He says loosening standards would create space for regulation of false speech that doesn't rise to the level of defamation . He says he's right that loosening current standards would allow regulation .
 He largely glosses over the ways in which new regulations could be abused . But he also glosses up the potential for new regulations to be abused, he says .
 State legislatures are fighting misinformation by restricting public schools’ ability to teach students about systemic racism . Even today, under a speechprotective doctrinal framework, state legislatures are trying to fight misinformation .
 Devin Nunes, a Republican member of Coneress from California, has filed a slew of lawsuits against journalists and ordinary citizens who have criticized, mocked, or reported on him .
 Harvey Weinstein was able to use the threat of defamation litigation to stave off, for years, the news reports that justifiably ended his career . Harvey Weinstein's career ended after he was accused of rape, sexual assault and sexual assault .
 At one point, he suggests capping damage awards to mitigate the chilling effect of defamation suits . At one time, he suggested capping damages awards to avoid chilling effect on defamation lawsuits .
 Analysis focuses on the costs of the current doctrinal framework and mostly skips over the benefits . But his analysis focuses on costs, he says, on the benefits and costs .
 It leaves the impression that Sunstein has not fully accounted for the possibility, some would say, that making it easier for public figures to sue critics for false speech would make it easier to suppress true speech .
 At its best, Sunstein’s book offers a host of useful ideas about how First Amendment doctrine and content moderation policies might be adjusted to encourage governments and technology companies to address lies .
 A more convincing account of the age of deception would place less emphasis on ordinary citizens and more on the governments that spread falsehoods . A more compelling policy agenda would place more emphasis on the media organizations and technology companies that amplify them .
 Justice David Davis spent several pages explaining the dangers of an unchecked executive . Justice Davis wrote for the majority of the Supreme Court .
 Davis made a dire warning about unchecked presidential power . Yet the executive branch has fared quite well in the courts in the years since Davis made his warning .
 Of ‘Trump's various abuses of authority, few were exposed, confirmed, or punished by the courts, which did little to stymie his power grabs,’ says CNN.com.com .
 The Trump administration lost some highprofile legal challenges to several of its more controversial policies, including the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . The administration also lost a bid to add a question about citizenship to the 2020 census .
 Trump effectively lost a pair of major disputes over subpoenas from Congress and a Manhattan district attorney for his financial records . Trump also lost a two-decision battle with the DA over his finances .
 President Joe Biden had more constitutional authority on his first day in office than President Barack Obama had on his last . Biden has more authority now than Obama did in his last term, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Political scientists Stephen Skowronek, John Dearborn, and Desmond King write Phantoms of a Beleaguered Republic . They argue that this tug of war has historically served as a check on presidential prerogatives . One theory locates power in the person of the president and another
 Some degree of tension between these two competing visions is inevitable, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The White House and the federal bureaucracy will view each other with suspicion . Absent a consensus on what is appropriately partisan, the White House will be wary of the bureaucracy . Obama administration will have to work together to avoid a repeat of the scandal .
 The authors devote most of the first half of the book to documenting how and when that antagonism began to fully manifest . The authors spend most of their book to document the antagonism between the two sides .
 A bureaucracy was needed to administer these functions, and successive presidents, as the heads of this bureaucracy, were increasingly associated with these sprawling federal programs . President George W. Bush was the president of the country's largest state of origin .
 The more powers the executive branch had, the more the chief executive and the administrative state vied for authority over those functions . But despite this symbiosis the more powers and responsibilities the more power the more they had .
 These two concepts of the executive branch have been on a collision course for a long time . The White House has been in touch with President Barack Obama's executive branch .
 The Supreme Court is dedicated to putting its thumb on the scale . But what is new is not just a president more willing to push the envelope than any of his predecessors .
 The Supreme Court can be blamed for enabling Trump's war against his own bureaucracy . Unlike during most of the twentieth century, the Court has intervened in support of the office of the president, to the point .
 The Imperial Presidency’s Enablers is an engaging account of the evolution of the federal government . Elena Kagan has described what she calls “presidential administration” or a federal government that is regularly SYaLNad / wHoHNad .
 The larger the federal bureaucracy grew and the more responsibilities it took on, the more complex and opaque its hierarchy turned . But the larger the bureaucracy grew the more insulated from electoral accountability its officials became, and more independence from the Oval Office .
 What might be called, meant nonpejoratively, “the deep state” reflects the desire of a growing expert administrative apparatus . The deep state wants to shield more of the government’s decisionmaking authority from shifting partisan winds and from personal patronage .
 Conservatives in the 1970s and 1980s were embracing a rival interpretation of the constitutional separation of powers known as the unitary executive theory .
 Republican presidents were in office for 20 of the 24 years between 1969 and 1993 . William Rehnquist and Antonin Scalia were appointed to the Supreme Court by Republican presidents during this time .
 In other words, executive power lies with the president and the president alone . The president alone is in charge of executive power .
 Presidents exercise unimpeded control over the administrative state and can dismiss whomever they please, whenever they please . Presidents can dismiss whoever they please and whenever they choose . President Obama has the power to dismiss whoever he wants to dismiss .
 This theory was trotted out to resist some of Congress’s most aggressive postWatergate reforms . Many of these reforms were intended to strengthen the bureaucracy at the expense of presidential power .
 Phantoms of a Beleaguered Republic: The deep state and the unitary executive . The relationship between these two concepts animates all of the Phantoms .
 Presidents exercise broad control over the bureaucracy of the executive branch but use relative restraint, lest they provoke pushback from within . So long as neither force dominates the other, they maintain a healthy equilibrium .
 The 1978 Ethics in Government Act empowered the U.S. attorney general and a special division of the D.C. federal appeals court to appoint an independent counsel to investigate senior government officials . That decision upheld the independentcounsel provisions of the 1978 Ethics In Government Act .
 Scalia: President could not fire a lawyer vested with the power to enforce the laws of the U.S. Scalia: He did not have the executive power to fire the lawyer . Scalia: "If the president can't fire lawyer, then he did not, in fact, have the
 Morrison: Congress can protect ‘inferior’ executive-branch officers from being dismissed by the president without cause . One of Morrison’s most important holdings was that Congress could protect independent counsel .
 In the contest between the deep state and the unitary executive, Morrison tipped the scales in favor of the former . Thus, in the contest .
 Supreme Court has turned further to the right, its efforts to gut it have accelerated . Its wrongness has become an article of faith among conservatives, and as the Supreme Court turns further right, it has accelerated .
 In 2010, Chief Justice John Roberts effectively neutered the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board . The board was created in the aftermath of the Enron and WorldCom accounting scandals .
 A provision that protected members of the board from removal except for good cause, the Court argued, interfered with the president’s constitutional authority . Unlike in Morrison, these officers could be removed only by other executive officers whose removal required good cause .
 The brakes have truly come off with the confirmation of the Court’s two newest justices . The brakes on the Supreme Court's confirmation have come off in the past few weeks .
 Brett Kavanaugh provided the fifth and decisive vote in the June 2020 ruling in Seila Law Consumer Financial Protection Bureau . The ruling said inferior officers are not protected from removal without cause if they are the singular head of an independent agency .
 The ruling took a healthy bite out of Congress’s power to provide for such independence . But if the whole point of independent agencies is their independence, the ruling is not good news .
 Clarence Thomas joined the three Democratic appointees in dissent . The 5-4 majority held that even these minor executive-branch adjudicators are in fact “principal” officers .
 In one fell swoop, the Court significantly winnowed the ranks of bureaucrats protected from presidential removal by Morrison . It substantially increased the president's direct control over administrative judges within the executive branch .
 The Supreme Court is now committed to the idea of the unitary executive as it has been at any point in its history . The clear takeaway from a handful of recent decisions is that the court is now as committed to it as ever before .
 This development would be significant at any point in time, but it was especially glaring given that it transpired during Trump's presidency .
 Phantoms of a Beleaguered Republic presents the opportunity presented by Trump to amass presidential power . Trump has made no secret of his desire to be president, but Phantoms is to show the opportunity he has presented .
 Supporters of presidential authority eagerly got onboard with Trump’ efforts to rid himself of administrative con200 FOREIGN AFFAIRS straints .
 What had been a primarily judicial and academic movement, cloaked in dense legal jargon and technicalities, quickly became a public spectacle . Trump sought to bend the executive branch to his will .
 The president portrayed the deep state as part of an antidemocratic conspiracy, and when the state pushed back, the result was, well, a spectacle .
 The president’s insistence that he alone held the executive power of the American state drew out these forms of resistance . President Obama's insistence that the U.S. state alone held executive power drew out resistance .
 President Obama turned the Deep State conspiracy into something of a self-fulfilling prophecy . He turned on the value of depth, on the wisdom of stripping administration of its own integrity, he says .
 The clear-eyed choice is not between the Deep State and the unitary executive, it's between the U.S. and the executive . The U.N. should not be allowed to be part of America's most powerful bureaucracy, it says .
 Proponents of the theory are unconvinced by expertise, mistrustful of nonpartisanship, and suspicious of everything that cannot be directly controlled by the chief executive . Proponents say the theory is not true .
 The theory eliminates one of the critical checks that exist to prevent presidents from pushing the envelope too far . Fully applied, the theory therefore eliminates a critical check that exists to prevent a president from pushing too far.
 With the administrative state rendered an arm of the Oval Office, the president ends up being accountable to virtually no one . Other checks on presidential power, such as the courts and Congress, also not stepping up to the plate .
 Skowronek, Dearborn, and King don't ignore the Supreme Court’s role in adjudicating on executive and administrative power . But they don't feature it in the way that it merits, either .
 Trump is hardly the first president to push idiosyncratic theories of executive power . Trump is not the first to push an executive power theory .
 The Supreme Court of that era implicitly rejected this theory in one especially high-profile dispute over the use of military commissions to try Guantanamo detainees . The case was decided by the Supreme Court in the 1980s .
 The Imperial Presidency’s Enablers the president will have much more power going forward . Today's Supreme Court, by contrast, has reconfigured constitutional authority such that the president has much more control .
 Trump may doubt that the Court was on his side because it didn’t hand him the 2020 election, but it was, and is, very much on the side of the presidency as an institution . The Supreme Court is a very powerful institution .
 Biden fired the Trump-appointed commissioner of the Social Security Administration without cause . The person in that position is protected from removal except in the event of neglect of duty or malfeasance in office .
 Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel argued that the protection from being removed without cause was no longer constitutional after Seila Law and Collins . The memo was written by progressives who, before joining the Biden administration, had been longtime academic critics of the unitary executive .
 If unitary executive truly is ascendant, even Democrats want to reap the benefits . Democrats want the benefits, even if they want to benefit from it .
 Phantoms of a Beleaguered Republic ultimately rails against the trap against which they rails . That trap is that is the trap . Phantoms are of the trap, and that trap ultimately rails .
 The question then becomes how to restore the balance that characterized both the executive branch and the separation of powers throughout the century after Davis’s ruling .
 It seems unlikely that Congress will reassert itself, whether one party is reluctant to check the power of its own president . Legislation that does try to bolster existing checks will be vetoed by presidents who have no incentive .
 Interbranch checks on presidential power have increasingly fallen away, leaving only intrabranch checks . The separation of parties taking the place of the separation of powers, separation of power has fallen away .
 It's hard to be optimistic, given the polarized state of U.S. politics, that voters will simply eliminate the problem by electing presidents who decline to expand their own authority .
 Trump laid bare the risks of the unitary executive, wielding expansive presidential power for personal gain with relative impunity . Trump has been accused of using the power of the presidency to gain personal gain in the past .
 The Supreme Court has so far reacted as if what happened was because of who ‘Trump was and is, not because of the powers of the office that he held,’s power . ‘He was able to benefit from thanks in part to the Court itself.’
 The U.S. may simply have to hope that the Court will respond differently in the future, in defense of checks on presidential authority, if the country elects another Trump . The alternative—a president unbounded by external or internal checks— would be worse .
 James argues that successfully navigating today’s technological revolutions and upheavals in global capitalism will require the invention of new concepts . James argues .
 Pirie tells the story of the rise and fall of systems of law across the civilizations, empires, and societies of the ancient and modern world . Pirie: In this panoramic history, Pirie explores the rise of law systems across the world's cultures .
 The kings of ancient Mesopotamia wrapped their laws in grand statements of social justice and the dictates of the gods . The laws of Mesopotamian kings were wrapped around social justice .
 Chinese emperors claimed that the laws on which their authority rested were manifestations of the order of the cosmos . The laws were said to be the laws of the universe .
 The age of Western empire brought with it ambitious efforts by European states to organize and legitimate their imperial conquests in a system of international law . European states were able to legitimate their conquests through international law.
 Pirie Pirie shows that laws protect against the abuse of power but also serve as instruments of social control . Pirie: Laws protect against abuses of power, but also act as instruments for social control. Pirie says laws are designed to prevent abuse of authority .
 Laws can be used as both swords and shields in the struggle for power and order . Laws can also be used in the struggles for power, order .
 authoritarian states operating in a global system that has elevated norms of democracy and human rights, have extra incentives to engage in image promotion . But today’s authoritarian states operate in an environment that has raised standards of democracy, human rights and democracy .
 authoritarian states protect and enhance their legitimacy and standing with a range of practices, from standard advertising campaigns to high-risk extraterritorial operations to apprehend and silence critics . Authoritarian states protect their legitimacy with a variety of practices .
 Regimes such as Kazakhstan’s routinely employ Western public relations firms in campaigns . Regimes use Western PR firms to promote the country's achievements . Kazakhstan's government routinely employs Western PR agencies .
 Russia engages in more systematic efforts to censor, obscure, and refute unfavorable information, using its infamous Internet “troll farms’s” to distract and discredit critics . The Russian government engages in a systematic effort to censor and refute negative information .
 China has sought to persuade foreign elites to view the state favorably through junkets for journalists and policymakers . Its state-owned media outlets offer positive accounts of the Chinese regime . State-owned news outlets offer favorable accounts of China .
 North Korea, Russia, and Saudi Arabia have all reportedly assassinated dissidents living abroad . North Korea and Russia have all reported to have assassinated dissidents .
 Dukalskis argues that the best way to counter authoritarian propaganda is to promote transparency, protect information flows, and stand up for democratic values .
 In most histories of the academic field of international relations, very few women make an appearance . In most of the world's academic fields, women are not mentioned in most of them .
 The “greats” in the scholarly canon are overwhelmingly Anglo-American men . The ‘greats in the literary canon are mostly Anglo-Americans,’ says historian John Sutter .
 In this groundbreaking book, a distinguished group of scholars engages in what the historian Glenda Sluga calls “recovery history” Historians reconstruct the forgotten and marginalized ideas of 18 female thinkers . Several African American women played formative roles in defining and launching the field .
 Eslanda Robeson was a Black activist and intellectual whose internationalist thought focused on the struggles of women for participation in world politics . One chapter of the volume considers the contributions of Robeson, an activist and activist .
 There are chapters on the revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg and the philosopher Simone Weil . There are also chapters on Weil's work on class and colonialism .
 Vera Micheles Dean was director of research for the Foreign Policy Association in the midtwentieth century . Dean formulated a brand of liberal internationalism that emphasized cosmopolitanism and democratic solidarity . Dean was a leading figure in the liberal internationalist movement .
 The essays lay the foundation for interdisciplinary debates and new histories of the field . Together, the essays will lay the foundations for new histories .
 Right-wing activists and movements have grown louder in recent years . Across the Western world, right-wing movements and movements are growing louder .
 Today’s various nationalists, populists, religious traditionalists, and racial supremacists form the vanguard of a “conservative revolution” with deep roots in the twentieth century . They are now charting a path to a postliberal future, Rose argues .
 Oswald Spengler developed an account of world history as a series of cultural struggles rooted in unbridgeable divides of blood, soil, language, and tradition . Oswald's account is based on his account of the cultural struggles of the past .
 Alain de Benoist was a prophet of the French far right in his heyday . He developed a theory of ‘folk democracy’ in which all peoples had the right to protect their customs, cultures, and ethnic identities .
 Francis Parker Yockey was the preeminent American theorist of authoritarianism . Yockey envisioning an alliance between a postliberal America and a post-Soviet Russia .
 They may seem obscure to many readers, but they are well known and well regarded by the adherents of political movements that pose a serious threat to liberalism around the world today . They are well-known to many, but well- regarded by adherents of movements that threaten liberalism .
 Too many critics oversimplify what economists do or fail to appreciate how the discipline is changing . Ithough the practice of economics is widely criticized, too many critics over-simply explain .
 With her background in government, consulting, and academia, Coyle offers a better-informed critique . Coyle: "With her background, she offers an excellent critique of the U.S.
 Economists understand the limitations of their models, she says . Economists increasingly interact with those in other disciplines . A growing amount of their research is devoted to analyzing big data .
 Too often, economists forget that they are part of the system they are analyzing and that their work can affect its operation . Academic work on finance has affected the organization of financial markets, and not always for the better .
 Some people fail to ask whether their familiar statistical and conceptual categories still apply in today’s digital world . They sometimes fail to question whether their . familiar statistical categories still . apply in the digital world.
 Lindert has produced a worthy successor to his landmark book Growing Public . Growing Public used historical evidence to describe the rise of the welfare state . Lindert's book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 An earlier book focused on the North Atlantic economies, this one paints on a global canvas . The new book focuses on the global economies .
 Lindert again debunks the view that government spending on social services tends to slow economic growth . Lindert debunks view that social services tend to slow economy growth .
 Social programs help equalize incomes, even in countries such as the U.S., where their scope is relatively limited . Social programs can equalize income even in the United States, he says .
 The author concludes by exploring whether immigration tensions will further fray social safety nets and whether increases in life expectancy will threaten the solvency of public pensions or crowd out other valuable forms of social spending . If so, if so, how social proerams might be redesigned to meet these risks
 Bernholz argues that giving is an admirable American tradition but also a response to citizens’ deep and abiding skepticism about the role of government and the consequent inadequacy of public programs . He argues that such giving is a response .
 Economists will search in vain for data on who provides charitable donations and for what kinds of activities . Economists say it's impossible to find out who makes charitable donations .
 "The book does not lack for novel ideas. But they will not search in vain for new ideas," the author says .
 The post-World War IT global trading system was largely designed by the United States . It was heavily criticized by developing countries, including Brazil, India, and China, for placing unfair restraints on their economic development policies .
 The U.S. has become a leading critic of the World Trade Organization . Yet emerging powers have become its chief defenders .
 Emerging markets developed an interest in maintaining and even strengthening the rules-based system . As emerging markets became major exporters, they developed a interest in keeping the system strong .
 U.S. resorted to import restrictions to protect workers and turned away from the wro when it ruled against Washington . For its part, the United States, possessing a limited social safety net, resorted to .
 Emerging markets developed the legal capacity to use global trade rules and procedures to their advantage . Emerging markets have also developed the capacity of attorneys and negotiators with trade law expertise .
 Shaffer argues for reinvigorating the WTO as a primary interface between the U.S. and China . He argues for revising wTo rules to provide more space for Beijing to pursue state capitalism .
 Garavini's rich history starts with the emergence of petroleum-producing countries in the 1920s . He covers the establishment of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in the 1960s, the oil shocks of the 1970s, and OPEC's declining ability to control prices in the 1980s
 Diplomat historian focuses on interaction of so-called petrostates with U.S. government, oil companies . Garavini: Petrostates interact with the United States government, with oil companies, and with one another .
 He details OPEC’s internal machinations using the minutes of the organization's conferences, a primary source not available to previous investigators . The minutes of OPEC's conferences are used to detail OPEC's internal workings .
 His latest book pulls together the strands of his three decades of studying this issue . He has been studying the issue for decades .
 A constant theme is frustration at the failure of policymakers to adjust their thinking, despite his own efforts to advise and inform them . He says he is frustrated that policymakers have not adjusted their thinking .
 It took too long for them to appreciate the vulnerability of computer networks to crooks and hostile political actors . The U.S. government has not fully appreciated the vulnerability to cyber-security .
 Companies and governments placed too much emphasis on firewalls and antivirus software when encryption and cloud computing offered better defenses . Companies should not have put too much reliance on antivirus technology, experts say .
 One distinctive feature of his approach is his belief in arms control agreements to ensure that civilians and critical infrastructure are spared harmful attacks .
 Despite some occasional high-level interest, there have been no serious negotiations on that issue among the major powers . Sadly, despite some occasional . high . level of interest, the issue has not been discussed in the past .
 Payne has produced an engaging and accessible guide to the development of artificial intelligence as applied to war . Payne has also produced a book on how to use artificial intelligence in the military .
 He shows how an initial push stalled in the 1970s . What made the difference later was the remarkable increase in computing power, the amount of data being generated on the Internet, and the way engineers can learn .
 The technology is now too varied and too far advanced to be banned, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are profound ethical issues once machines can decide which humans to kill"
 ai favors the offense, owing mainly to the ability of a1-enabled weapons to swarm . Second, a1s can swarm, and ai's swarm can also swarm .
 If AI receives a lot of data and a narrow goal, it will be tacti208 FOREIGN AFFAIRS cally brilliant in ways that human commanders could never match . But AI will never be a true strategist, he says .
 Jones takes an unusual and helpful approach to the security challenges facing the United States . He explores how three men shaped the strategies of some of the country’s most troublesome rivals .
 General Valery Gerasimov, chief of Russia's general staff; the late Iranian major general Qasem Soleimani, who was blown up on U.S. President Donald Trumps order in early 2020 . General Zhang Youxia, vice chair of China’s Central
 Using Russian, Farsi, and Mandarin materials, Jones shows how they all turned to irregular forms of warfare, including information campaigns on social media, as well as espionage and special operations, to weaken the US .
 Jones does not quite make clear whether or how these men created policy, as opposed to just articulating and implementing it . Jones says it's not clear if or not how they created policy or how they did .
 He shows how menacing and disruptive their efforts can be and proposes ways to fight back . Still, he shows how disruptive and disruptive they can be .
 She uses a wealth of examples from the annals of spycraft, from Washington's failure to anticipate China's entry into the Korean War to its successful search for Osama bin Laden .
 Digital revolution is changing the practice of intelligence as information becomes more plentiful and accessible but also more manipulable . The digital revolution will change the way intelligence is being used in intelligence .
 This raises for Zegart a number of interesting questions, such as whether artificial intelligence can correct some of the cognitive biases that lead to analytic failures . It also raises questions about how analysts can verify the authenticity of information .
 She also discusses the importance of nonstate actors, including technology giants such as Google and even private individuals tracking illicit nuclear activities .
 Chenoweth believes that when it comes to inspiring social change, such means are more ethical and more effective than violence . She believes that such means can be more ethical than violence and effective .
 When nonviolent activists topple a regime, what follows is usually more stable and inclusive than the aftermath of a violent insurrection . The U.S. should be more inclusive than a violent uprising, says Julian Zelizer .
 Chenoweth sees civil resistance as a form of pressure building up from below against illegitimate and unjust practices and regimes . She says civil resistance is a way of building up pressure against illegitimate practices .
 She identifies a close link between the tactics of civil resistance and progressive political change . She says those who use these methods are invariably in the right .
 Sectarian and regressive movements can also employ civil resistance, she says . But as she acknowledges, sectarian movements can use civil resistance . They frequently do, and they frequently do .
 Facebook has prioritized revenue growth above all else, says Mark Zuckerberg . The social network has prioritised revenue growth over all else in recent years .
 Facebook offers a weak public apology, followed by an ineffectual response from Congress or the Federal Trade Commission . When that fails, Facebook's stock price goes up, the stock price rises . Facebook's apology is followed by a rise in stock price .
 Facebook's sheer size, its huge cash reserves, its aggressive legal, public relations, and lobbying teams, and regulators’ lack of understanding of what happens “behind the platform” have so far prevented effective action to rein in the company’s damaging impacts .
 The authors aren't hopeful this will come soon, but this book could help . The authors are hopeful this is possible, but it's not likely soon .
 Many historians view Wood as the greatest living scholar of the American Revolution . Wood is considered to be one of the most influential historians in American Revolution history .
 John Sutter explores the debates that shaped the United States’ future governance . He explores the invention of the radical concept of popular sovereignty, and the forming of the country’s founding documents .
 Wood shows how the Revolution “released pent-up social forces in the North that turned northern society into a middleclass world,” thereby pushing the nation toward modernity . Wood: The Revolution released pent up social forces that pushed the nation to modernize .
 The relevance of the founding documents to today's disputes is evident throughout the film . The film is a look at the history of the American Revolution .
 Two talented biographers reached identical conclusions in deeply researched biographies issued within a few months of each other . Four decades after Jimmy Carter’s presidency, Jimmy Carter's biographers reach identical conclusions .
 In both foreign and domestic policy, they agree, the years of Carter’s single term were far more accomplished than they seemed at the time or have seemed since . They agree, but they disagree, that they agree that the years were more accomplished .
 The generally accepted view that Carter was a weak or failed president and a much better ex-president is simply wrong . Carter was not a weak president, but a better president, he says . He says the view that he was a failed president is wrong .
 He avoided war in Latin America with the fiercely contested Panama Canal treaties . He initiated a human rights policy that played a role in the later fall of the Soviet Union and the rise of democracies .
 His administration produced the nation’s first full-scale energy policy, pushed through significant legislation on the environment and government ethics . His administration also carried out the first civil service reform in a century, created cabinet departments of energy and education .
 Carter's appointment of Paul Volcker to chair the Federal Reserve broke the back of inflation . But with sky-high interest rates, interest rates played a major part in Carter’s defeat at the polls .
 Alter offers insightful judgments far more often than Bird, who lets the story tell itself . Bird treats far more extensively Carter's life before his election in 1976, which profoundly shaped his presidency, especially as regards race relations and civil rights . Alter offers more insightful judgments than Bird .
 Despite his patented grin and downhome style, he was often cold and hard to know . Notwithstanding his trademark grin, he is often cold, hard to say .
 The intensely focused, hardworking engineer and the deeply faithful born-again Christian coexisted, sometimes uneasily, sometimes uneasy . The intense focus of engineer and Christian faith often clashed .
 Although devoted to doing right in the job of president, he lacked warmth and ease in communicating that would have made him a successful leader . He lacked warmth, ease in communication that would've made him successful leader, he said .
 It is hard to believe that there is any aspect of the American presidency that hasn't been fully explored . From first ladies to first pets, there are many aspects of the presidency that haven't been explored .
 These are the men and women who can relieve the loneliness a president lives with, help him think through what to do about a major problem, and say things to him that no one else else can . These are those who can help relieve a president's loneliness .
 "The resulting book is an entertaining, sometimes thought-provoking read," says author . The resulting book was published by Simon Cowell in 2007 .
 Thomas Jefferson and James Madison exchanged around 1,250 letters between 18th and 19th century . Jefferson and Madison were the two most powerful men in American history . The friendship was famously political and political, and the friendship lasted 50 years .
 Abraham Lincoln's friendship with Joshua Speed may have saved Lincoln’s life from severe depression and probably did save his career . There is no doubt that Speed saved Lincoln's life from depression .
 The latter two ate, drank, and relaxed together, “rarely if ever talked politics, ... and often spent large chunks of time in silence” Rebozo proved there was nothing he wouldn't do for Nixon .
 Kennedy called on Ormsby-Gore to help figure out what to do at the peak of the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy had already shared a close friendship with the British diplomat for 25 years .
 Sarotte weaves together the most engaging and carefully documented account of this period in East-West diplomacy currently available . Sarotte is the author of the book, "East-West Diplomacy" and "West"
 Historian: Western leaders gave informal assurances that NATO would not expand to former East Germany . She says that in the late 1980s and early 1990s, many Western leaders said NATO wouldn't expand . Historians: NATO didn't expand to the territory of the former East German territory .
 She argues that perceived betrayal was a major factor in the collapse of democracy in Russia and the further deterioration of relations between the West and Russia under Vladimir Putin .
 Bush and Clinton slowed NATO expansion to try to stabilize the government of Russian President Boris Yeltsin in the short term . Clinton and Clinton held off as long as he still looked viable .
 It was only when Yeltsin's fall became imminent, that the U.S. moved to expand the alliance . The United States was only willing to expand its alliance with Russia when it became inevitable .
 Cooper was the European Union's unofficial foreign policy guru for many years . Cooper served as the union’s director general for external and politico-military affairs from 2002 to 2010 .
 Machiavelli, ‘Talleyrand, Konrad Adenauer, Jean Monnet, Dean Acheson, George Kennan, and Henry Kissinger . Kissinger .
 Diplomatic success requires extreme inconsistency and immorality, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Diplomatic success must be extreme inconsistency" Zelizer says . He says that diplomatic success requires great consistency and consistency .
 Cooper portrays most foreign-policy making as little more than a desperate, often futile effort to navigate in the face of deep uncertainty, “black swan” events, and unintended consequences . At the same time, Cooper says most foreign policy making is a desperate effort .
 Ev. Ev. traces a centuries-long spread of liberal values, democratic institutions, multilateral cooperation, and the use of diplomacy instead of military force, he says . And he traces the spread of democratic institutions and democratic institutions .
 These three conclusions remain in considerable, and perhaps irreconcilable, tension with one another . The conclusion of these three conclusions are still at great tension .
 The world language today is imperfect English, spoken by well over a billion people . Because of the global reach of first the United Kingdom and later the United States, imperfect English is spoken by over a million people .
 The majority learn it as a second language . According to some native speakers, other native speakers do not speak it properly .
 Trudgill is a linguist who writes a popular column for The New European . He has been in touch with the world's most famous linguist, and has written a number of books on the subject .
 He revels in English’s massive and diverse vocabulary, with its finely shaded differentiations among near synonyms . English is a result of historical interactions with other languages and dialects, he says .
 For anyone, native speaker or not, this book offers a pleasurable and humorous voyage of discovery . The book is available for purchase from Amazon.com .
 Norwegians enjoy a well-functioning liberal democracy, a productive freemarket economy, stable social relations, and a generous and popular social welfare state . Norweigians also enjoy a successful and popular liberal democracy .
 In global rankings of equality, gender balance, happiness, life expectancy, and the rule of law, Norway invariably appears near the top . Norway is ranked highest in the world for equality and gender balance .
 Historians seek to explain why the country is so successful . Two historians seek to understand why they are so successful in the world .
 They enthusiastically recount the country’s history, yet they fail to answer the question . "They enthusiastically recounted the country's history," but they failed to answer it, he says .
 Norwegians trust one another and trust their government, which can effectively promote the common good . Norweigians trust each other and trust the government to promote their country's interests .
 In the end, it is unclear what foreigners can learn from Norway’s success .
 When people think of Greece, they generally think of the present-day nationstate, which they imagine as roughly conterminous with a narrowly bounded ancient society that had Athens and a few neighboring cities at its center .
 In this magisterial yet readable introduction to Greek history, Beaton reveals the far more complicated reality . Beaton is one of the best of his kind, whether for academic or popular audiences .
 Greeks have long lived in parts of present-day Bulgaria, Cyprus, Italy, Russia, Turkey, and countries of the Middle East . Greeks have lived in areas of the region, including Bulgaria and Cyprus, for centuries .
 Greek independence resulted from the work of warlords, outside powers, and generic Orthodox Christian opposition to Ottoman rule . Instead, it resulted from warlords and outside powers .
 The new Greek state had to impose a sanitized version of the Greek language and a sense of national identity within its territory . The new state must impose a . sanitized . version of Greek language .
 Many of Greece’s problems with its neighbors are rooted in past wars waged by the Greeks to assert that identity . Others spring from its status as a small country subject to many indignities, only one of which is its financial tutelage under the EU .
 Jones is best known for writing popular histories and producing television series such as Secrets of Great British Castles and Britain’s Bloodiest Dynasty . Perhaps unsurprisingly, his history of Europe between the fall of Rome and the Protestant Reformation is neither deep nor authoritative .
 In an old-school manner, Jones weaves together brief biographical sketches of colorful people, from Attila the Hun to Martin Luther, with engaging yarns about the critical events in which they took part . Jones' new film is based on the works of Martin Luther .
 He nods to historiographic fashion just long enough to inquire about the impact of climate change and ask why European countries rose to global preeminence in this period .
 CNN.com's John Sutter asks: "What do you say? What do you think? Tell us what you think about your own life?" He says the answer is that they had grown stronger and richer .
 The resulting account of the Middle Ages is as engaging a read as any . Still, it's not the best way to describe the medieval period .
 The hospitable tribes, scattered in tiny communities, subsist in bucolic harmony with an abundant, generous natural world . Yet are dwarfed by the natural immensity of the rainforest .
 The voluminous book’s brief texts add informative context, but Salgado mainly allows the captivating black-and-white photos to speak for themselves .
 The rainforest’s startling beauty and majesty are overwhelming . Amazing aerial photography captures breathtaking cloud formations that offer an ever-changing visual spectacle .
 Binet imagines a counterfactual history in which the Aztecs and the Incas conquer western Europe . Binet playfully imagines the Aztec and Incas conquering western Europe in a counter-factual world .
 His entertaining style blends biting satire of late medieval European follies with postmodern irony . His art blends satire of medieval Europe with modern irony .
 Sixteenth-century Christendom is plagued by perpetual dynastic and religious wars, ridiculous superstitions, and shocking social injustice . Seen through the eyes of the pragmatic Incan emperor Atahuallpa, sixteenth century Christendsom was plagued by dynastic wars, religious wars and
 Binet’s fictional Incas form alliances with conquered, restive populations . Just like the Spanish conquistadors did in reality, Binet's Incas allies with conquered populations . The Incas are depicted as the Incas in the novel .
 The brilliant Cuban princess Higuénamota intimidates European courts with her brown-skinned nakedness . Michelangelo is commissioned to make a sculpture of her .
 Binet lampoons Christopher Columbus, Martin Luther, and Thomas More . Binet has great fun transporting the Spanish novelist Miguel de Cervantes and the artist El Greco to an idyllic island in the Caribbean .
 As a redemptive fantasy rescuing history from the horrific tragedy of the European destruction of the precolonial Americas, Civilizations is a most satisfying read . The book is set in the Americas and is set to be published in 2015 .
 In this erudite crime thriller, Padura, Cuba’s leading man of letters, pilots his melancholic, irreverent detective, Mario Conde, toward his 60th birthday . The film is based on the memoirs of the Cuban writer who is Cuba's leading
 The plot revolving around a stolen wooden statue of the Black Virgin, of medieval origin, is a vehicle for the author’s trenchant commentaries on contemporary Cuba and his existential ruminations on the human condition .
 Padura ponders whether ideologies and religions merely disguise the human drive for power and wealth . He also asks whether revolutionaries elevate or immiserate their populations — questions echoed by Cuba’s contemporary fate .
 The mature Conde finds solace in an enduring love relationship and in his steadfast circle of lifelong drinking buddies . Conde is surrounded by material and moral decay .
 Naim, who left his native Venezuela many years ago, turns to historical fiction to pen this sharp, effective indictment of Hugo Chavez and the late tyrant’s brand of authoritarian populism .
 A gorgeous female CIA operative and an irresistibly charming male officer in Cuba's Intelligence Directorate . Readers of political thrillers may intuit early on the resolution of the deadly duel between two opposing spies .
 Naim's award-winning nonfiction, in which legitimate leaders and private business executives, interlaced with violent Mafias, engage in intricate power struggles . Some civil society leaders can be as hypocritical as politicians they decry, Naim says .
 In his acknowledgments, Naim reasserts his faith that his ‘wonderful country” will recover . Naim: "I'm not giving up on my country, but I'm praying for my country."
 From the deep abyss depicted in his novel, it is difficult to perceive the green shoots of a reborn Venezuela . The novel is published in Venezuela, Venezuela, and is published by Caracas-based publisher Caracasso .
 Lomnitz traces the odyssey of his Ashkenazi Jewish ancestors from Nazi-infested Europe to South America, Israel, California, and Mexico City . The author is a cultural historian .
 Latin America was a haven from European barbarism, but was hardly free from anti-Semitism . Anti-Semitism was rife in Latin America during the 1930s and '60s, with anti-Semitic tendencies .
 Lomnitz’s well-networked, intelligent, and hard-working family survived and even prospered . Still, the well-networking, intelligent and hardworking family still thrived .
 Lomnitz speculates that his grandfather, a successful businessman in Mannheim, Germany, was assassinated in his office by young Nazis as early as 1922 . Based on his meticulous research, he speculates his grandfather was assassinated by the Nazis .
 In more hopeful passages, he recounts how his relatives brushed shoulders with such luminaries as the Peruvian Marxist Marxist José Carlos Mariategui and the Chilean folk composer Violeta Parra .
 Russian natural gas, oil, and coal have separate value chains . The value chains include production in Siberia, through Ukraine, and to consumers in the European Union .
 Value chains deeply permeate politics and business in the countries through which they pass . The value chains are deeply embedded in politics, business and politics .
 For some important players, their country’s energy dependence on Russia may turn out to be an opportunity rather than a constraint . For some of the world's biggest stars, that could be the case for Russia .
 Dmytro Firtash, Thor Kolomoisky, and Rinat Akhmetov were able to build tremendous fortunes by extracting rents in natural gas, oil, and coal sectors . They turned their wealth into political power, and turned their rents into wealth .
 Ukraine’s industrial capacity continued to decline, and its role as a transit country weakened . Meanwhile, the country's role as an industrial and transit transit country has also weakened .
 Russia has moved to drastically reduce Ukraine’s transit role by launching the Nord Stream project . The project will bypass Ukraine and bring Russian gas directly to Germany through a pipeline under the Baltic Sea . All three oligarchs remain powerful today, even as Russia moves to reduce Ukraine's transit role
 Plokhy discovered a few previously unknown documents relating to the Cuban missile crisis . His outstanding talent for weaving a narrative from myriad sources makes his new book hard to put down .
 Soviet soldiers’ recollections of unbearable heat, poisonous plants, and worm-infested food during their time in Cuba . Plohky also relates the anxiety of the Soviet envoy Anastas Mikoyan as he failed to placate the Cuban leader Fidel Castro .
 Plokhy focuses on the many mistakes made by both major and minor participants during the crisis . He says the mistakes were made by major or minor participants in the crisis in Ukraine .
 Ironside contests the view that money had limited value in the Soviet system . She studies Soviet economic policies from the late 1940s to the mid-1960s .
 Soviet postwar governments were very concerned with increasing the ruble’s purchasing power as a means to economic growth and abundance . She demonstrates that Soviet post-war governments were concerned .
 The Soviet leader Joseph Stalin slashed consumer prices, but there was little for people to buy . Stalin slashed prices in the face of an acute food shortage in the Soviet Union .
 Nikita Khrushchev opted instead to raise pensions and wages of low-paid workers and to eliminate certain taxes . That led to wage overspending, but without a rise in productivity, demand for goods still exceeded supply .
 The Soviet Union tried various means, such as compulsory masssubscription bonds, lotteries, and savings deposits, to absorb the excess cash . These instruments steadily increased the government's debt to its own citizens . The debt remained unpaid through the end of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 In democracies and autocracies alike, declining trust in politics and politicians has allowed conspiracy theories to move from the margins of society to the center of politics . Conspiracy theories have become increasingly popular in the United States .
 The study of this phenomenon is a growing field, but so far, it focuses mostly on Western countries . The United States, in particular, provides a striking example of what is happening .
 The resort to “conspiracism” cannot be fully explained by either historical patterns or the character of the political regime, he says . He points out that the resort to conspiracism cannot be explained by historical patterns .
 Incumbent politicians’ propensity for making conspiracy claims changes over time and may rise in response to political developments . Incumbents' propensity to make conspiracy claims may change over time, may rise .
 Radnitz identifies the immediate circumstances—domestic political competition or destabilizing events such as terrorist attacks, protests, riots, or assassinations— that tend to motivate leaders to rely on the rhetoric of conspiracism .
 Of the countries examined, the increasingly authoritarian Russia stands out for its volume of conspiracy claims, mostly involving American or Western interventions . Many of the claims centered on the disruptive events in Ukraine during the 2004-5 Orange Revolution and the 2013-14 Euromaidan protests .
 Ukraine itself is second to Russia in the overall volume of conspiracy claims . Ukraine's competitive and turbulent politics is second behind Russia's .
 Radnitz concludes that even among people who are generally receptive to conspiracy theories, the essential cynicism of those theories tends to deepen public suspicion of the very officials who endorse them . Even among those who are receptive to theories, those who support them tend to be cynical .
 Russia is waging war on Western mainstream media, with conspiracy theories as its primary weapon . They trace its transformation from a source for stories about Russia to an aggressive “ministry of information defense”
 The authors describe RT’s methods based on an episode-byepisode examination of several rT shows, including one hosted by Jesse Ventura . Jesse Ventura is a former Minnesota governor with a track record as a conspiracy theorist .
 The authors acknowledge that RT's attempts to counter orave allegations of Russia’s wrongdoings are not necessarily effective with foreign audiences . However, they say that when it comes to RT's efforts, the channel's tactics are not always effective . The authors say that RT’
 The Saudi royal family faced criticism for cooperation with non-Muslim powers in the 1990-91 Gulf War . The monarchy has systematically pivoted away from reliance on the Wahhabi religious establishment .
 Mecca and Medina have been transformed from pilgrimage sites into tourist destinations, says Bsheer . Doing so has involved trying to obliterate evidence of the lively and varied political debates of the late Ottoman era .
 Much of the work of this “historic preservation” was overseen by the current king, Salman, during his decades as the governor of Riyadh . It has been embraced and accelerated under the current crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman . The birthplace of the Saud family, north of Riyadh,
 Shehab is one of the Arab world's most inventive graphic artists . Shehab was not a political rebel until the Egyptian uprising of 2011, she says .
 She had started a project called “A Thousand Times NO,” in which she explored the various ways the word “no” has been written in Arabic over the centuries .
 As the upheaval unfolded, she was inspired, as were many previously politically inactive Egyptians . She was inspired by the upheaval, and was inspired to take action .
 The erafhti stencils variations of works from "A Thousand Times NO" across Cairo . She took to the streets, contributing to a remarkable flowering of public art .
 Shehab's memoir recounts the emotional intensity and artistic inspiration of the period . The memoir illuminates it on page after page with vivid photographs of both her own work and that of other erafhti artists .
 A graphic novel based on the civil unrest that seized Turkey in the 1970s and led to the military coup of 1980 . This book endeavors to capture the excitement, confusion, and, it appears, ultimate futility of the political activism of that era .
 American anthropologist and Turkish artist Gunduz collaborated to follow the political careers of four fictional student activists . White, an anthropologist who was a student in Turkey at the time, and Gunduz, a Turkish artist and illustrator, collaborated on the project .
 Their battles spiral into factionalism and violence as they sacrifice family harmony, long-standing friendships, and promising professional careers .
 White argues that the format of the graphic novel avoids the flattened abstractions of academic analysis . But the book begs for an epilogue that would draw more universal conclusions, he writes .
 The groups to which these young people pledged allegiance, whatever their putative ideologies, are all portrayed as being led by intolerant autocrats . After all, these groups are portrayed as those led by intolerance autocrats.
 White and Gunduz shared their own speculation about what may or may have changed in Turkey in the intervening decades .
 Takeyh sets out to provide a sober, fair-minded assessment, enabled by perspectives afforded by both the passage of time and increasingly accessible archives . He writes: "Takeyh is the author of a book about how the world's history is changing .
 Takeyh has a soft spot for the old aristocracy, arguing that however elitist it may have been, it had a far more sensitive finger on the pulse of the countryside than the clueless technocrats who implemented the shah’s U.S. programs .
 Whether the landed nobility would have been able to understand and respond to frustrations among peasants and students . The landed nobility could have responded effectively to those frustrations, but that remains open question .
 Senior figures in the regime decamped to Europe or the U.S. as Khomeini's revolution gathered steam . What is striking is the number of senior figures who, rather than stand their ground, decamped .
 Women in the Middle East and North Africa are typically portrayed as victims of patriarchy and poverty, war and violence, Orientalism and imperialism . Women in North Africa and the Mideast are typically depicted as victims .
 This book suggests, very convincingly, that they are victimized just as much by the antiquated platitudes, stereotypes, and distortions with which they are portrayed . It suggests they are just as well as being victimized as portrayed .
 In a collection of 40 short pieces by scholars and activists, the editors showcase a stunning variety of domains in which women are operating on their own behalf and in the service of others . The editors showcase 40 short stories by scholars, activists .
 Political activists are debating constitutional reform in Tunisia, advocating feminism in Islam in Syria, supporting independence in southern Yemen, developing gender studies in Morocco . They are also calling for restorative justice in Libya, demanding an end to sexual harassment in Egypt .
 Arab uprisings emboldened a generation of women who are now more active, more visible, and more influential in the politics and social life of the region than ever before . The seeds of this activism were planted as early as the 1920s, Stephan and Charrad argue .
 Despite appearances, the editors suggest, there has been a subtle democratization of politics . Bottom-up pressure is forcing greater accountability on often reluctant regimes .
 The Arab Spring left important traces, visible today in the growing prominence and authority of women . Women's rise in Arab Spring is visible today as a result of the Arab Spring, says Ms. Ghitis .
 Markey demonstrates that in Iran, Kazakhstan, and Pakistan, China seeks energy resources, more secure transport routes, and deference to its repression of the Uyghurs . Markey shows that in Kazakhstan, Pakistan, and Iran, China wants energy resources and security .
 Beijing shows little interest in intervening in other countries' domestic problems or in solving its partner states’ conflicts with their neighbors . But Beijing shows no interest in intervention in other nations’ domestic problems .
 Chinese presence reduces U.S. influence, buttresses authoritarian regimes with diplomatic support and surveillance technology . To be sure, it reduces United States influence .
 The partner governments are keen to set limits on Chinese influence in China . But the partner governments themselves are keen on setting limits on China .
 China’s rising presence in continental Eurasia is unlikely to lead to anything resembling hegemony . So China's rising presence will not lead to something resembling hegemony, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Beijing eventually had to provide protection when insurgents threatened Chinese personnel and assets . In places such as Libya, Sudan, and Yemen, Beijing has had to protect itself .
 China has limited itself to “military operations other than war,” such as participation in UN peacekeeping missions and multilateral antipiracy patrols . But so far, China has only participated in peacekeeping and crisis-driven evacuations .
 Beijing remains committed to the principle of intervening only under UN mandates and with the permission of local governments . Policy debate at home suggests that Beijing is committed to this policy .
 The Chinese military prioritizes challenges closer to home, such as Taiwan . Instead of pushing for permanent bases in many places abroad, the Chinese military prioritizes challenges closer home .
 If China were nonetheless to try to expand its military footprint globally as its interests and capabilities increase, these books show that the process would not be easy .
 Kashmir has been the locus of four wars between India and Pakistan over three decades . The disputed territory has seen frequent firing and shelling incidents across the so-called Line of Control .
 Jammu and Kashmir has been swept by renewed waves of resistance . In 2019, the Hindu nationalist government of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi imposed direct central government control over the sector in what is bound to be a futile attempt to crush opposition .
 U.S.-led forces battled Chinese and North Korean forces to a stalemate on the Korean Peninsula in July 1951 . The two sides began to negotiate an armistice after the war broke out in July .
 The negotiations dragged on for two years because the U.S. insisted on the “voluntary repatriation” of Chinese prisoners of war . The United States insisted on a ‘voluntary’ repatriation of the Chinese prisoners .
 This ostensibly humanitarian concept was unacceptable to the Chinese side . It violated the newly signed Geneva Convention on the treatment of POWs . It cost tragically large losses of life among soldiers and pows on both sides and among North Korean civilians .
 Chang shows that the true reason for the U.S. policy was the desire for a propaganda victory over China . Chang says that the United States policy was to win propaganda victory in China .
 Most of the 14,000 Chinese pows who ultimately decided to go to Taiwan did so as a result of an American “reindoctrination/exploitation” program in the camps .
 Goscha’s zestfully granular history of the Vietminh war against the French, which lasted from 1946 to 1954 . Goscha challenges the myth that Ho Chi Minh's forces bested the professional French army simply because they were fighting for national liberation .
 Ho's creation of a party-controlled governing apparatus with the capacity to recruit, finance, arm, coordinate, and deploy armed forces . Ho's government will be able to recruit and finance the country's military .
 Even from its early days as what Goscha calls an “archipelago state,’ Ho’s regime administered a network of territories, drafted soldiers, kept records, conducted police work, issued currency, taxed commerce, and carried on international trade . Ho's regime administered
 Ho expanded his organizational machine into a Leninist-style “wartime state’ with Chinese support . Ho was able to field the well-equipped conventional army that besieged and overran the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu . With Chinese support, Ho then expanded his
 Shinzo Abe managed to stay in office for eight years, the longest term of any Japanese prime minister . He managed to carry out a series of major institutional reforms and stimulate the economy . The 25 expert contributors to this book analyze how Shinzo Abe stayed in office .
 Abe actively managed public opinion, used strategically timed elections to discipline factions in his ruling party . Abe also increased staffing in the Cabinet Secretariat and the prime minister's office .
 His economic policies, known as “Abenomics,’ accelerated existing programs to promote innovation, upgrade working conditions, boost female workforce participation, among other gains .
 Several chapters puzzle over why monetary easing and fiscal stimulus under Abe drove smaller-than-desired increases in inflation and economic growth . But several chapters puzzle why inflation and growth increased less than expected .
 The book's core leader-centered analysis gains credibility from the fact that Abe’s successor, Yoshihide Suga, had the same tools as Abe but was less successful . Many chapters are technical, but the book's analysis is more focused on the leader of Japan .
 Abe would doubtless pick up his agenda again if he were to return to office for a third term . Abe would probably pick up agenda again in his third term as prime minister .
 China in post-Mao period has not tried to deny or destroy the international human rights regime, but it has worked to shape the regime in its favor, usually in ways that weaken it . China has not been trying to deny, destroy or destroy human rights regimes, but has worked
 Inboden's revealing behind-the-scenes case studies show how China’s human rights diplomacy has become increasingly sophisticated . Inbodeen: Human rights diplomacy is becoming increasingly sophisticated in China .
 When the UN Convention Against Torture was drafted, in the early 1980s, China was relatively passive . China has been a relatively passive state of mind since the 1980s .
 In the 1990s, the United States and others weakened the ability of an independent anti-torture subcommittee to inspect places of detention in signatory states . The U.S. and others worked to weaken the U.N. Security Council's ability to inspect detention facilities in sign
 The uN’s new Human Rights Council was writing its rules of operation . China worked with others to block proposals that would have made the council more effective, such as a human rights good-behavior requirement .
 The book’s third case study tracks China's use of the compliance-monitoring committee of the International Labor Organization as a venue to trade favors with like-minded regimes that want to avoid scrutiny .
 The book looks at the story through the prism of diamonds, the colony’s main source of revenue and exports . The book is based on the story of the colony, which was founded in 1903 .
 This is a smart choice, as it allows Press to range widely, from the day-to-day activities in the diamond fields, to business intrigue in Berlin, to the shady politics of the international diamond trade .
 German South West Africa was founded in the 1880s to further the imperial ambitions of German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck . Press’s account shows that the colony well deserved its reputation for brutal violence .
 South West African diamonds came to dominate the huge retail market for gems in the United States . Germany's economic history makes clear the importance of diamonds .
 Natural resource wealth mostly benefited the imperial rulers back home, especially a small number of German banks and businessmen . As in almost every colony, this natural resource wealth mainly benefited the Imperial rulers .
 Most academic studies of Boko Haram have focused on the Islamist militant groups sociological roots and religious antecedents . Boko Haram has been the subject of numerous academic studies in the past .
 Omenit’s highly original study focuses on trying to explain the group's success over the last few decades as a fighting force .
 Nigeria's Boko Haram is based in northeastern Nigeria on the borders with Cameroon, Chad, and Niger . The group has a history of fighting in Nigeria's northern part of the country .
 Many analyses of the group emphasize its use of seemingly indiscriminate violence against civilians, including kidnappings and suicide bombings . The group is known for its indiscriminate attacks on civilians .
 Boko Haram has exhibited both organizational resilience and strategic savvy in its choice of targets and its ability to surprise the Nigerian army with changing tactics . Omeni argues that Boko Haram is sometimes a more traditional insurgency .
 The book also includes a useful discussion of the group’s relationship with the Islamic State (also known as ISIS), which led Boko Haram to fragment into two rival factions in 2016 .
 The book does not discuss the implications of the recent death of Abubakar Shekau, who had led the organization since 2009 . Unfortunately, the book doesn't discuss the impact of the death of the recently deceased leader .
 In 2003, an internationally brokered peace deal formally ended the murderous Second Congo War . Peace deal created a transitional national government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
 The last two decades have been marked by regular outbreaks of violence in the eastern and northeastern regions of the country . Stearns’s book seeks to explain why, despite major UN peacekeeping missions and substantial foreign aid, violence has continued in the region .
 Stearns details the emergence of warlords with ambiguous motivations, the repeated interventions by Rwanda and Uganda, and the role of the incompetent national army .
 An old Congo hand who appears to have interviewed all the key players, Stearns does not offer a linear history of the conflict . Instead, he moves back and forth across the two decades to develop his arguments .
 The violence has been sustained by a “military bourgeoisie” that benefits from instability by plundering natural resources and foreign aid, says the author . But he makes a convincing case that the violence is sustained by the military .
 The government has made things worse by shelling out ‘fighting bonuses’ to military personnel that dwarf their peacetime salaries . “Fighting bonuses” are dwarf the peacetime salary of military personnel .
 In 1926, the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company was looking for a way to reduce its dependence on British suppliers from Southeast Asia . The company was looking to keep up with an explosion in the American appetite for car tires .
 Liberia's economy and policymaking has been dominated by the company . The company came to dominate the country’s economy, policymaking to a remarkable extent .
 Mitman peppers this history with a wealth of fascinating details and interesting characters . Mitman: "It's a great mix of fascinating facts and interesting people"
 Firestone could hasten the emergence of an independent African bourgeoisie . Du Bois would soon regret having believed that Firestone would hasten .
 Liberian heads of state were willing to play along with Firestone . They invested in very profitable rubber plantations of their own .
 There are more than 25 million people who have left their countries of origin because of some combination of economic, environmental, and political crises . Today, there are over 25 million refugees worldwide .
 Such refugees often feature in Western media as a burden on the rich countries of the developed world . Such refugees are often seen as a burdens to the rich world .
 In fact, the overwhelming majority of refugees remain in the region of their homeland . Betts makes clear in this informative account of contemporary refugee policy .
 The three East African countries that provide the main case studies for the book account for some three million refugees today . Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, and Uganda account for around 3 million refugees in the region .
 Betts argues that even in low-income countries, the right mix of policies can ensure that refugees not merely survive in misery but can instead thrive and generate wealth for themselves, their communities, and the host country .
 Refugee refugees have civil and economic rights, allowing them to work, and integrating them more completely in the receiving communities can lead to much better outcomes . In particular, his analysis suggests that providing refugees with civil, economic rights and allowing them work in receiving communities .
 "Backsliding" is a key part of our argument, but it misses key dimensions of the very concept of backsliding . It misses important aspects of the argument but also key dimensions, such as the concept of a backslide .
 Norris argues that we focus primarily on elites and miss larger changes in electorates and the failure of democratic institutions to deliver the goods . Norris argues we focus on elites rather than larger changes to electorates .
 We do define backsliding as purposeful institutional change led by would-be autocrats, but precisely in contexts in which they have gained office in free and fair elections . We define it as purposeless institutional change, but in contexts of free elections .
 Norris: It is ultimately voters who acquiesce to majoritarian and authoritarian appeals . Norris: As Norris notes, it's ultimately voters are ultimately the ones who accept authoritarian appeals. Norris: "Voters are ultimately responsible for their decisions"
 "The starting point in our causal story is polarization, and among publics as well as elites," says David Gergen . Gergen says polarization is the starting point of the story .
 Norris says polarization contributes to government dysfunction that he says we ignore . Norris: It is precisely such polarization that contributes to the government dysfunction .
 Norris chastises us for our narrow and highly heterogeneous sample of 16 cases, but our selection was self-conscious . Norris also chastises them for their narrow sample of . 16 cases .
 Backsliding is an incremental deterioration of democratic institutions and norms in countries that have attained a modicum of democracy to begin with . Backingliding will be incremental deterioration in democratic institutions, experts say .
 There is much more to be said on backsliding, including about its invidious foreign policy consequences . The U.S. has been in the throes of a decade of back-sliding .
 Norris's objections cover ground that is fully addressed in Backsliding . Norris’s objections covered ground that will be addressed in the new book .
 Stephan Haggard and Robert Kaufman’s book makes an invaluable contribution to the debate over the deterioration of democratic institutions, norms, and practices, they say . As my review noted, the book is an invaluable addition to the discussion .
 In this view, the electorate is a facilitator of executive power but not a primary driver of it . Voters “acquiesce” but they are not the reason democracy is eroding, he says .
 Owner (If owned by a corporation, give the name and address of the corporation immediately followed by the names and addresses of all stockholders owning or holding 1 percent or more of the total amount of stock) Share your address, name your corporation, address and address .
 If not owned by a corporation, give the names and addresses of the individual owners . Give the names of the individuals who own the property .
 If owned by a partnership or other unincorporated firm, give its name and address as well as those of each individual owner . Give your address and the name of the firm that you are owned .
 It is structural and cultural changes in mass society that are the primary long-term drivers of backsliding . It is . resulting in consequences for institutions and opportunities for strategic elites, she says .
 There is clearly room for supply-side, demand-side and institutional accounts in the literature on democratic regression . There is no shortage of accounts for democratic regression, says Julian Zelizer .
 Analysts should not have to artificially pick one or another in any comprehensive understanding . Analysts do not and should not choose one of the two options, they say. Analysts need to be able to find out which one is best .
 There are profound differences in theoretical emphasis and empirical evidence . But there is profound differences between theories and evidence, says CNN.com .
 Mailed Outside-County Paid Subscriptions Stated on PS Form 3541 (Included paid Distribution above nominal rate, advertisers proof copies, and exchange copies) 108,269 2. Mailed outside-county paid subscriptions . Mailed out-of-count
 Paid Subscriptions Stated on PS Form 3541 (Included paid Distribution above nominal rate, advertisers proof copies, and exchange copies) 3. Mailed In-county Paid Subsidents (Mails In-County paid Subs) Mailed Subs. St
 Sales Through Dealers and Carriers, Street Vendors, Counter Sales, and Other Paid Distribution Outside USPS 14,073 14,400 4,400 . 4,700 paid distribution outside USPS .
 Paid Distribution by Other Classes of Mail through the USPS 17,782 18,350 C Total Paid Distribution 138,565 141,019 D Free or Nominal Rate Distribution 1. The USPS paid distribution by other classes of mail .
 Free or Nominal Rate Copies Mailed at Other Classes through the USPS 4.0 . Copies can be sent at other classes through the postal service .
 Statement of Ownership will be printed in the November/December 2021 issue of this issue . The purpose, function and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for publication .
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS furnishes false or misleading information on this form or . who omits material or information . requested on the form may be subject to criminal sanctions 14.14. furnish false or . misleading information .
 Foreign Affairs Brain Trust asked experts whether they agreed or disagreed that U.S. foreign policy has become too hostile to China . We asked dozens of experts whether or not the United States has become more hostile toward China .