 For those too young to remember the only direct nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, Mr Frankel's short and graceful account is an excellent introduction to the vital part of our recent past . For those who are not familiar with the Cold War, Frankel is
 For those already steeped in missile crisis lore, Mr Frankel offers new insights . In 1962, unlike 2003, there really were weapons of mass destruction, unlike Iraq .
 High-altitude photographs found and identified the missiles before they were deployed . The missiles will be deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The missiles were discovered by a U-2 overflight on Oct. 1962 . President Kennedy decided that the deployment of such weapons was unacceptable .
 The 44-year-old president absented himself from many of the ExCom meetings to allow freer debate . He was kept informed by his brother Robert, then attorney general, and by Theodore C Sorensen, his brilliant alter ego, who drafted many key public statements and
 Both women agreed, after personal requests from Kennedy, not to print the story . They both agreed to be anonymous .
 Once he was caught red-handed, Khrushchev realized that the Soviet Union would have to back down . It was, given the stakes, the correct decision .
 This concerned the removal of 15 Jupiter medium-range missiles from Turkey . The missiles were removed from the country in a bid to remove them .
 By the time they were installed in early 1962 they were already obsolete . President Dwight D Eisenhower said they should have been dumped at sea rather than sent to Turkey .
 A trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for the American Jupiters in Turkey would have constituted a substantial propaganda victory for Khrushchev . Kennedy feared it would have encouraged future Soviet blackmail . Kennedy set out to construct a fully deniable ""non-deal deal"" on the Jup
 Soviet missile team in Cuba shot down a U-2, killing its pilot; Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended immediate military retaliation . Castro asked Khrushchev for urgent help against an invasion he expected within hours .
 Khrushchev sent President Kennedy a letter -his second in two days - that deeply alarmed Washington . Worst of all was a letter to President Kennedy, his second letter to the president .
 It was far more threatening than the first, and, worse, the Soviets broadcast its full text on Radio Moscow . The Soviets broadcast the full text of the text on radio Moscow .
 Kennedy told Kennedy he needed a commitment by the next day that bases would be removed . Kennedy told him that the president needed to commit to removing bases from the U.S. The bases were removed .
 Kennedy replied, using clever formulation devised by Rusk, that the Jupiter missiles were not an ""insurmountable obstacle" but that, if removed, they could never be linked publicly to the missiles in Cuba . If removed, the missiles would never be publicly linked to Cuba .
 The original records of this conversation were carefully edited to remove any hint that there was a connection . Moscow never mentioned the issue publicly . And it would require four to five months and consultations with America's NATO allies .
 Many observers suspected a deal from the outset, but it was only decades later that the full story emerged . The Americans had the necessary deniability. President Kennedy's deft combination of threats and harmless fig leafs worked .
 The next day the Soviets issued a public statement that effectively ended the crisis . The Soviets issued the statement the next day . It was the first public statement since the crisis began .
 There is no certainty that other presidents would have handled history's only nuclear confrontation with superpowers with such coolness and skill .
 Kennedy said there were generals, and not only generals, who were "itching for a fight" Kennedy said: "There were, Kennedy said, generals who were 'itching for the fight"