 Boomers remember the Cuban missile crisis as an October 1962 event . The event grew from a simple announcement into the shuddering fear of nuclear apocalypse .
 What follows is a chronologically simplified list of the various events that preceded the crisis, the crisis itself, and its aftermath . The list includes the events leading up to the crisis and aftermath .
 President Kennedy accepted “sole responsibility” following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . In November he authorized an aggressive covert operations against Fidel Castro . President Kennedy took responsibility for the failed invasion .
 Operation Mongoose’s goal was to remove the communists from power to “help Cuba overthrow the Communist regime,” including its leader Fidel Castro . The mission was to help Cuba overthrow its leader, including Castro .
 Fidel Castro informed visiting Soviet officials that Cuba would accept the deployment of nuclear weapons . Fidel Castro told Soviet officials he would accept deployment of the weapons .
 U.S. Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone stated at a high-level meeting that circumstantial evidence suggested that the Soviet Union was constructing offensive missile installations in Cuba . McCone: "There is circumstantially evidence" that the Soviets were constructing missile installations .
 Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara disagreed with McCone, arguing that the build-up was purely defensive . McNamara and Rusk argued that the buildup was only defensive .
 U-2 surveillance flight provided conclusive evidence of the existence of missile sites at eight different locations in Cuba . 12 days later, on August 29, a high-altitude U.2. surveillance flight .
 Some intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba, the U.S. State Dept. says .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós spoke at the UN General Assembly: “If … we are attacked, we will defend ourselves. We will defend us," he said .
 President Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only . Four days later, on October 18, Kennedy met . The weapons were said to be for defense only .
 Kennedy did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up . Not wanting to expose what he already knew, and wanting to avoid panicking the American public, he did not .
 President Kennedy announced the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and ordered a naval blockade . President Kennedy ordered a blockade .
 Low level photo of missile site under construction at Cuba’s San Cristobal area . Medium range ballistic missile site .
 Added since October 14, are fuel trailers, a missile shelter tent, and equipment . Added since Oct. 14, were fuel trailers and a shelter tent .
 President John F Kennedy spoke before reporters during a televised speech to the nation about the strategic blockade of Cuba . He also warned the Soviet Union about missile sanctions . Kennedy was speaking to reporters before reporters .
 Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting at the U.N. Stevenson challenged him to admit the existence of the missiles .
 The Soviets responded to the blockade by turning back 14 ships presumably carrying offensive weapons . The blockade was the result of the blockade of the Soviet Union .
 B-52 bombers were dispersed to various locations and made ready to take off, fully equipped . Meanwhile, B-51 bombers were dispersing to other locations .
 The message offered a new trade, that the missiles on Cuba would be removed in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey . The message was posted in the U.S. State Department .
 Cuba shot down a United States U2 plane with surface to air missile killing the pilot, Rudolf Anderson . The plane was shot down with a surface-to-air missile, killing Anderson .
 U.S. Army anti-aircraft rockets pointed out over the Florida Straits in Key West, Florida . The rockets were fired from a range in Florida's Atlantic Ocean .
 Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . The bases were removed from the Soviet Union's Cuba base .
 Rudolph Anderson’s body is interred in Greenville, South Carolina at Woodlawn Memorial Park . Rudolph Anderson's body was interred at a South Carolina memorial park .
 One full-time duplex wire telegraph circuit, routed Washington, routed London, used for the transmission of messages . Moscow used for service communications and for coordination of operations .
 President John F Kennedy signed the documents of ratification for a nuclear test ban treaty with Britain and the Soviet Union . The treaty was ratified by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Ambassador William Attwood secretly called Castro’s aide and physician, Rene Vallejo, to discuss a possible secret meeting in Havana . Attwood, a Kennedy delegate to the U.N., was a Cuban-American delegate in the 1960s . The meeting was the first
 Attwood was told by Castro’s U.N. ambassador, Carlos Lechuga, in September 1963, that the Cuban leader wished to establish back-channel communications with Washington . Attwood had been told by the Cuban president that he wanted to establish communications with the U.
 Attwood and Lechuga have yet to agree on an agenda for talks with Castro . Attwood says the president would tell him what to say to Castro .
 Kennedy had settled the Cuban crisis, in part, by pledging that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . However that pledge was conditioned on the presumption that Castro would stop trying to encourage other revolutions like his own .
 Helms brandished what he called a “vicious-looking’looking” rifle and told the president how its identifying Cuban seal had been sanded off . Helms said the rifle was sanded away from the identifying Cuban symbol .
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Required fields are marked . Required fields include comment and email .