 Students will listen to the actual speech President Kennedy gave during the Crisis to address the Soviet threat coming from Cuba . Students will also discuss the implications for American citizens during the period .
 Students will compose a letter to Khrushchev from the perspective of the President . Students will also write a letter about how they believe a resolution could be reached . The students will then write a personal letter to the Soviet leader .
 North Carolina Essential Standards for American History II and AH2 . Grade 11 North Carolina . American History I and II . AH2. II .
 Students should have a basic understanding of the communist ideology and how it differs from democracy . Additionally, students should have an understanding of how democracy differs from communism .
 As a security measure, all schools are required to have periodic ‘air raid’ drills . The drills are designed to prepare students in the unlikely event of an attack by terrorists .
 Tell them that when they hear the alarm, they are to get under their desks, put their heads between their legs, and fold their arms over their heads to shield themselves against debris . Tell them to put your heads between legs, put your arms over your heads and fold them to shield
 Once you have explained the procedure sound an alarm and have them practice . Sound an alarm to help them learn how to use the alarm system .
 Tell students it is for their own good, it is only practice, and ask them to participate in the drill .
 After students have assumed the position, turn off the alarm and have them return to their seats . The alarm will be set off at the end of each session .
 Ask questions about their thoughts and feelings concerning the drill . Ask probing questions about what they think and feelings they feel about the drill.
 “Duck and Cover” was a social guidance film produced in 1951 by the United States federal government's Civil Defense branch shortly after the Soviet Union began nuclear testing . Share the background information with students before showing the video .
 The movie states that nuclear war could happen at any time without warning . U.S. citizens should keep this constantly in mind and always be ready .
 Tell them if they are over the age of 56, then they lived through this period . Tell them that if they're over the . age of . 56, if they . are over a . 56 then they will be able to tell their story to the public .
 If their grandparents are older than 61, it means they were old enough to go to school during the early 1960s . It is very likely that they had to participate in similar drills or even worse .
 Present students with the attached picture of an actual public school drill from the 1950s . The drill was actually a real school drill .
 At least they didn't have to go out in the hallway and lay on the ground face down . Point out that while they might have felt foolish ‘hiding’ under their desks, at least they did not have to lay face down. Point out .
 The communist government of the Soviet Union wanted to convert other countries to communism . The government wanted to turn other countries into communist countries .
 The US pledged to support free countries so they could resist communism . The pledge was made to help free countries resist the threat of communism .
 Both countries had nuclear weapons and were capable of launching a nuclear war . Both countries were able to launch nuclear war in the 1980s .
 Many Western European countries sided with the US to form NATO (National Atlantic Treaty Organization) in 1949 . NATO was formed by the United States in 1949 after the war of the Cold War .
 Many Eastern European countries signed the Warsaw Pact and formed an alliance with the Soviet Union . Eastern European nations signed Warsaw Pact with Soviet Union in order to form alliance .
 Cuba, located only 90 miles off the coast of Florida, sided with the Soviet Union after Fidel Castro came to power in 1959 . Cuba is located just 90 miles from Florida .
 A nuclear weapon capable of destroying entire cities could be deployed . With the push of a button on either side, a nuclear weapon could be used .
 As soon as a weapon was deployed, the other side would inevitably retaliate, leading to a full-­­­‐scale nuclear war and possibly even nuclear annihilation . The U.S. and South Korea are at odds of nuclear war .
 People who lived during the time feared that if one side launched a nuclear weapon, the entire planet could be virtually destroyed . Many people who lived in the 1950s feared that nuclear fallout would make huge areas of land uninhabitable .
 Many people worried about the possibility of nuclear fallout and thus took precautions to protect themselves . Explain to students that many people took precautions in the wake of the threat .
 Project the attached images of an air raid shelter and a fallout shelter and ask students to guess what they think they are looking at . Project the images of the two shelters and try to find out what you think they're looking like .
 A fallout shelter is an enclosed space designed to protect occupants from radioactive debris, or “fallout,” that results from a nuclear explosion . Explain that some people took during the Cold War was to build a fallout shelter .
 Once a nuclear weapon had been fired, radiation would be deadly to anyone coming into contact with it . Anyone coming in contact with a nuclear bomb would be killed by radiation .
 fallout shelters were designed to allow their occupants to minimize exposure to harmful fallout until radioactivity has dissipated to a safer level . The shelters are designed to protect people from exposure to radioactivity .
 These shelters were generally built below ground, at depths where radiation would not seep . The shelters were built in places where radiation could not be seeped .
 Primary source source images from a 1960s handbook on fallout shelters . To enrich the conversation or handout the attached primary source images .
 Read aloud as a class, taking time to address the ‘take-­­‐away’/discussion questions following each brief section . Read aloud and discuss the contents of each section .
 Instruct them to listen carefully and answer guided listening questions as they hear them addressed . Tell them what you want to hear from your child .
 After students have had an opportunity to listen to the speech, discuss their answers to the guided listening questions .
 Soviet government cannot instruct captains of Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe orders of American naval forces blockading this island . U.S. forces blockaded this island, therefore, the Soviet government can't instruct captains .
 Our instructions to Soviet sailors are to observe strictly the generally accepted standards of navigation in international waters and not retreat one step from them . Our instructions are to . observe strictly . accepted standards, not retreat from them.
 If the U.S. side violates these rights, it must be aware of the responsibility it will bear for this act . And, if the American side violates it, it will be responsible for it .
 "To be sure, we will not remain mere observers of pirate actions by American ships in the open sea," says President Obama .
 "We will then be forced on our part to take those measures we deem necessary and sufficient to defend our rights," he said . The government will be forced to take 'necessary and sufficient' measures, he added .
 This excerpt is taken from an actual letter written to President Kennedy from Khrushchev . Inform your students that this excerpt was taken from a letter written from President Kennedy to President Khruschev .
 Students assume the persona of President Kennedy and compose a letter in response to Khrushchev . Then, as a writing exercise, have students write a letter to President Kennedy . Students write a response to the letter .
 Have students interview parents/grandparents or an elder community member about what it was like to be alive during the Cold War . Have students present their findings to class .
 Ask the guest to talk about how the fear of nuclear war manifested itself in day-­­‐to-­‐day school life .
 The crisis began on October 14, 1962 when photographs taken during a reconnaissance flight over Cuba by a US U-­‐2 spy plane revealed that the Soviet Union had secretly started building bases for medium-­­‐range ballistic missiles on the island .
 Scholars debate why the Soviet Union took this confrontational step . Scholars still debate why it took this confrontation step .
 Some argue that the Soviets wanted to protect their ally Cuba from the United States . The U.S. had tried various times to topple Fidel Castro following his assumption of power . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy learned of the news two days later and met with his top advisers to decide how to respond . Kennedy met with top advisers-­‐-­­‐later dubbed the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 If operational and equipped with nuclear warheads, missiles could quickly destroy targets within the United States . Kennedy and his advisers agreed that the weapons presented a grave threat and needed to be removed .
 At first, Kennedy and the ExComm favored a military response, with options ranging from airstrikes on the missile bases to an all-­­­‐out invasion of Cuba .
 ExComm members became more and more concerned that it could provoke a Soviet response that might lead to a full-­­­‐scale war . The military alternative lost favor, however, as the military alternative became less popular .
 Central Intelligence Agency reported some Soviet MRBMs in Cuba were already operational, probably armed with nuclear warheads . Such worries gained greater credence when the CIA reported that some Soviet weapons in Cuba could already be operational .
 The Doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction is the doctrine of military strategy in which a full-­­­‐scale use of nuclear weapons by two opposing sides would effectively result in the destruction of both the attacker and the defender .
 It is based on the theory of ‘deterrence’ which says that simply having weapons (or even making the enemy think you do) can threaten the enemy and prevent them from using the very same weapons .
 The strategy must be employed by both sides to avoid the worst possible outcome . Both sides must avoid nuclear annihilation .
 Kennedy elected not to strike the missile bases in Cuba . Ultimately, Kennedy chose not to attack the bases .
 The President chose to surround Cuba with a naval blockade, called a “quarantine,“ which technically was a violation of international law . The President, during an ExComm meeting held on October 20, chose to instead chose to .
 The blockade was designed to prevent the Soviet Union from introducing more weapons or warheads into Cuba . The blockade offered several advantages over a military strike, including a blockade .
 The U.S. offered the option of increasing pressure on the Soviet Union to remove its missiles if need be . While signaling the United States’ determination, it was flexible, it offered Kennedy and his advisers .
 The crisis and the White House response remained secret until October 22, when President Kennedy, in a nationally televised address, informed the American people about the missiles . President Kennedy announced the quarantine of Cuba on October 22 .
 The public waited as the world seemed poised on the brink of nuclear war . Public waited for the public to see if the world would go to war .
 How do you think the Soviet leader felt about the blockade, which as technically illegal?
 Answers came two days later, October 24, when several Soviet ships turned back from the quarantine line . The Crisis Averted Answers came 2 days later .
 Khrushchev proposed a solution to the problem in a letter to President Kennedy on October 26 . The Soviets, through numerous channels, proposed the solution . The letter was sent to Kennedy on that day .
 The Soviet Union would remove its missiles if the United States lifted the blockade and pledged not to invade Cuba . The U.S. would lift the blockade if it lifted the Soviet Union's blockade .
 A U-­­‐2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba and its pilot killed, one of several events that threatened to escalate the crisis . Meanwhile, the U.S. was shooting down a spy plane over Cuba .
 President Kennedy deliberately ignored Khrushchev's second letter to the Soviet Premier . President Kennedy accepted the terms outlined in his first-­­‐-­‐removing the missiles in exchange for lifting the blockade and issuing a non-­-invasion pledge .
 On October 28, Khrushchev replied positively to Kennedy's letter, thereby peacefully ending a potentially catastrophic crisis . Kennedy: "It's a good thing to say 'Yes' on October 28"
 Kennedy and his advisers responded cautiously but firmly to the Soviet emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba . They opted for a flexible blockade rather than a potentially escalatory military alternative . The blockade was a response to a potential escalation of military action .
 Evidence about near misses, accidents, and unauthorized actions recently has come to light suggesting that the crisis came dangerously close to spinning out of control .
 Given the tensions of October 1962, the downing of a U-­‐2 over Cuba or straying of a . U.S. aircraft over Soviet airspace could have been interpreted as a deliberate provocation requiring a military response .
 The superpowers pulled back from the nuclear brink in the wake of the crisis . In any event, the superpowers pull back from nuclear brink .
 Within a year, Kennedy and Khrushchev signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was the first international agreement on nuclear weapons . It was also the first nuclear test ban treaty .
 The superpowers installed a ""hotline"" to improve communication between the White House and the Soviet Union . The 'hotline' was installed to improve communications between the two countries .
 Guided Listening Questions: Listen carefully to the first 11 minutes of President Kennedy’s speech . Answer the following questions as you hear them addressed . Listen carefully and answer the questions as the speech begins .