 By then, Kennedy had replaced military advisors he inherited from Eisenhower with people of his own choosing . Kennedy replaced them with people he had chosen from Eisenhower's own choosing.
 Wheeler replaced Decker as Army Chief of Staff . Maxwell Taylor returned to active duty . Wheeler succeeded Lemnitzer as Chairman of the Army .
 Earlier, Anderson had replaced Burke as CNO and LeMay had succeeded Thomas D White as Air Force Chief of Staff . LeMay succeeded White as the Air Force chief of Staff and Anderson replaced Burke .
 In Taylor’s view, LeMay was a superb operational commander, as demonstrated by his accomplishments in World War II and during the years he ran the Strategic Air Command .
 Though he found LeMay coarse, rude, and overbearing, he felt he had to promote him in view of the general’s seniority and strong popular and congressional following, he said .
 He said he was one of the few military professionals he respected and felt comfortable with . Indeed, he said, he was a respected military professional .
 To his JCS colleagues, Taylor’s return to the Pentagon was less than welcome owing to the political overtones surrounding his appointment, his identification with administration policies .
 As Chairman, he saw himself mainly as the agent of his civilian superiors . He tried to craft military recommendations that harmonized with civilian views and administration programs .
 The Joint Staff is only “marginally effective” because of its “inherent slowness” in addressing issues and providing timely responses, he said . The JCS were losing influence, he attributed this to the Joint Staff .
 Service chiefs believed they could not always count on Taylor to convey their views fairly and accurately to the President . Some of the Service chiefs believe they can't always count against Taylor .
 Taylor’s hearing difficulties may have exacerbated the problem . He could not be relied on to report what the President or other senior officials said .
 Taylor was still in the White House as the President’s military representative when the Cuban missile crisis unfolded . Taylor was in the President's military representative at the time .
 Kennedy administration sought to isolate Castro’s Cuba and undermine its authority and influence . The Bay of Pigs episode was the result of the Kennedy administration's efforts to isolate Cuba . Castro's Cuban government was overthrown in 1961 .
 Joint Chiefs' contribution was a set of plans for a swift and powerful U.S. invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro’s government in an 8-day campaign . The Joint Chiefs’ contribution was to a plan for an 8 day campaign .
 President Kennedy concurred in the general outline of the plan . Meeting with Secretary McNamara and Admiral Burke on April 29, 1961 .
 The President turned to his brother, Robert, to coordinate the effort . He preferred to draw on Taylor, a family friend, rather than the JCS for military advice .
 The Kennedy administration’s growing obsession with Cuba reflected a fundamental shift in the focus of Cold War politics . Like the struggle for Laos, the struggle was similar to that of Laos . Like Laos, it was a shift in focus in focus of the Cold War .
 During the late 1940s and 1950s, Europe and Northeast Asia had been at the center of the Cold War . During the 1950s and 1960s, Asia and Europe was at the heart of the cold war .
 By the early 1960s, despite occasional flare-ups over Berlin and along the demilitarized zone between North and 2 South Korea, the contest for control in these areas was essentially over and settled in .
 President Kennedy referred to Khrushchev’s speech often . President Kennedy considered it clear evidence that the United States needed to pay more attention to the Third World .
 In particular, he stressed the development of aid programs to improve living conditions . He stressed the acquisition of more effective tools for counterinsurgency warfare .
 Khrushchev found the temptation of establishing a strong Soviet presence in Cuba irresistible . The Cuban island nation is 90 miles from the southern coast of the United States .
 Cuba would also serve as a hub for spreading Communism throughout Latin America . The weapons would counterbalance the deployment of American forces in Europe and the Near East .
 Khrushchev risked losing his foothold in Cuba by placing strategic nuclear missiles there . Less clear is why he chose to risk a sharp U.S. response to the provocation .
 Khrushchev justified his actions as providing Castro with deterrence against U.S. attack . In his memoirs, he said his actions provided Castro with a deterrence against American attack .
 There may have been a handful of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba at the time . Evidence of their presence is sketchy and has never been positively confirmed .
 The most plausible explanation for Khrushchev's actions is that he was trying to bolster the Soviet Union’s strategic posture and overplayed his hand, writes David Gergen . Gergen: Most plausible explanation is that the most plausible is he overplayed .
 Khrushchev was a “crude” thinker 3 who miscalculated that he could push the President around with impunity . Kennedy loyalists like diplomat George Ball was a "crude" thinker 3 . The consensus was that he was a 'crude' thinker who m
 The decision to deploy missiles in Cuba emerged from an informal meeting in the spring of 1962 between Khrushchev and Marshal Rodion Malinovskiy, the minister of defense .
 Malinovskiy complained about the presence of 15 U.S. Jupiter mediumrange ballistic missiles in Turkey . He said the need to redress this situation is urgent .
 Malinovskiy: The Russians were an irritant requiring diversion of resources . While not a serious military threat, they were not in the view a serious threat, Malinovsky said .
 Khrushchev seized on the idea of putting strategic missiles in Cuba . One thing led to another and it was from these conversations that Khruschev seized upon the idea . Khruski: "One thing led . to another"
 Khrushchev relied on the Soviet General Staff to concoct an elaborate deception scheme to implement his policy . The Soviet Union used the deception to implement its policy .
 The operation involved assembling and outfitting in total secrecy over 50,000 soldiers, airmen, and sailors, calculating the weapons, equipment, supplies, and support they would need for a prolonged stay in Cuba, finding 85 freighters for transportation, and completing the mission in 5 months .
 Senior members of the Soviet Defense Council initially resisted the idea . Khrushchev was a practiced expert in bullying people, he got his way .
 A high-level Soviet military delegation, posing as engineers, visited Havana and secured Castro’s agreement to the plan . The Soviet delegation posed as engineers and secured the agreement to Cuba .
 On September 8, 1962, the first SS–4 MRBMs were unloaded in Cuba . They were the first to be delivered to Cuba in 1962 .
 Their nuclear warheads began arriving a month later, though their presence went undetected by U.S. intelligence . Their arrival was a month after they began arriving in the United States .
 Rumors were rife within intelligence circles and the Cuban exile community in south Florida that the Soviets were up to something . By summer, rumors were rife in the exile community .
 Attention focused on apparent buildup of conventional arms in Dardanelles . CIA confirmed in July and August through U– 2 photographs, HUMINT sources, and NSA surveillance .
 The CIA detected increased construction activity for SA–2 antiaircraft missile installations and a partially finished surface-to-surface missile complex at the Cuban coastal town of Banes, reported to President Kennedy on September 7 . The CIA also detected increased activity .
 The Banes installation was for short-range antiship cruise missiles and did not pose a serious threat to U.S. vessels . President Kennedy imposed tight compartmentalization on all intelligence dealing with offensive weapons .
 Earlier, he had imposed similar constraints on the dissemination of SA–2 surface-to-air missile information .
 These precautions severely limited the distribution of intelligence data, even among high-level officials and senior analysts .
 Whether they prevented critical intelligence from reaching the JCS is unclear . It's unclear whether they stopped critical intelligence reaching JCS .
 As part of the deception operation, the Soviets maintained they had no plans to deploy offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Soviets maintained that they had . no plans for offensive nuclear missile deployment .
 Until U–2 pictures proved otherwise, the Intelligence Community accepted U.2 assurances at face value . U.S. intelligence community had been assured of U.N. presence in Syria .
 Monthly U–2 overflights of Cuba had been routine since the Bay of Pigs . By September 1962, with reports of increased Soviet activity, the Kennedy administration fell under growing pressure .
 As more SA–2 sites became operational, the U–2s were increasingly vulnerable, raising fears of a repeat of the Powers incident .
 To gloss over the loss of coverage, the White House termed these “additional” flights, which technically they were. The White House glossed over the coverage of the coverage .
 General Lemnitzer still considered U.S. surveillance of Cuba to be “adequate” in light of current policy and military requirements . As late as September 24, however, he still considered United States surveillance .
 The JCS were well aware of the danger posed by the growing Soviet presence in Cuba . Castro’s stubborn hold on power despite ongoing economic, diplomatic, and covert efforts to loosen his grip .
 JCS continued to focus on various contingency plans to cripple or topple Castro’s regime . Convinced that the time was fast approaching when only a military solution would suffice, the JCS focused on contingency plans .
 Also on the table was a Joint Strategic Survey Council proposal to impose a naval blockade of Cuba .
 The JCS paid less attention to this option than the others because there was no guarantee it would assure Castro’s downfall . However, the JCS focused on this option because it was not guaranteed to assure Castro's downfall . This option was less likely than the other .
 The Joint Chiefs did not discuss the plans with senior administration figures outside the Pentagon . Treating these plans as exceedingly sensitive, the Joint Chiefs didn't discuss them in any detail .
 Their possible political and diplomatic impact remained unassessed . Consequently, their possible political, diplomatic impact was unassessed .
 The President’s views, insofar as they were known to the JCS, favored continuing surveillance of the island and avoidance of a military confrontation . The President's views,  favored continuing surveillance and avoiding military confrontation, he said .
 Kennedy asked Congress in September for authority to call up 150,000 Reservists . In early October he and McNamara discussed the possibility of an air strike to take out SA–2 sites .
 President wanted better information before taking further action . But before taking action, he said he needed better information .
 On October 12, with the SA–2 threat still his uppermost concern, he transferred operational command and control of U–2 flights over Cuba from the CIA to the Strategic Air Command . He authorized the resumption of direct overflights, limited to the western tip of the island for
 Two days later, SAC’s first U–2 mission confirmed that the Soviets were deploying SS–4 medium-range surface-to-surface missiles on the island . The Soviets deployed the missiles on SAC's first mission .
 Subsequent flights revealed that the Soviets were also constructing SS–5 intermediate-range ballistic missile sites . Subsequent tests revealed that Soviet missile sites were also being built in the USSR .
 The discovery that the Soviets were deploying offensive strategic missiles in Cuba presented Kennedy with the most serious foreign policy crisis of his Presidency . The discovery of the Soviet Union's strategic missile deployment presented the President with a crisis of foreign policy . Kennedy faced a crisis in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis
 Militarily, the MRBMs and IRBMs the Soviets were deploying in Cuba were comparable to the Thor and Jupiter missiles the United States had deployed to Britain, Italy, and Turkey the previous few years .
 With ranges of up to 1,200 miles for the MRBMs and 2,500 miles for IRBMs, the Soviets could threaten most of the eastern half of the U.S. with nuclear destruction . With ranges up to 2,000 miles, the Soviet Union could threaten
 By themselves, these weapons may have done little or nothing to change the overall strategic balance . The United States continued to hold a substantial lead in ICBMs and long-range strategic bombers .
 The threat was much 7 too large and close to home to ignore . All the same, the threat is much much larger than it was to ignore.
 With the congressional mid-term elections looming, a decisive response became all the more certain . With the mid-terms looming, the president's response became even more certain.
 Kennedy improvised through an ad hoc body known as the Executive Committee, or ExCom . ExCom is a body of ad hoc bodies known as ExCom. ExCom was created by Kennedy to manage the crisis .
 ExCom operated for security reasons with no pre-set agenda . ExCom initially consisted of Cabinet-level officials, a handful of close aides, and a few outside advisors .
 As time passed, the list of attendees steadily grew to more than seventy people, mostly civilians . Most of the attendees were from civilians .
 Joint Chiefs were actively engaged in contingency planning throughout the crisis . They were not directly privy to ExCom’s deliberations or even much of the information that passed through it .
 General Taylor was the sole JCS member on the ExCom and one of its few members with significant military experience . General Taylor is one of the few members of ExCom with significant experience .
 During the crisis, the Joint Chiefs met privately with the President only once, on October 19 . President Obama met with them only once during the crisis .
 In his memoirs, Taylor acknowledged that some of the chiefs distrusted him . Taylor acknowledges that some chiefs had distrust him . He also acknowledged that he had a relationship with the British government .
 He added that he repeatedly volunteered to arrange more meetings with the President, but that none of the Service chiefs showed any interest .
 The main advantage of a larger and more conspicuous JCS presence in the ExCom would have been closer coordination . The JCS would have had a more conspicuous presence in ExCom .
 Policymakers would have had a clearer understanding of the military options and the Joint Chiefs a fuller appreciation of the political and diplomatic dimensions of the problem . Policymakers should have been able to better understand the military and diplomatic options .
 In the JCS view, the deployment of offensive missiles in Cuba was a serious provocation that more than justified Castro’s removal from power by force if necessary . The JCS says Castro's removal would be justified by force .
 From the onset of the crisis, the JCS favored a direct and unequivocal military response to eliminate all Soviet missiles from Cuba and, in the process, to “get rid” of Castro . The JCS favors a direct military response, to eliminate Soviet missiles .
 During the Bay of 8 Pigs, he had wanted the Joint Chiefs to speak out more . He had wanted them to speak more during the Bay .
 By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, he had little interest in what they had to say . He had little time to listen to the Cuban leaders' views .
 By keeping them at arm's length, he could acknowledge their suggestions but ignore them as well . He could acknowledge them but ignore their suggestions as well, as well as ignore them .
 There was little repetition of the squabbling that had exposed their disunity and marred their effectiveness during the Berlin and Laos episodes . Throughout their deliberations, there was little .
 U.S. Commander in Chief, Atlantic, to exercise primary responsibility for Cuban contingencies . Commander D. Dennison, commander in chief, Atlantic to exercise responsibility for Cuba contingencies, will be in charge .
 McNamara authorized U.S. combat aircraft to fly with nuclear weapons . Facing a shortage of conventional munitions, McNamara approved the move . McNamara was forced to use nuclear weapons against conventional forces .
 Joint Chiefs confined presentation to President on October 19 to air attack phase . Joint Chiefs accepted McNamara’s advice and confined presentation .
 The Air Force chief doubts whether a naval blockade or lesser measures will permanently neutralize the missile threat . The most ardent advocate of this course was LeMay, the most ardent supporter of the blockade . The U.S. has been criticized for its approach to Iran .
 Kennedy seemed to like the idea of a “surgical” air strike against IR/MRBM sites alone . Kennedy seemed like a "surgical" air strike alone .
 A large-scale air campaign (especially one that might involve tactical nuclear weapons) was another matter . In exploring options with the JCS, he expressed concern that it might invite Soviet reprisals .
 Kennedy also feared that an American attack of any sort on Cuba with the Soviets there could escalate into a nuclear exchange . Kennedy feared an attack on Cuba could lead to a nuclear war .
 The next day, after a rambling 2-hour ExCom session, the President decided to put both an air campaign and an invasion on hold and to impose a blockade . A blockade amounted to a declaration of war in international law .
 General Taylor strenuously defended the JCS position in favor of air strikes . Taylor played down the possibility that the use of nuclear weapons against Cuban targets would invite nuclear retaliation from the Soviets .
 Taylor returned to the Pentagon to brief his JCS colleagues . Afterwards he returned to brief them on the Pentagon .
 Taylor said that the decisive votes had come from McNamara, Rusk, and UN Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson, all of whom strongly opposed air attacks .
 Kennedy and the Joint Chiefs were not, in fact, as far apart as it seemed . Kennedy and his Joint Chiefs are not, as well apart as they seemed, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 The President directed the Joint Chiefs to proceed with the military buildup opposite Cuba . Even though the President preferred the quarantine, he had not categorically ruled out either an air attack or an invasion .
 Joint Chiefs ordered SAC bombers up to the “radar line” where the Soviets would detect them . Joint Chiefs also ordered the Commander in Chief to begin generating his forces toward DEFCON 2 .
 Joint Chiefs instructed Admiral Dennison on October 26 to concentrate his preparations on OPLAN–316, which he could execute on shorter notice . The Joint Chiefs decided to move the operation away from the large-scale invasion .
 McNamara told the ExCom that the U.S. would “keep the heat on” the Russians . McNamara: By leaving the invasion and other military options open, the United States would keep the "heat on" Russia .
 Kennedy thus found military power indispensable, even if he felt events were taking over . Kennedy was president of the U.S. in the 1960s and '60s .
 "To go beyond a show of force, as he demonstrated time and again during the crisis, was out of the question without the most extreme provocation," he said . But to go beyond that was out the question, he said, without the extreme provocation, he added .
 Joint Chiefs and civilian superiors are at odds with each other . The Joint Chiefs have a strained relationship with their civilian superiors . The tensions further exacerbated the already strained relationship .
 The most serious clash was between McNamara and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson .
 Anderson vehemently objected to the intrusion of civilians into the management of naval operations . Anderson professed the utmost respect for civilian authority, but he vehemently objected .
 The night before, the Office of Naval Intelligence had received unconfirmed reports that, rather than risk inspections under the quarantine, many Soviet merchant ships heading for Cuba, including some suspected of carrying missiles, had slowed, changed course or turned back .
 ONI insisted on visual verification from U.S. warships and reconnaissance aircraft before giving the information wide distribution . The information was verified by the United States, ONI said .
 It was not until noon the next day that McNamara and the White House finally received the information . As a result, McNamara's office was forced to withhold the information from McNamara until noon .
 Anderson declined to explain why it had taken so long for the information to reach McNamara . Anderson took umbrage at the Secretary’s manner .
 The Secretary of Defense stalked out, resolving as he left to be rid of Anderson at the earliest convenient opportunity . Tempers flared and the secretary of defense left .
 A similar communications lapse took place a few days later, on October 27, during the height of the crisis, as chances for a negotiated settlement dwindle .
 Khrushchev letter linked the removal of U.S. Jupiter MRBMs from Turkey to removal of Soviet offensive missiles from Cuba . At issue was a truculent letter linking the removal . of the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey with Cuba .
 Jupiters were vulnerable to a preemptive attack and had a low level of readiness because they used nonstorable liquid fuel . Deployed above ground at “soft” fixed sites, the Jupits were vulnerable .
 Kennedy had never attached much military value to them and, treating them as ‘obsolete,” was inclined to deal with them . Kennedy was not particularly fond of the U.S. military in the 1960s .
 Joint Chiefs began making preparations to go to the White House the next morning to bring the President up to date on the status of war plans . Secretary of State Rusk had come up with a scheme to break the impasse, and early that evening he and the President held a short meeting
 Others present were McGeorge Bundy, McNamara, Gilpatric, Robert Kennedy, George Ball, Theodore Sorensen and Llewellyn E Thompson, the former U.S. Ambassador to Moscow .
 It was at this gathering that Kennedy approved a secret initiative, which his brother Robert conveyed to Anatoly Dobrynin . The offer was in two parts .
 The first was a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba or overthrow Castro in exchange for removal of the Soviet missiles . The second, at Rusk’s instigation, was an informal assurance that in the not-too-distant future the U.S. would
 The concession on the Jupiters appears to have been unnecessary since an offer to discuss the matter at a later date probably would have sufficed . The concession was probably unnecessary .
 The Joint Chiefs were never consulted, nor were given an opportunity to comment on the strategic implications of this settlement . Kennedy chose to sweeten the deal and give Khrushchev fewer grounds for objecting .
 General LeMay was disappointed that the President, with a preponderance of strategic and tactical nuclear power on his side, had not demanded more concessions from the Soviets . LeMay said he was disappointed with the President's lack of concessions .
 Joint Chiefs learned more about the deal and about “a proposal” to withdraw the Jupiters from Turkey and assign Polaris boats in their place . Little by little over the next few days the Joint Chiefs learn more about it .
 The consensus on the Joint Staff was that the U.S. had come out on the poorer end of the bargain . The consensus is that the United States had come to a disadvantage .
 Jupiters make up one-third of SACEUR’s Quick Reaction Alert Force . They carried a much larger payload than Polaris and were more reliable and accurate .
 Joint Chiefs considered sending Secretary of Defense a memorandum recommending against it . Joint Chiefs believed withdrawal of the Jupiters would be ill-advised .
 The 13-year-old schoolgirl's schoolmates let the matter drop . But upon discovering that it was a done deal, they let the issue drop .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff were at an all-time low during the Cuban missile crisis . Relations between the Kennedy administration and the Joint Chiefs were at a low when the crisis ended .
 In contrast, Kennedy’s public stature and esteem had never been higher . In contrast . Kennedy's public stature . never had ever been higher.
 The President emerged with his credibility and prestige measurably enhanced . Lauded by his admirers and critics alike for showing exemplary statesmanship .
 President Obama made compromises to end the crisis . But his military advisors considered many of his concessions unnecessary and excessive .
 The chiefs say the U.S. had left Castro’s regime in place . Worst of all, in the chiefs’ view, is that the United States had left the Castro regime behind .
 The presence of an outpost of communism in the Western Hemisphere left the JCS no choice but to continue allocating substantial military and intelligence resources for containment purposes . JCS: "The presence of a outpost of Communism in the . Western Hemisphere is no choice"
 McDonald was serving 14 years with NATO at the time of his selection and would have preferred to stay in London . Well liked and highly respected among his peers, McDonald was .
 Kennedy and McNamara might have gone further in purging the chiefs, but they knew that LeMay, the other candidate for removal, had strong support in Congress and was virtually untouchable . LeMay was virtually unbeatable in Congress .
 The administration’s foreign policy agenda began to move away from the confrontational approach that had characterized its first 2 years, toward a rapprochement with the Soviets based on the negotiation of outstanding differences .
 Kennedy's quest to improve relations with the Soviet Union was the nuclear test ban . The measure had been on the back burner since the waning days of Eisenhower administration .
 Before winning the White House, Kennedy had spoken in favor of curbs on nuclear testing . In his inaugural address, Kennedy listed ‘the inspection and control of arms’ as a major objective of his Presidency .
 At his meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961, he had been unsuccessful in enlisting the Soviet leader’s cooperation . But at the same time, he was unsuccessful in trying to enlisting his cooperation .
 The United States was then observing a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing both above and below ground . Eisenhower had introduced the moratorium in October 1958 . The U.S. was observing the moratorium .
 Kennedy faced pressure from Congress, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the JCS to resume testing . Without progress in negotiations, Kennedy knew that some point he would face concerted pressure . Kennedy: "Without progress, there will not be enough time for testing"
 Joint Chiefs had been urging Kennedy to resume testing almost from the moment he took office . The Joint Chiefs urged Kennedy to continue testing underground and underwater .
 After the Soviets resumed 15 atmospheric testing in September 1961, Kennedy gave in . Kennedy eventually gave in to the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 One of the experiments the Soviets conducted, on October 30, 1961, was a colossal “super bomb” nicknamed Tsar Bomba (King of Bombs) That had an explosive yield of 58 megatons, the largest nuclear device ever detonated .
 Joint Chiefs dismissed the test as a stunt designed for propaganda purposes and to intimidate other countries . Seeing no practical military requirement for a bomb that size, Joint Chiefs said it was a stunt .
 U.S. expertise in conducting nuclear experiments had “gone to pot,” as one of those in charge put it, causing delays and difficulties during the first round of underground tests in Nevada .
 Several important experiments connected to the development of an antiballistic missile system went awry . Near the outset of the series, several important experiments involved in the system were lost .
 For the first time, a Polaris submarine launched one of its missiles and detonated the nuclear warhead . The first time a Polaris missile has been detonated by a nuclear missile .
 Other experiments showed the feasibility of increasing the yield-to-weight ratio and the shelf life of warheads . Other experiments demonstrated the feasibility .
 Dominic was the last series of atmospheric tests the U.S. conducted during the Cuban missile crisis . From these data emerged a new generation of more advanced nuclear weapons .
 As the missile crisis wound down, Kennedy and Khrushchev expressed interest in reducing international tensions, starting with a renewed effort to reach a nuclear test ban . The two leaders made an effort to reduce international tensions .
 A major stumbling block then and for years to come was the need for reliable and effective verification . The need to be verified was a stumbling block, the government said in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev’s agreement to permit aerial inspections by the United Nations to verify the removal 16 of the missiles from Cuba was for some in the Kennedy administration a promising sign that the Soviets were becoming more open-minded about accepting reliable verification measures .
 Joint Chiefs were less optimistic, and in formulating a negotiating position they raised numerous objections . The Joint Chiefs are less optimistic about the deal .
 Taylor felt increasingly frustrated and wanted to do more to further the President’s agenda . While he went along with his colleagues’ recommendations, Taylor felt frustrated . Taylor felt more frustrated with the White House's recommendations .
 Kennedy would have preferred a comprehensive agreement barring all forms of testing . Conspicuously absent from the U.S. delegation that went to Moscow in July 1963 was a JCS representative .
 Putin realized that there was insufficient support for such an accord either at home or in the Kremlin . But he realized there was not enough support for the accord either in Russia or the Kremlin, he said .
 A ban would have been tantamount to proscribing new nuclear weapons . A complete ban would've been a complete ban on nuclear weapons, a spokesman says .
 He authorized his chief negotiator, W Averell Harriman, to pursue a treaty banning atmospheric, outer space, and underwater explosions .
 Kennedy summoned Joint Chiefs to the White House on July 24, 1963, to urge cooperation . Kennedy summoned the Joint Chiefs in the final stage of negotiations . Kennedy called Joint Chiefs on July 23, 1963 .
 Signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963, the Limited Test Ban Treaty entered into force the following October . The treaty was signed in Moscow in 1963 .
 A major breakthrough in arms control, it helped set the stage for the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks later in the decade . It was a major arms control breakthrough in the 1980s .
 Had Joint Chiefs opposed the treaty, it almost certainly would have failed of adoption . Had the Joint Chiefs had opposed it, it would have been unlikely to be adopted .
 Taylor’s role, both personally and personally and as Chairman, was crucial to the treaty's approval . Taylor's role in approving the treaty is crucial to its success .
 Without his persistence in nudging the Service chiefs along, the outcome almost certainly would have been different .
 Institutionally, the test ban episode demonstrated that power and influence within the JCS organization were moving slowly but surely into the hands of the Chairman . Eisenhower’s 1958 amendments had largely intended, as Eisenhower's 1958 amendments did .
 Chairman emerged from the treaty debate as a key figure in interpreting the chiefs’ views and shaping their advice and recommendations . No longer merely a presiding officer or spokesman, he has emerged from treaty debate .
 The Chairman would become more and more the personification of the military point of view . His interpretation of his colleagues’ advice would be the final word, he said .
 Overall authority, prestige, and influence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a corporate advisory body had never been lower than by the time the test ban debate was over .
 Though JCS views still carried considerable weight on Capitol Hill, the same was not true at the White House and elsewhere in the executive branch . The JCS still carries considerable weight in Washington .
 Kennedy had lost faith in the Joint Chiefs after the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy never regained confidence in his military advisors . Kennedy lost confidence in Joint Chiefs .
 Except for Taylor, Taylor, he kept the JCS at arm’s length . The JCS has been in touch with Taylor, a close friend .
 Joint Chiefs accepted these ups and downs in their fortunes as part of the job . Rarely ever openly critical of their superiors, Joint Chiefs accept these ups . Joint Chiefs are rarely ever openly criticizing their superiors .
 Reared in a tradition that stressed civilian control of the military, they instinctively deferred to the Commander in Chief ’s lead . They were not inclined to challenge his decisions lest it appear they were impugning his authority .
 It became increasingly difficult for them to maintain their credibility and provide reliable professional advice . But in so doing, they became increasingly hard to maintain credibility .
 Taylor’s hearing problems include hearing problems . Kennedy and his Joint Chiefs of Staff ” .
 The Last Testament, trans. and ed. by Strobe Talbott (Boston: Little, Brown, 1974), 511. Strobe: "The Last Testament" is 511 . Strobe's version of the Bible was published in 1974 .
 No Soviet official ever mentioned the presence of these weapons in Cuba . Other than Gribkov, no Soviet official mentioned the weapons .
 Documents do not confirm that tactical nuclear weapons had actually reached Cuba at the time of the crisis . Nor do the documents Gribkov cites confirm the weapons were actually in Cuba .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958–1964 , 171, suggest that the idea of putting missiles in Cuba was Khrushnik's all along . Khrushnick: "The idea was put in Cuba all along. It's not a secret"
 Anadyr was the name of a river in the extreme northeastern Soviet Union . The name of the river was also known in the Soviet Union during the Soviet era .
 Why the President specified 3 months is unknown, but it would have taken him beyond the November elections and into the new Congress . The President would have had to wait until after November elections .
 ExCom began functioning on October 16, 1962 . ExCom was not officially constituted until October 22, 1962, and began functioning October 16 .
 In mid-November 1962, Kennedy sought to reopen the deal he had cut with Khrushchev by including Soviet IL–28 fighter-bombers as among the weapons banned from Cuba . The IL-28 fighter bombers were among those included in the ban .
 The Soviets agreed to remove their IL–28s, but offered no pledge not to reintroduce them or some similar plane . The Soviets agree to remove them, but offer no pledge to reintroduction them or similar planes .
 On November 30, 1961, Kennedy approved the resumption of atmospheric testing . Kennedy delayed announcing the decision until March 1962 just as tests were scheduled to begin . Kennedy announced the decision in March 1962 as tests began .