 The images provided the first indication that the USSR was placing offensive weapons – intermediateand medium-range ballistic missiles – in Cuba . October 15, 1962 .
 The revelation would change the course of the negotiations between USSR leader Nikita Khrushchev and U.S. President John F Kennedy . In an already tense national policy environment that pitted Communist ideals against Democracy, this revelation .
 This imagery was key to understanding that the Soviet intentions in Cuba were more threatening than previously assessed . This imagery showed that the Soviets were more likely to attack Cuba .
 Until these images, only defensive weapons – surface-to-air missiles – had been detected by U.S. intelligence, which seemed to support statements made by Khrushchev . The images were captured by Air Force U-2 and United States Navy low altitude photo reconnaissance aircraft .
 A team of imagery analysts pored over these images, quickly realizing the gravity of their discovery and the risk they posed to upsetting the balance of power between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . National Photographic Interpretation Center founding director Arthur P Lundahl led the team .
 The discovery was also a critical milestone in the evolution of geospatial intelligence and its vital role in shaping foreign policy decision making . The discovery of the geospiracial map was also critical milestone .
 NGA still provides intelligence that provides ground truth that helps shape policy . Like NPIC did in 1962, NGA provides intelligence to shape U.S. policy .
 NPIC analysts used their expertise in nuclear missiles and launch platforms to determine the radius of the threat posed by the missiles in Cuba . October 16, 1962 .
 The range of the newly discovered missiles and the risk they posed to U.S. national security became a primary concern of the Kennedy administration . Kennedy administration was concerned about the risk posed by the missiles .
 NGA analysts and geospatial intelligence products continue to define for national leaders the threats posed by potential adversaries . NGA analyst: "Geospiracial intelligence products are important to national leaders"
 Analysts sought to identify likely storage sites for Soviet nuclear warheads within Cuba . October 17, 1962 . Analysts were trying to find out where to store nuclear warheads .
 NPIC interpreters confirm presence of Soviet “Fishbed’s” fighter aircraft in Cuba . NPIC interpreter: Soviet "Fishbed" fighter aircraft seen in Cuban airfield .
 NPIC photo interpreters helped U.S. national decision makers understand the scope of the troop presence near missile positions . The NPIC helped the United States national decision .
 This helped develop a broader understanding of Soviet reinforcements in Cuba, and how quickly the missiles could be readied for use . It helped develop an understanding of the Soviet forces in Cuba .
 Mariel served as a major port of entry for Soviet goods and as a Cuban naval base . Mariel, on the northwestern coast of Cuba, was a major Soviet port for goods .
 George Anderson used aircraft carriers, including USS Essex, to enforce the quarantine to deter further Soviet deliveries of men and military supplies to Cuba .
 NPIC analysts continued to provide overwhelming evidence of the extent of the nuclear missile launchers throughout Cuba as the crisis continued . October 22, 1962 .
 October 23, 1962 Cuba set up defensive positions to protect the mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missile sites . The Soviets set up the positions in order to protect their missile sites from Soviet missile attacks .
 These defensive surface-to-air missiles were ready to keep U.S. aircraft out of the area and reduce the threat they posed to the ballistic missile sites . The missiles would have been able to keep United States aircraft from the area .
 The Soviets attempted to send four submarines from their Northern Fleet to Cuba during the crisis . As part of their strategy to deter U.S. attempts to interdict Russian merchant vessel shipments to Cuba, the Soviets sent four submarines to Cuba .
 This image shows all the elements necessary to launch a missile with a 1,100 nautical mile range . The missile could be launched with a range of 1,000 nautical miles .
 Analysts could tell by the tracks in the ground leading to one of the missile shelter tents that a weapon in a high state of readiness was present . Analysts say the tracks indicate a weapon was in a state of high readiness .
 The image also demonstrated the Soviets extensive use of canvas to camouflage its weapons components and, therefore, its intentions, .
 Soviets continued effort to build their military force within Cuba . October 26, 1962, as negotiations between Kennedy and Khrushchev waned on .
 The Ilyushin-28 bombers were shipped in parts to Cuba in parts from the Soviet Union . They were built in parts and shipped to Cuba .
 On day 12 of the crisis, freighter ships delivered oxidizer and rocket fuel to Cuba . October 27, 1962, Cuba was hit by the Cuban missile crisis .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was killed-in-action when his U-2 reconnaissance aircraft was struck over Cuba during a photo reconnaissance mission by a SA-2 missile . Anderson was the sole casualty of the crisis .
 A South Carolina native from the textile region, he was graduated from Clemson in 1948 . He was in Clemson’s first Air Force Reserve Officers Training Corps class . A native of South Carolina, he graduated in 1948 from Clemson .
 He served in the Korean Conflict where his operational combat career began in 1953 flying RF-86 SABRE reconnaissance missions . He also served in Korean War .
 Anderson was a member of the 4028th Strategic Reconnaissance Weather Squadron, 4080th Strategic Wing, of the Strategic Air Command, based at Laughlin AFB, Texas .
 Major Anderson, flying an unescorted, unarmed aircraft, lost his life while participating in one of several aerial reconnaissance missions over Cuba . During this period of great national crisis, Major Anderson died in Cuba . Major Anderson was killed during the Cuban Revolution .
 Major Anderson made photographs which provided the U.S. government with conclusive evidence of the introduction of long-range offensive missiles into Cuba .
 NPIC photo interpreters provided key support to confirm that Khrushchev’s Soviet nuclear forces were, in fact, being withdrawn from Cuba .
 NPIC provided timely, vital intelligence that shaped Kennedy’s understanding of the threat . NPIC armed him with crucial details that formed the basis for the sound judgment and decision making .
 The same professional analysis that averted nuclear war in 1962 informs the President and other policymakers is still produced at NGA today . NGA is producing the analysis that saved a nuclear war .
 Brugioni visited the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency in September for a taped interview on his recollections of the crisis . The interview was taped on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the event .
 JFK commended NPIC Director Arthur Lundahl in personally-signed letter . Kennedy acknowledged NPIC's explicit wish to keep contributions to resolving the crisis anonymous .
 The letter thanked Lundahl and his team for their tireless efforts during the crisis . Lundahl acknowledged the quality of the imagery analysis he considered so vital to his decision making .
 A close-knit team of four National Photographic Imagery Center photo interpreters produced detailed legwork that formed the basis for the daily assessments of the imagery captured by U.S. photo reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba .
 Their analysis tipped President Kennedy to true Soviet intentions and informed his decision making throughout the crisis . The analysis tipped him to Soviet intentions .
 Depicted from left to right are imagery analysts Dick Reninger, Joe Sullivan, Jim Holmes and Vincent DiRenzo . The imagery analysts are behind the scenes for the first time in a week .
 National Photographic Imagery Center photo interpreters had been charged by Kennedy to find a better way of describing the threat in terms of how many missiles could be quickly fired from Cuba at any given point in time .
 Analyst Dino Brugioni took the occasional opportunity to work humor in the somber imagery analysis routine . The analyst was preparing briefing boards for Kennedy throughout the crisis .
 A low level photo reconnaissance mission inadvertently captured a photo of a 2-stall field latrine in Cuba that depicted one unoccupied stall and one clearly occupied by an unidentified Cuban soldier . Brugioni including the latrine photo on a briefing board for the President .
 A machine that enabled imagery analysts to derive very precise measurements from objects or features revealed on photographic imagery . Device enabled NPIC analysts to accurately measure the length of the tubes they discovered wile analyzing U-2 spy plane imagery and determine they were missiles .
 This measurement was done by moving the photographic plate beneath a microscope along accurately scraped ways . The plate was placed under a microscope on a photographic plate under the microscope . This measurement of the plate was made using a microscope under the scanner .
 By reading the dial on the X and Y direction screws, one could measure very accurately the relative positions of objects on the plates . The dial is used to read the relative position of objects in order to make sure they are accurate .