 As a news report from the day the events took place, I was able to tell the information is reliable . As a reporter, I can tell you that the information from that day was reliable .
 Through separate research I found the information proved valid, finding that such meetings did take place and met with success .
 This report confirmed that the missiles in Cuba were indeed being dismantled, as well as confirm that they were being sent back to the Soviet Union shortly afterward .
 The U.S. continued to watch Cuba to make sure that they were not lying about dismantling the missiles, and would need to confirm it with more satellite pictures . It also put forward the fact that the United States .
 "I can tell this source is reliable because the discussion taking place includes the voices of members of the cabinet and Kennedy, as well as the fact that they were released by the Kennedy library . The discussion is taking place, and the voices are being discussed, the author says .
 These tapes gave me bundles of information including the personality of the discussion, and its degradation from logical process to paranoia and confusion . These tapes were given to me by the author of the book, The New York Times .
 This information let me provide an excess of accuracy in my report, as well as the kind of tone that would be used after such a trying time . This information provided me with an extra level of accuracy, and the tone I would like to use it .
 As being part of a college's site, the information is very reliable, and not questionable . The information is not questionable, and is not questioned .
 This article helped me understand more what people thought about the crisis because it contained the results of surveys that showed what people think about the reasons and consequences of what could have happened . This article, in particular, helped us understand more about what we think about what happened .
 Using that tone helped me construct my article easily, due to understanding more forcibly the kind of relief that was widespread when the crisis ended . The tone of the article helped me understand the relief relief people felt in the aftermath of the crisis .
 It has statements of what they had planned and how it would have been executed . It also has statements about what they planned to do with the execution .
 It’s scary to think that at some point in time there were a handful of men who day in and day out, talked over this document and knew they couldn’t tell anyone . If it went through would have to keep it a secret or face charges of treason and
 It explicitly says in the document to not forward it to anyone basically . The document says not to forward it forward to anyone . It says 'don't forward anything'
 It references an ‘Operation Mongoose’ which was another operation involving intervention in Cuba, on a much less aggressive level . Operation Mongoose was a less aggressive form of intervention in the country .
 What this article contains is a great piece by piece breakdown of what happened in the early days of the Cuban missile crisiskisk.a the declaration of war. What it means is a breakdown of the events leading up to the crisis .
 It talks about his meeting with his Advisors and their views on what the U.S. should do . Also since I am working on the moral complications also it talks about moral complications . Also talks about meeting with Advisors .
 This is a picture of the uncrating of IL-28 bombers . This is the thing that led the United States of America to know that they were allied with the Soviet Union .
 This photograph was a catalyst to what happened with the declaration of war . It was a photo that sparked the outbreak of World War II .
 Without this photograph there would be no cuban missile crisis, there would have been no crisis in the country .
 This source is also a great reference for my part of the project where I discuss John F Kennedy and Gromyok's meeting . This source also includes a reference to the Kennedy-Gromyok meeting .
 I write that it adds another layer of moral complication and here it shows the distrust of the soviet union by saying this statement is false twice . The union is distrusting of the Soviet Union by saying it is false .
 This is a motivation for us attacking the Soviet union but we dont, instead we just advance with our blockade and do what we said we would do earlier, which is stopping new things coming into Cuba .
 As the article is still only focused on the American side this is essential in showing moral complications . The article still only focuses on the U.S.
 This was because after reading this they seemed more human to me and not the people causing a problem, I thought they were more human than the people who caused a problem . This was due to the fact that they seemed 'more human' to me .
 Without this source it would be just like only getting one side of the story, that would not be a complete investigative journal or report . Without this reporter's source, "it would be like only . getting one story of the truth," he says .
 JFK signed the order to quarantines people in the U.S. during World War II . The quarantine was quarantined during the Cold War . JFK signed it into law in 1961 .
 This primary source was useful because it reports the event of The Invasion of the Bay of Pigs . The invasion took place during the Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Prior to the invasion, the CIA had Cuban exiles trained to invade their homeland, in an attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro’s government . The CIA had trained exiles to attack the government of Cuba .
 The Cuban government were forewarned of this invasion and were prepared for it. Reported in many newspapers, foreign and American, the Cuban government .
 When it had happened, news radio broadcasts told of the invasion as a success, but within 3 days, it had been over because of the forewarning . The invasion was over within three days, because of a forewarning.
 This takes place on April 21, 1961, two days after the Bay of Pigs Invasion . This is the first time the U.S. has invaded Cuba .
 Only two to three questions focus on the situation of Cuba . Although the transcript is lengthy, only two of the questions are focused on Cuba .
 President Eisenhower ordered the CIA to start training Cuban exiles to eventually invade their home country . Eisenhower assures the public that the facts would come out in due time, though newspapers had already reported the incident .
 Cuba joined the Soviet Union AFTER they were invaded . According to him, Cuba joined after it was invaded . Cuba joined Soviet Union after invasion .
 If the Soviet Union did not protect this “very small, useless land” surrounded by hostile territory, it would lose its reputation . The Soviet Union would lose reputation because of the possible fact that they didn't protect allies .
 The composer wishes that they come home in time for Christmas . He also holds the honor of the United States nation more strongly .
 He was informed, through newspaper headlines, that if the payment were to be given, it would come out of United States taxpayer dollars . The payment would come from United States taxpayers .
 Gerald Ford urges the President to inform the public about the exchange at hand . Gerald Ford also urges the public to inform them about the events at hand.
 Palm Beach Post reports similar information but with less speculation about the training of Cuban rebels . They also note the actions of Fidel Castro and give more of a perspective .
 Castro was in a town that was bombed, close to the invasion . Castro was reportedly in the town when it was bombed . Castro is believed to have been in the area when the invasion began .
 The United States had declared its motives to overthrow the Communist regime . Subsequent to the invasion, the U.S. declared its motive for overthrowing the Soviet Union .
 Cuba gave a state of national alert and arrested Eduardo Roza Masvidal . He was accused of hiding cash and medicine for the Cuban rebels . The Cuban government says it is investigating the case .