 U.S. Army tanks face off against Soviet armor at Checkpoint Charlie, Berlin, Germany, Oct.61.61 .
 In January 1961, Dwight D Eisenhower handed over power to the brilliant, but reckless and aggressive, President John F Kennedy . The even-handed, levelheaded, agile-minded President Eisenhower had handed power over to the  President Kennedy .
 John Kennedy was a committed anti-communist, more than willing to find ways to confront the USSR and its proxies around the globe, and even in space .
 Kennedy approved the Central Intelligence Agency’s plans, developed during the Eisenhower administration, to invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . In just six months, Kennedy committed the United States to a space race to the moon against the USSR .
 In Khrushchev’s eyes, Kennedy and the U.S. were behaving unpredictably in just what they might do next on the world stage, he said . The U.K. and the United States were behaving unpredictable .
 President John F Kennedy addressed the nation from the Oval Office during the Berlin Crisis on July 25th, 1961 .
 East Germany erected a security wall around the entire perimeter of the Western Zone of the city . John F Kennedy Library photo by Cecil Stoughton in Berlin .
 Designed to stem the flow of skilled workers from East Germany and the rest of the Warsaw Pact to the West . The Soviets viewed the ‘Berlin Wall’ as a means to keep East Germany from imploding . Designed to stop the flow from skilled workers .
 The West treated the massive construction project as a major escalation in the East-West confrontation . The West saw it very differently, however, and treated the project as an escalation .
 Kennedy further escalated the crisis as he continued to call up National Guard and Reserve units . He proceeded to order the largest military buildup in U.S. history .
 U.S. soldiers from the United States Army Berlin Command face off against East German police during one of several standoffs at Checkpoint Charlie in 1961 . The standoff was one of many standoffs between the two sides .
 On several occasions that year, tanks and infantry soldiers stood watch as armed military policemen escorted United States personnel across the border into East Berlin .
 The U.S. Embassy’s Chief of Mission was stopped entering East Berlin on his way to a theater in October . It was a major diplomatic violation of the original Berlin agreement from the Potsdam Conference in 1945 .
 The diplomat was escorted by an Army infantry battalion with tanks . This led to a series of back and forth incidents, which culminated on Oct. 31 .
 American M48 Patton and Soviet T-55 main battle tanks faced off just yards apart at Checkpoint Charlie . The Soviets responded with their own tank battalion, and suddenly the world was faced with pictures of the two .
 American M48 Patton and Soviet T-55 main battle tanks faced off just yards apart at Checkpoint Charlie . Suddenly a horrified world was faced with pictures of American and Soviet tanks facing off .
 Both the Americans and Soviets had to work quickly to keep events from spiraling out of control and armed conflict erupting . Both the U.S. and Soviets worked quickly to prevent armed conflict .
 Kennedy in particular was having trouble within his own administration, with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Gen. Gen. John Kennedy .
 Lucius Clay, the popular U.S. military commander in Berlin, bickering on how to handle the standoff . Lucius Clay was the popular United States military commander .
 The face off at Checkpoint Charlie was resolved by negotiating through personal back channels . The face-off was eventually resolved by talking to each other through personal channels .
 The Soviets moved one of their tanks back five meters, followed with a similar withdrawal by one of the American tanks . As a sign that both sides wanted to end the confrontation, both sides moved five meters back and five meters .
 This ended the “hot” portion of the 1961 Berlin Crisis, but the slow simmer of the Cold War continued through the fall and winter of 1961 and into 1962 .
 U.S. soldiers from the United States Army Berlin Command face off against East German police at Checkpoint Charlie in 1961 . The incident took place during the Berlin Crisis .
 NIE 11-8/1-61 stripped aside any remaining doubts about Khrushchev’s strategic missile Maskirovka . The missile was launched in 1961 .
 NIE 11-8/1/1-61 was published by the U.S. Department of Energy in 2010 . The report was published in the fall of that year . The U.N. government published the report in March 2010 .
 Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatrick laid out the basic points of NIE 11-8/1-61 . Gilpatrick gave a discreet speech in Hot Springs, Va., on Oct. 10 . NIE is based on the basic principles of the NIE .
 The following week, McNamara himself gave a television interview that reiterated the findings of NIE 11-8/1-61 . McNamara gave the interview to the following week .
 This sudden infusion of strategic insight gave Kennedy and his ‘New Frontiersmen’ a new willingness to take risks and push back against Soviet actions around the world . Kennedy's "New Frontiermen" were able to push back on Soviet actions .
 The face-to-face confrontation in Berlin was just the first of a yearlong string of aggressive U.S. acts that would force Khrushchev and the USSR into a strategic corner . In October 1962, the United States took the world into crisis on a small Caribbean island in