 Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald was born July 22, 1890 in Boston . She was born in 1890 to local politician John F Fitzgerald and Mary Josephine Hannon . Fitzgerald was married to local Boston politician John Fitzgerald .
 J Kennedy helps to organize the Columbia Trust Company, Boston's only Irish-owned bank . J Kennedy helped organize the bank .
 Joe begins his banking career as a clerk for Columbia Trust Company . Two years later he will organize resistance to a takeover bid, and become president of the bank at age 25 .
 Joseph Patrick Kennedy Jr. is born on July 25, 1915 . Nine months later they start their family when they married . The Kennedy family was born in 1915 .
 October 1917 Joe Sr. opposes World War I . He becomes assistant general manager of Bethlehem Shipbuilding's Fore River Plant in Quincy, Massachusetts, and avoids active military service .
 Within her first year, it is apparent that she has serious learning disabilities . She was diagnosed with learning disabilities within her first few months of her life .
 Joe Sr. joins Hayden, Stone and Co. brokerage firm in the heyday of the unregulated stock market . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. was born in June 1919 in New York City .
 Joe and Rose Kennedy's third daughter, Eunice Kennedy, was born July 10, 1921 . Joe Kennedy's wife, Rose Kennedy, is the president of the nation .
 Joe and Rose Kennedy's fifth and youngest daughter, Jean Ann Kennedy, was born February 20, 1928 . Joe Kennedy's wife, Rose Kennedy, died in March 1928 .
 Joe Sr. has already liquidated his substantial long-term investments . Joe Sr.'s son Joe has been in the process of liquidating his investments .
 Joe will later deny, then admit, that he continued to make money in the stock market by selling short while the market fell . Joe continued to sell short while market fell. Joe will then admit to having made money in stock .
 He will be the last of Joe and Rose Kennedy’s nine children . His oldest brother Joe is nearly seventeen years old .
 FDR appoints Joe Sr. chairman of the new Securities and Exchange Commission . The new commission is charged with regulating the manipulation of stock prices that Kennedy had mastered decades earlier . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. was the first person to be appointed to the commission .
 After 14 months of service, even critics will concede that he has served well . Yet after 14 months he has already served well, critics will admit that .
 Joe Jr. enrolls as a freshman at Harvard after a year spent studying in London . September 1934 . Joe Jr.'s parents were married at the time of his death .
 October 1935 Jack enrolls at Princeton, having withdrawn from the London School of Economics and Political Science with an attack of jaundice . Jack withdraws from the school after suffering from an illness that left him with a severe stomach ailment .
 Joe Sr. is appointed head of the newly-established United States Maritime Commission in 1937 . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. is the first president of the U.S. Maritime Commission .
 He publicizes his achievements successfully enough to be featured on the cover of Fortune magazine . He was featured on Fortune magazine cover .
 FDR nominates Joe Sr. as ambassador to Great Britain in 1938 . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. was nominated to be ambassador to the UK . Joe Jr.'s father died in 1945 .
 Joe Sr. will arrive in London next month, followed by Rose, Kick and the four youngest Kennedys . Joe Jr. will be at the centre of the family's annual tour of Europe .
 Joe Sr.'s pique at not being offered an honorary degree prevents him from attending his son's graduation . Joe Sr. Sr. says he will not attend the graduation of his son at the age of 18 .
 Ambassador Kennedy argues for co-existence with dictatorships in a speech at the Trafalgar Day dinner of the Navy League . October 19, 1938 Ambassador Kennedy was speaking at the dinner . Ambassador Kennedy made the speech in a bid to show that dictatorships can co-exist peacefully .
 Jack travels through Germany, Poland and Russia on the eve of World War II . He reports to his father on the imminence of war .
 Germany and the Soviet Union sign a ten-year non-aggression pact in 1939 . August 23, 1939 Germany and Soviet Union signed a ten year pact . The pact was the result of a pact between the two countries .
 With Arthur Krock, he reworks his senior thesis, ""Appeasement at Munich,"" into a book published as Why England Slept . He re-works his thesis into a new book, "Why England Sleep"
 October 1940 Joe Sr. returns to the United States, asking to be relieved of his ambassadorial post . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. is the son of a prominent World War II diplomat . Joe Jr.'s father died in 1945 at age 65 .
 In an interview with The Boston Globe, Joe Sr. reiterates his views on staying out of the war for an American audience . November 8, 1940 . Joe Sr.'s views on the war are published in The Globe .
 Joe Jr. is sent to flight school; Jack is commissioned as an ensign, joining the Office of Naval Intelligence . Jack Jr. joins Joe Jr.'s brother, Jack Jr., in flight school .
 Without consulting Rose, Joe Sr. arranges for Rosemary to have a frontal lobotomy . Rosemary suffers from a severe form of depression .
 The operation leaves their daughter in worse condition, and she will be institutionalized for the rest of her life . The operation will leave her parents with a permanent disability .
 Jack begins an affair with Inga Arvad, a married Dane falsely suspected of being a Nazi spy . Jack begins affair with married Dane who is falsely believed to be a German spy . The film is set in New York City, New York, and opens in the U.S
 Jack is transferred from Naval Intelligence to the Navy shipyard at Charleston, South Carolina . January 1942 Jack was transferred to Naval Intelligence at the Navy's shipyard .
 Joe Jr. receives his naval wings -with his father in attendance . Joe Jr.'s father was in attendance at his father's ceremony in 1942 .
 Despite being stranded in the middle of the Pacific, he manages to save the rest of his crew . He manages to rescue the other crew .
 Just shy of his eighteenth birthday, Robert Kennedy enlists in the Naval Reserve . October 5, 1943, is Robert Kennedy's birthday . He is the son of President Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy Jr.
 Joe Jr. dies on a secret mission flying over the English Channel . Joe Jr.'s father died on a mission over the Channel in August 1944 .
 William Cavendish was killed in battle against the Germans in 1944 . Cavendish died September 9, 1944 in battle with the Germans .
 November 1945 Joe Sr. buys Chicago’s Merchandise Mart, the largest privately-owned building in the world . Joe Sr.'s son Joe Jr. bought the building in 1945 .
 April 1946 Jack announces that he will run for Massachusetts' 11th Congressional district seat . The seat was left vacant by once-again-mayor James Michael Curley .
 His grandfather, John ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, who held the seat a half-century earlier, campaigns with him . His grandfather is also campaigning for the seat .
 Once Kennedy wins the primary, he is a shoo-in for the seat in Democratic Boston . Kennedy is expected to win the Democratic Boston seat .
 He is diagnosed with Addison's disease, a hormonal disorder that causes fatigue and compromises the immune system . He is also diagnosed with the disease, which causes fatigue .
 Ted is caught cheating on an exam and expelled from Harvard in 1951 . Ted is expelled after being caught cheating in the exam . Ted was expelled for cheating at Harvard .
 Jack wins a place in the United States Senate, unseating the descendant of a Boston Brahmin family, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Jack unseats the descendant . Jack is the son of a prominent member of the Lodge family in Boston, Massachusetts .
 January 1953 Robert Kennedy becomes assistant counsel to the Senate Subcommittee on Investigations chaired by Joseph McCarthy . Robert Kennedy was assistant counsel for the Committee of Investigation .
 During his convalescence, he will write Profiles in Courage, published in 1956 . During convalesence, he wrote Profiles In Courage .
 Adlai Stevenson throws the choice of a running mate to the Democratic convention in 1956 . Stevenson's choice of running mate is revealed at the convention .
 Jacqueline Kennedy gives birth prematurely to a stillborn daughter in 1956 . August 23, 1956, was the first time she gave birth to her stillborn baby .
 Jack Kennedy argues for the independence of Algeria from France . Jack Kennedy is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .
 Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was born November 11, 1957 . She is the daughter of Jacqueline and Jack Kennedy . She was born in 1957 .
 The viability of a Catholic candidate is tested in state primaries throughout the year . Catholic candidates are tested in primaries in states across the country .
 July 1960 Jack Kennedy wins the nomination for president at the Democratic convention in Los Angeles . July 1960 was the first time Kennedy had been nominated for president .
 September 26, 1960 Kennedy debates Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the first of four televised meetings . Kennedy debates Richard Nixon for the first time in four televised debates .
 November 8, 1960 John F Kennedy is elected the 35th president of the United States . He is the youngest president ever to be elected -and the first Roman Catholic . Kennedy is the only Roman Catholic elected president .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. was born November 25, 1960 . He was born to Jacqueline and Jack Kennedy . He is the son of former President John Kennedy .
 Jack is counseled on a counterinsurgency plan against Fidel Castro’s Communist government in Cuba . At a time of deep Cold War fears, Jack is told on a plan to counter-insurgentency plan .
 March 1961 President Kennedy signs into law the creation of the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was created by President Kennedy in 1961 . President Kennedy signed into law creating the Corps .
 President Kennedy announces his goal to land a man on the moon and return him to earth before the end of the decade . May 25, 1961, President Kennedy announced his goal .
 May 29, 1961 President Kennedy meets Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna . President Kennedy and Soviet premier Khrushchchev met in 1961 in Vienna, Austria .
 August 1961 The Soviets build a dividing wall in the German city of Berlin . The Soviets built the wall in 1961 in Berlin .
 He is paralyzed and will remain unable to speak for the last eight years of his life . He will be unable to walk for the next eight years .
 March 1962 Ted resigns as assistant district attorney in Suffolk County and announces his candidacy for his brother Jack's unexpired Senate seat . Ted resigned from his position as assistant DA to run for Jack's Senate seat in 1962 .
 At President Kennedy's 45th birthday party at Madison Square Garden, Marilyn Monroe sings a breathless ""Happy Birthday"" to the president .
 Three hundred federal marshals accompany Meredith; a deadly riot breaks out . On orders of attorney general Robert Kennedy, three hundred marshals accompanied Meredith . Meredith was shot dead by police in 1968 .
 October 1962 The discovery of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba engulfs the presidency in crisis . October 1962 . October 1963 . October 1964 . October 1961 . October 31 . October 28 . October 29 . October 30 . October 27 .
 The U.S. will remove similar missiles from Turkey in the near future . The Soviets will remove their missiles, and the United States will remove them from Turkey .
 November 6, 1962 The people of Massachusetts elect Ted Kennedy to the United States Senate . Ted Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate .
 June 1963 President Kennedy calls for a moratorium on nuclear weapons tests . June 1963 was President Kennedy's first attempt to test nuclear weapons in 1963 .
 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy was born August 8, 1963 . He was born to the President and the First Lady .
 Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson takes the oath of office on Air Force One . Vice President Johnson was sworn in as President of the U.S. in 1961 .
 November 29, 1963 Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren chairs a commission established to investigate the death of President Kennedy . The commission was established to look into Kennedy's 1963 death . Warren chaired the commission .
 June 1964 Senator Ted Kennedy's back is broken in a plane crash that kills his aide and the pilot . Senator Kennedy was killed in the crash that killed him and his aide in 1964 .
 The Warren Commission report concludes that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination of President Kennedy . September 24, 1964 . The report was published by the Warren Commission .
 Lyndon Johnson is elected president of the United States on November 3, 1964 . Robert Kennedy is elected to the Senate in 1964 . Kennedy is the son of President Lyndon Johnson .
 Robert Kennedy is confronted with extreme poverty in rural America . Traveling through the Mississippi delta, Robert Kennedy was confronted by extreme poverty . Robert Kennedy traveled with Robert Kennedy in 1967 .
 Robert Kennedy announces his candidacy for the presidency in March 1968 . March 1968 was the first time Kennedy had announced his candidacy .
 Although late to the race, he wins primaries in Washington, D.C., Indiana, Nebraska, and South Dakota . He won primaries in Indiana, South Dakota, and Nebraska .
 Robert Kennedy is shot in Los Angeles; he dies the next day . Kennedy won the California primary in 1968; he was assassinated in 1968 .
 Los Angeles Police Department determines Sirhan Sirhan, a deranged Palestinian, acted on his own . Sirhan's actions were apparently self-inflicted, police say .
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver convenes the first Special Olympics for people with mental retardation in Chicago's Soldiers Field in 1968 . Shriver: "I'm a hero of the day"
 Senator Ted Kennedy drives his car off a bridge at Chappaquiddick, Massachusetts . Following an appreciation party for volunteers on Robert Kennedy’s campaign, Senator Kennedy drove his car .
 Ted Kennedy delivers a national television address to explain his actions at Chappaquiddick . Ted Kennedy was convicted of vehicular manslaughter in 1969 . Kennedy: "I am not guilty of any wrongdoing. I am innocent of any criminal wrongdoing"
 Ted Kennedy is reelected to the Senate in 1970, but loses his post as Majority Whip . Ted Kennedy was reelected in November 1970 .
 November 1979 Ted Kennedy announces his candidacy for the 1980 presidential election . Ted Kennedy announced his candidacy in November 1979 . Kennedy was the first candidate to announce his candidacy .
 In an emotional speech to the Democratic national convention, Ted withdraws his bid for the presidency . August 1980 . Ted says he will never run for president again .
 Ted Kennedy announces he will not run for president in 1984 . Ted Kennedy announced in 1982 that he would not be running for president . Kennedy announced he would run for the White House in 1984.
 Ted Kennedy announces he will not be a candidate for President in 1988 . Ted Kennedy announced in 1985 that he would not run for president in 1988. Ted Kennedy had been a presidential candidate since 1964 .
 He will serve until 1999, when he steps down to run the Citizens Energy Corporation . He will run the non-profit organization negotiating affordable energy for the poor .
 Robert Kennedy's oldest child, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, was sworn in as lieutenant governor of Maryland January 18, 1995 . Townsend is the daughter of Robert Kennedy and Robert Kennedy Jr. Townsend .
 January 22, 1995 Family matriarch Rose Kennedy dies, just a few months short of her 105th birthday . Rose Kennedy died just months before her 105 birthday .
 John F Kennedy Jr. and his wife Carolyn Bessette Kennedy die in an airplane accident off the coast of Massachusetts . En route to the wedding of cousin Rory Kennedy, Jr. died in the crash .
 He will survive over a year, passing at the family compound in Hyannis Port on August 25, 2009 .
 A preview of The Kennedys, a saga of ambition, wealth, family loyalty and personal tragedy . Trailer: "Kennedys" is a tale of ambition and wealth .
 The Kennedys at Hyannis Port was the setting for Kennedy family gatherings over many years . The Kennedy family compound was the site of many family gatherings .