 The defeat of the mercenary Brigade at Bay of Pigs made the U.S. think that the only way of crushing the Cuban Revolution was through a direct military intervention . The defeat made the . United States think that . the only . way to crush the Cuban revolution was . through military intervention
 The United States considered a self-inflicted aggression in connection with the Guantanamo Naval Base that would allow them to blame Cuba and provide a pretext for invading the island . As part of their hostile plans, the United States .
 U.S. Marines shooting toward Cuban territory, some times for several hours . Marines shooting at Cuban territory . U.N. military says it's a violation of freedom of expression in Cuba .
 The number of violations of Cuba’s airspace and territorial waters increased . Cuba's territorial waters were also violated by the Cuban government .
 U.S. planes flew over Cuban territory 12 times on July 9th, 1962 . In one single day, the United States flew over Cuba 12 times .
 On another occasion they launched rockets against eastern Cuba territory . The Cuban government launched rockets on another occasion . The rockets were launched in eastern Cuba .
 Washington stepped up pressures on Latin American governments so they unconditionally support U.S. plans against Cuba . Meanwhile, Washington steps up pressure on Latin America governments to support Cuba's plans .
 In 1960 the United States took severe economic sanctions against Cuba . The U.S. refused to supply oil and cut back on purchases of sugar, Cuba’s largest and most important export .
 The Cuban government nationalized the oil industry, sugar processing plants, and other American-owned businesses in Cuba in the summer of 1961 . Forced to make a choice, the Cuban government decided to nationalize the industry .
 The United States set up an economic blockade of Cuba, stopping trade and prohibiting American tourism to the island . In response, the U.S. set up a trade embargo and tourism embargo .
 In September 1960 Congress passed a law denying American foreign aid to any nation that assisted Cuba economically or militarily . The law was passed by Congress in 1960 .
 The ban of tourism alone deprived Cuba of 60 million dollars in annual income . Tens of thousands of workers in the service industry unemployed .
 U.S. broke off all relations with Cuba in January 1961 . Cuba was the last nation to have a diplomatic relationship with Cuba . Cuba became a model of Cuba in 1961 .
 The Soviet Union and other Communist nations stepped in to purchase Cuban sugar and oil . Cuba was in dire need of sugar and other essential goods . Soviet Union stepped in and provided the country with oil and other goods .
 By the end of 1960 the Cuban government nationalized most industry, trade, banking, and transportation, taking another step towards becoming a Communist state . The Cuban government took the lead in nationalizing most of the country's industries .
 The U.S. pressured and forced other Latin-American nations to break off relations with Cuba . Meanwhile, the United States pressured other Latin American countries to break ties with the Cuban government .
 In 1959, troops led by Fidel Castro toppled a corrupt military regime in Cuba . The revolution ushered in a socialist revolution . Castro's troops toppled the military regime and ushered in the revolution .
 The Kennedy administration in the U.S. supported a military expedition to undermine Castro in 1961, but it was decisively repulsed at the Bay of Pigs . Castro was overthrown by the Kennedy administration, but was decisively defeated .
 In the aftermath of the attempted invasion, Soviet missiles were sent to Cuba . The Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba after the failed invasion .
 Kennedy determined in October 1962 that the Soviet Union remove its missiles from Cuba . Kennedy was still rankling from the defeat of the Bay of Pigs defeat .
 He also called upon his … allies to put their … allies put their NORAD forces on alert in the event the Soviets refused to back down . The Soviets would not back down, he said .
 Spy flights over Cuba showed what might be surface-to-air nuclear missiles being installed in the western provinces by Soviet technicians . Soviet technicians installed the missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev assured President Kennedy that his intelligence reports were wrong . President Kennedy was told his intelligence was wrong by the Soviet Union government .
 Photographs delivered to the White House proved that Khrushchev had lied . Photographs were delivered on 14 October, proving that the truth was true .
 Why Khrushchev had gone ahead with plans which were bound to endanger the safety of the whole world is not clear . Why he went ahead with the plans was not clear.
 Perhaps the blunders of the Bay of Pigs and the unpopularity of the U.S. in Latin America had led him to think there was no risk, he says .
 He informed the OAS of the danger from the missiles to both the U.S. and the Latin republics . The missiles could be used by both the United States and Latin nations .
 He demanded and got OAS support for a plan to stop and search all Soviet ships heading for Cuba . The plan was approved by the OAS and led to an OAS plan to search Soviet ships .
 President Obama ordered 145,000 American troops to stand by in Florida and Nicaragua . Without waiting for a reply, he ordered the troops stand by .
 Faced with the possibility of clashes which could lead to all-out war, Khrushchev backed down . Faced . with the . possibility of the clashes which . could lead . to lead to an all out war . Fears of clashes that could . lead to . all-
 On 29 October he ordered ships heading for Cuba to turn back and work to start dismantling missiles on the island . The U.S. has ordered ships headed to Cuba to work on dismantling missiles .
 In October 1962, the Soviet Union and the U.S. went eyeball-to-eyeball and were on the brink of nuclear war . The two countries were on a collision course in October 1962 .
 U-2 spy plane over Cuba revealed that Soviet Union was installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles . Photographs taken by U.S. spy plane reveal missile installation in Cuba .
 The president realized that if the ships were boarded and their cargoes seized, the Soviet Union might regard this as an act of war . The president was worried that the ships might be boarded and seized, he said .
 Soviet Premier Khrushchev sent a signal that he might be willing to negotiate . Soviet premier Khrushchevski sent a message that he was willing to talk with the West .
 In exchange for the Soviets agreeing to remove the missiles, the U.S. publicly pledged not to invade Cuba . The United States secretly agreed to remove its aging missiles from Turkey in exchange for removing them .
 In July 1963, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Britain approved a treaty to halt the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, in outer space, and under water . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Britain .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union established a hotline providing a direct communication link between the White House and the Kremlin . The following month, the United States and the Soviet Union set up a hotline .