 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union appeared to be sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviets were seen to be on the verge of a nuclear war
 Dobbs' hour-by-hour chronicle of those near-fatal days . Dobbs reveals some startling new incidents that illustrate how close we came to Armageddon. Dobbs: "It's not easy to say what happened to us. It's like a nuclear war."
 Khrushchev &#8217;s plan to destroy the U.S. naval base at Guant&#225;namo . The accidental overflight of the Soviet Union by an American spy plane . The crash landing of an American F-106 jet with a live nuclear weapon
 Dobbs takes us inside the White House and the Kremlin as Kennedy and Khrushchev agonize over the possibility of war . Dobbs: Kennedy and Kennedy were agonizing over the possible war risk of war.
 Customer Reviews sort reviews by: NewestOldest oldestHighestHighestLowest and Newest Oldest Lowest . Top 50 New Top 50 Top 50 . New 50 New 50 .
 "I'm working through this thing right now. I'm just working through it right now," she says .
 An amazing work, bringing forth facts heretofore missed or suppressed or suppressed, is an amazing work . "An amazing work," says author .
 Dobbs rather sartorically points out that of all the players in the drama, Castro outlasted them all . Dobbs: Castro outlasts them all. Dobbs says Castro outlived them all of them .
 This book would be waaay better with a ruthless editing job, but otherwise, good .
 While a lot has been written over the years on the Cuban missile crisis, I think this book doesn't falter from a lot of the biases prevalent in many of the other works on the subject .
 Really well-told tick-tock of the famous ""13 Days"" with lots more insight into the Soviet military deployment on Cuba .
 Mainly written from the United States perspective, but still many details from the Soviet side too . Mainly from the U.S. perspective, this is written in Soviet perspective .
 "Very dramatic at times and some very exciting details about the decision making and tactics at that time" "Very exciting details" of the decision-making and tactics .
 "Lots of technical info ... hard to read" "Lots of technical information" "Hard to read," "Hard-to-read"
 "Good book that was interesting to read. Good book that's interesting to be read" " Good book" " 'Good book"
 "Fascinating book about the Cuban Missle Crisis. Fascinating book" "Fantastic book"
 Dobbs went back to original sources and has new data and revelations about those crazy days . Dobbs: Dobbs has new sources and new data to reveal about those days .
 Many implications for our current and future international dealings . Lots of implications for the future of international relations .
 "Brilliant, though I expected a little more at the end," says reviewer . Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" " Brilliant"
 "Never knew just how close we were to nuclear war," says author . "I was in the middle of a nuclear war"
 I was involved with a crash of an F-106, brought back memories and made me research the crash . I was . involved in a crash that brought . back memories of the crash, he says . He was involved in the crash of the F.106 .
 "I love the way it never mentions the future, so you see things as they unfold, as it would have been seen at the time," says author . "You see things unfold as they unfolded, as they would have, as well as the future," she says .
 "Literally one of the scariest books I've read," says author . Narration Rating: Story Rating: 1.5 .
 I knew we got close to all out wwiiii but didn't realize how close or how it could have changed in an instant . I knew I was going to get close to an all-out wiiii, but I wasn't sure how close it was .
 Interesting play-by-play description of the Cuban missile crisis . Interesting play by play description .
 Dobbs explores the personalities of the men calling the shots and otherwise swept up in this momentous series of events that brought the U.S. and USSR to the brink of nuclear war.. stars .
 " this is a must read if you're interested in the cold war. very well researched and entertaining" "very well researched" and entertaining .
 This is an excellent, gripping summary of the time the world stood still . I think I've read just about everything on this crisis and this is a gripping summary .
 Read this and the book with the transcribed tapes and you will have an excellent understanding of the event . Read the book and the transcriptions of the tapes .
 "Excellent book, most informative and highly recommended," says Mikebradbury .
 "Very well written, tense, and made me try other books written by this author. Very well written"
 David Cameron has worked at the center of British politics for Margaret Thatcher, John Major, and now David Cameron . David Cameron is a former Cabinet minister who has been in charge of the Conservative Party since 1986 .
 Harry Jones is the author of more than a dozen thrillers, including House of Cards . He is also the creator of a hugely successful television drama, House Of Cards .
 Bob Walter is a producer, director, and audiobook narrator . He is also a producer and director of the audiobook industry .
 He is best known for his work as a music producer and sound effects designer for the movies Halloween, The Little Brave Toaster, and Apocalypse Now .