 Cuba had recently undergone a revolution led by Fidel Castro, who had overthrown the dictator, Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro was the leader of the revolution that overthrown Batista, who was overthrown .
 Castro slowly came to accept Soviet offers of aid from the Soviet Union . However, facing American political opposition, and ideological pressure from his more radical brother, Raoul, and Che Guevara .
 Soviet offers of military and economic aid, once a trickle, became a torrent . Following the failed Americansupported invasion by Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, Soviet offers became more frequent .
 Rumors of invasion and provocative military moves by Washington convinced both Havana and Moscow that an invasion was likely . Washington made provocative moves by the U.S. in advance of an invasion .
 CIA was ordered to begin a program of assassination, subversion, and sabotage against Castro . Operation Mongoose was part of the CIA's "Operation Mongoose" CIA ordered to assassinate Castro, subvert, sabotage against him .
 The chance for mutual annihilation lay in the constant chance for a misunderstanding or miscalculation in the respective command structures that could force an all-out war . The risk of mutual annihilation was to be seen as a constant possibility of a misunderstanding .
 Both sides nearly lost control of events because of ill-considered actions by subordinates . Both sides lost control because of the actions of their subordinates .
 On 28 October, the Soviets shot down a high-altitude photoreconnaissance U2 over Cuba . The U2 was shot down by the Soviets in Cuba .
 Another U-2 flight strayed over the northern USSR, an incident that could only be interpreted as provocative by Moscow . And during the middle of the crisis, another U.2 flight was seen as provocative .
 Kennedy's steadiness in the face of constant calls for an assault on Cuba by conservative politicians and the military . Kennedy's willingness to bargain away the Soviet missiles in exchange for outdated U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey was critical elements .
 Khrushchev's rational choice to back off from the confrontation early in the crisis proved equally crucial . Kennedy's decision to seize the offers for an exchange made by Kennedy proved equally important .
 With the current available information, this question can be answered more accurately than before . With the information, from both classified and unclassified sources, this can be more accurate than before.
 Records released by various Russian ministerial archives have been released in the past . Russia's foreign minister has been accused of corruption in the country .
 A fourth posting will review the general effectiveness of American SIGINT during the crisis .
 A number of reasons have been put forward to explain why the Soviets installed the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviets in 1961 .
 These include a desire to settle the status of Berlin, then a city occupied by the forces of the Soviet Union, United States, Great Britain, and France . A desire to protect Cuba from an American invasion is also mentioned .
 While these reasons explain why the Soviets might put missiles in Cuba, they necessarily do not answer why they finally did it .
 Khrushchev was more aggressive and confrontational with the West than Stalin was . He was more confrontational and aggressive than Stalin did . He had a more aggressive approach to the West .
 He realized both the danger and usefulness of nuclear weapons in Cold War policy . He realized how, with them, he could press an advantage or control the West's reactions .
 Khrushchev was convinced that in early 1962, political and military situations were dangerous for Moscow . The Russian foreign ministry, the Office of the President of Russia, and the foreign and military intelligence services, released records from numerous archives .
 President Kennedy believed the President Kennedy meant to invade Cuba (JFK actually was considering various invasion options at the time) and that he would not negotiate a settlement on the status of Berlin . He believed JFK meant to attack Cuba and would not talk about Berlin .
 What Khrushchev wanted was some way to threaten the U.S. The United States threatened the Soviet Union, the author says . The U.K. threatened the United States in the same way the Soviets did, he says .
 Khrushchev first proposed the plan, known eventually as Anadyr, to the Soviet Presidium, in 1962 . The plan was approved by the Presidium of the Soviet Union .
 The Cubans were informed as early as 29 May by a special Soviet delegation, which flew to Havana . The Cuban government was informed by the Soviet Union on 29 May, according to a special delegation .
 This force would be under the command of Soviet General Issa Pliyev, a former cavalry officer who was known to follow the toughest orders . This force was under command of former cavalry officers known to be known for following the orders .
 The Soviets dispatched nuclear-armed battlefield missiles, including the FROG-3 . The Soviets also dispatched nuclear weapons, including a nuclear-powered battlefield missile .
 Moscow contemplated building a submarine base to service early ballistic missile submarines, either the Hotel-class SSBN or the Golf-Class SSB, both of which carried the SS-N-5 missile . At the same time, Moscow considered building a base for early ballistic missiles submarines .
 The captains of the merchant ships were given secret orders to be opened in the presence of the ship's political officer . The captain of each ship received secret orders from the political officer to open them .
 Many told that if they were in danger of being boarded by foreign forces, they were to take ""all measures"" to protect personnel and sink the ship . Many were told to take 'all measures'
 Since late 1961, there had been a steady increase in the number of Soviet merchant ships sailing to Cuba .
 Analysts say curious aspects of Soviet shipping to Cuba caught the eye of analysts . However, over the next two months certain aspects of the Soviet shipping were not surprising .
 Many merchant ships were carrying loads well below their capacity in some cases only 25 percent . For one thing, many of the merchant ships carrying loads was carrying loads below capacity .
 In fact, all American intelligence reporting pretty much . outlined the huge conventional buildup occurring in Cuba . The buildup was outlined in American intelligence .
 None of this SI GINT re ortin even hinted at the resence of the ballistic missiles . However, contrary to implitit suggestions made in publications such as the recent Year in Defense Review, none of this .
 The strands of . evidence ... were une away m e e uge o reports . They were unearthly, but the strands of evidence were still there . 'The strands of
 Even the odd behavior of the ships that transported the nuclear warheads elicited attention in the SIGINT re orts. The Soviet icebreaker Indigirka and the freighter Alexandrovsk elicited ho . s ecial attention .
 In fact, one NSA re ortincluded en, en, Ill rea ity, t . .• was carrying Pliyev and about 2,500 Soviet troops .
 The USS Oxford did not monitor any communications related to the missile construction . Meanwhile, the technical research s ·. 1p, the USS Oxford, patrolling off the coast of Cuba, did not watch any communications . The U.S. military says it is investigating the possibility of a missile
 I ti,lthough reported, though reported, were not construed as unusual by the SIGINT analysts . The reports were not interpreted as unusual, but were reported as unusual .
 NSA reports compared these periods of dormancy to similar stretches of inactivity that occurred in the late 1950s . NSA: These periods were similar to similar periods that occurred during the late '50s .
 On 11 September, the Soviets were responding to President Kennedy's call-up of 150,000 reservists to active dut for 12 months because of the ""international situation" was, in reality, a large-scale exercise in the Far East that began before 14 October and lasted until
 In early October 1962, the consensus in the U.S. intelligence community was that the Soviets would not risk installing ballistic missiles in Cuba . The consensus in October 1962 said the Soviets wouldn't risk installing such a missile .