 "Just how close we came,” as the tagline of this movie says . Obviously I have no direct recollections of those days in the fall of 1962, but I have since become aptly aware of ‘just how close”
 President Kennedy has few choices after pictures show the presence of medium range missiles being installed in Cuba . President Kennedy had few choices in the face of the situation .
 The most obvious is to go in with force and attack the island, a full invasion is a favored option of Kennedy’s military aides . A full invasion of the island would be the most obvious option .
 The decision would ignite retaliation from Cuba’s ally with global nuclear war the very likely result . But certainly this decision would spark retaliation from Cuban ally with world nuclear war likely result.
 Kennedy sees another option that involves diplomacy, a firm resolve, and the most precious commodity of all—time . Fortunately Kennedy sees diplomacy, diplomacy, and a firm resolution .
 Even though we know how the story ends, watching the events unfold that led Kennedy to enact a blockade on all USSR ships bound for Cuba, was a riveting emotional experience .
 The inclusion of many profanities and terms of Deity are the movie's only shortcoming . The movie is about a young woman who is in a relationship with her husband .
 Most of the “private” dialogue in this movie is dramatized, and could have been scripted to allow this movie to find its way into more homes and schools . While it is probable a few coarse words were uttered in those back rooms .
 Political historians note that Thirteen Days does use artistic license, especially in the role of Kenny O’Donnell . Political historians say the film uses artistic license to depict political events .
 Everyone agrees the movie is still very effective at providing a sense of just how serious this situation was . However, everyone agrees that the movie still provides a good sense of how serious it was .
 Rod Gustafson has worked in various media industries since 1977 . He has worked for more than 40 years in the media industry .
 Parent Previews was founded in 1993 and continues to write and broadcast reviews in newspapers, on radio and the Internet .
 His efforts also include writing and researching media in all its forms and observing how it effects society and culture .
 The movie illustrates to future generations the dangers of conflict and nuclear war . Aside from the profanity, this movie clearly illustrates the danger of war .
 It also illustrates how poor communications can lead to disastrous results . "It's a disaster," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One plane gets shot with no injuries, while another plane is hit by a missile resulting in the death of the pilot . The tension of the crisis includes heated moments in meetings and themes of war .
 D+ at least 1 extreme profanity, 18 moderate profanities, 22 mild profansities, and 19 terms of deity used as expletives or profanies . D+ D+: At least 1 . extreme profanity . At least . 1 extreme . prof
 The most recent home video release of Thirteen Days movie is November 12, 2013 . Home Video: Th13 Days movie was released on November 13, 2013.
 Thirteen Days re-releases to home video in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of President John F Kennedy’s death . Release Date: 12 November 2013 . Th13 Days is released on home video to commemorate the Kennedy assassination .
 The Kennedy assassination is dramatized in the movie Parkland . Parkland is about one year after the Kennedy assassination .
 The Croods: A New Age MPAA Rating: PG Overall: AGreenland MPAA rating: PG-13 Overall: B+ Toys of Terror MPAA . Love and Monsters is PG Overall Overall: D . The Midnight Sky is PG- 13 overall .