 In this drawing from the Washington Star, Kennedy's face has blown up in his face . The drawing was taken by the Washington Post in 1963 .
 The Bay of Pigs is portrayed as a giant chicken which has come home to roost . The film is based on the story of Kennedy Kennedy's presidency .
 Although it is not the only film of the shooting, it has been called the most complete . It has been described as one of the best films of all the shooting .
 On December 10, 1963, a group of Catholic schoolchildren were sprinkling the temporary flame with holy water . The flame was set alight in a Catholic church .
 The cap came off the bottle and water poured onto the flame, putting it out . Water was poured on the flame after the bottle came off .
 In August 1967, an exceptionally heavy rain extinguished the permanent flame . The flame was extinguished in August 1967 .
 A nearby electrical transformer flooded as well, depriving the spark igniter of power and preventing the flame from being relit . The fire was set alight in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Two of the gravesite's flagstones had to be removed to access the transformer and repair it . The transformer was installed at the site of the fallen soldier .
 How Gerrymandering can influence electoral results on a non-proportional system . Ohio's Congressional District 13 is one of the most populated districts in the country .
 Magenta party wins urban district, while G party wins the 3 rural/suburban districts . The result expresses and enhances the fact that G is the state-wide majority party .
 Creating 4 mixed-type districts can yield a 4:0 win to G — a disproportional result considering the state-wide reality . Creating a mixed-style district can yield the same result as a 4-0 win over G .
 With classical Gerrymandering techniques it is even possible to ensure a 1:3 win to the state-wide minority M party . Gerrymandered techniques can also be used to guarantee a 1-3 win for the minority party .
 In 1963, Ernesto Miranda was arrested at his home in Phoenix, Arizona, on charges of kidnapping and rape . Miranda Arizona —all suspects must be read their rights before questioning Miranda Arizona . Miranda was accused of kidnapping, rape in 1963 .
 After two hours of questioning by police, he signed a confession and was later convicted, largely based on the confession . The confession was made after he was found guilty of murder .
 He claimed that his confession was invalid because it was coerced and because the police never advised him of his right to an attorney . He claimed he was never advised of right to a lawyer or right to avoid self-incrimination .