 The event was first held during the city's 1988 bicentennial year . The Queen City celebrates the Queen City's river history .
 Steamboats were vital to Butler County's economy for several decades in the 19th century . Steamboats never plied the Great Miami River, but those on the Ohio River were vital .
 Their major accomplishment was hauling more freight and mail and at a greater speed than their predecessors, the horse-drawn wagon and stagecoach and crude flatboats .
 The Miami-Erie canal opened between Middletown and Cincinnati in November 1827 . It combined with the Ohio River, via Cincinnati, expanding markets for the county's agriculture bounty .
 Canal boats and steamboats rapidly replaced risky flatboats in transporting local products . Canal boats replaced dangerous flatboats with steamboats . Steamboats and canal boats were used to transport local products in the 1930s .
 Long, dangerous one-way trips over the Great Miami, Ohio and Mississippi rivers on crude craft were no longer necessary for local farmers and merchants . Long trips over rivers no longer required for local merchants and farmers .
 In 1811 the first steamboat on the Ohio River started at Pittsburgh and visited Cincinnati, Louisville and other points before entering the Mississippi . It completed its slow trip at New Orleans and completed its journey in 1811 .
 War of 1812 and technical obstacles delayed the start of regular steamboat traffic . Steamboat traffic began in 1812 .
 In 1820 the passenger fare was $25 for an eight-day, 1,480-mile down stream trip from Cincinnati to New Orleans . According to one report, in 1820, in . 1820 .
 In the early 1820s, the Miami Canal promised several advantages over the shallow Great Miami River . The canal was built in the early 1800s to bypass the Great Miami .
 Current-propelled flatboats on the Great Miami couldn't haul Butler County products to the Queen City . Because its mouth was on the Ohio River at the Ohio-Indiana line, 17 miles west of Cincinnati, it couldn't be transported to the city .
 Steamboats couldn't navigate up stream on the Great Miami . The Great Miami had an average fall of about three feet per mile . Steamboats had flat bottoms and shallow draft .
 The Louisville & Portland Canal bypassed the Ohio River falls at Louisville . The canal was built in 1825 - the same year Miami Canal construction started south from Middletown .
 Until that canal was complete, passengers and freight had to change boats there, or wait until high water enabled navigation over the rapids .
 The $1 million L&P Canal -including $230,000 in federal help and about $200,000 from Cincinnati investors -opened in December 1830 . The canal was built in 18th century .
 By December 1830, a 67-mile stretch of the Miami-Erie Canal between Dayton and Cincinnati was complete at a cost of $77,850 . The canal was completed in December 1830 .
 Hamilton was connected to the state-financed waterway by the Hamilton Basin . The Hamilton Basin ran west from the canal to South Third Street . Hamilton Basin was connected by the canal .
 The basin -about seven-tenths of a mile in length - was lined with wharves, mills, factories and warehouses .
 Hogs were brought to packers for slaughter and processing, then sent over the canal to Cincinnati for steamboat transport to markets along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and their navigable tributaries .
 Also profiting by the canal-river combination were paper mills in Hamilton, Middletown, Franklin, Miamisburg and Lockland .
 Butler County products were more plentiful and cheaper in Butler County because of steamboats and canal boats . Materials and finished products arrived at Cincinnati by steamboats, and were hauled here by canal boats to the area .
 In the month of April 1850, 40 canal packets departed Hamilton and 2,433 passengers left the city bound for Cincinnati . The canal basin exports were peaking at the time of the canal's peak .
 In 1852, Cincinnati reported 8,000 steamboat arrivals that year . In 1849, the city was flooded with steamboat traffic .
 Although most of the glamor is gone, the Ohio River remains a vital transportation link . It is too complex to explain here.
 Steamboats -in their heyday and now in folklore - suggest romance, comfort, elegance, adventure and speed . Steamboats were steamboats in their heydays and now are considered a symbol of romance and elegance .
 Floating palaces once carried people and freight up and down the Ohio River . But there was a flip side to that positive image of floating palaces . The Ohio River is now a national park .
 Exploding boilers exposed passengers and crew to death and maiming from jagged bits of flying wood and metal, scalding water and fire .
 The Moselle, a Cincinnati-built steamboat, exploded on April 25, 1838 . It exploded soon after starting its scheduled trip from Cincinnati to St. Louis, Missouri .
 The boat, launched 25 days earlier, was reputed to be the fastest on the river . The boat was launched on the banks of the river 25 days ago .
 At the time, the Moselle explosion ranked as the worst steamboat disaster on the Ohio River . The explosion was the deadliest steamboat explosion on the river .
 Its destruction -which came with no warning to passengers, crew or on shore observers - brought congressional attention to the danger of steamboat travel .
 There were more than 20 explosions or accidents on the Ohio River in the 30 years following the Moselle's demise . Despite a new federal law and technical improvements, there have been 20 explosions and accidents in the past 30 years .
 Thirty-three crashes were reported on the Ohio in the 1860-1869 period . The Ohio was one of the fastest-traveled rivers in the world .
 The accident has been called the worst head-on collision on the river, although the death toll is uncertain . The death toll from the accident is uncertain, although it is believed to be the worst .
 The uncertainty was because ""no passenger lists were kept at the offices of the company,"" said the Hamilton Telegraph .
 America, built in Cincinnati in 1867, attempted to pass opposite the mouth of Bryant's Creek near Florence, Ind., and opposite Warsaw, Ky. It happened about 11:30m. The America was launched in Cincinnati, and the United States in 1865, in Cincinnati .
 Some believe whistles may have overlapped, which may have caused confusion in at least one pilothouse . Some believe the whistles overlapped .
 It is possible the customary signals came too late to avoid a collision . It was possible the signal came to an end too late, say experts .
 Another factor could have been that one of the boats was in the hands of an inexperienced pilot . Another factor was that the pilot was inexperienced, the pilot could not be seen .
 America's steel helm plowed into the United States, puncturing the cargo area . Whatever the cause, the U.S. cargo area was punctured .
 Spilled coal oil and whiskey quickly ignited and wind helped spread the fire . Spill coal oil, whiskey and whiskey ignited .
 The United States burned and sank with at least 70 passengers perishing in the rapidly spreading flames or drowning in the cold river . At least 70 people died in the sinking of the U.S. at the time .
 Eli Rayl and his wife converted their Indiana shore home into a hospital for shivering survivors . The Rayl family's home was transformed into a makeshift hospital for survivors .
 Later, a lighthouse was erected at Rayl's Landing near the disaster site, misnamed ""Rail's"" Light by the Coast Guard's lighthouse service .
 Most Americans who watched or heard the speech recall it as the most terrifying moment of the Cold War . Most Americans in the U.S. recall the speech as a moment of terror .
 Cuba had been under a communist government since Fidel Castro took power in 1959 . Cuba has been under Fidel Castro's government since 1959 .
 Soviet officials denied plans to place offensive weapons in Cuba, 90 miles from the U.S. Soviet officials had denied plans for offensive weapons .
 Air Force U-2 reconnaissance planes confirmed bases were being built for intermediate-range missiles . U.S. Air Force also confirmed bases in the area were being used to build missiles . The bases are believed to be being used as bases for missiles .
 He publicly announced details of the dangerous situation in his Oct. 31 address .
 If war developed in October 1962, it was assumed Butler County would be hit . Butler County was assumed to be hit by war .
 The county's top military target was the Oxford missile base, north of U S. 27, off Todd Road, about two miles west of Oxford . The base is located in the county's most populated area .
 Missiles had been ready there in four underground launching silos since 1960 . Missiles were ready there on four underground silos . The silos were used to launch missiles from 1960 .
 It was one of four missile bases that defended the Greater Cincinnati area until 1970 . The Cincinnati-area missile base is one of the four bases that defend the area .
 Additional training was ordered for local members of the Ohio National Guard and reserve units . Military personnel on furlough were recalled .
 Civilians also were on alert, paying close attention to every aircraft flying over the area . Civilians were also on alert .
 Some local businesses, industries and institutions took special precautions, including disaster drills . The drills were designed for Cold War situations, including Cold War drills .
 Despite international tension, scheduled events continued in the Hamilton area . The United Way campaign, Civic Theater rehearsals, high school football games, homecoming dances and campaigning for the November election .
 The missile was trucked to Oxford from Wright-Patterson Air Force Base under sponsorship of Miami's Air Force ROTC unit . The missile is trucked in from Miami to Oxford .
 Most inquiries concerned articles that should be placed in private shelters . Most inquiries were about how to improvise shelters and how to do it .
 Other buildings had been approved, but owners hadn't completed the paper work to become public shelters . Other buildings hadn't been approved .
 Six days after President Kennedy's dramatic speech, the nuclear showdown ended . Oct. 1962 -six days after JFK's speech - the nuclear crisis ended .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove offensive missiles and bombers from Cuba . The move was part of a plan to remove the offensive missiles from the island .
 Later, it was estimated the U.S. was ready with more than 25,000 nuclear weapons, about twice the Soviet number . The U S. was estimated to be ready with about twice that number .
 There's no sign declaring it a museum, and thousands of people pass it every day without recognizing it as such . Thousands pass the museum without realizing it is a museum .
 Some who patronize it, don't realize it is a functional, interactive piece of automotive history . Some of those who do not realize it's a functional piece of history, say it's interactive .
 If you've been driving only a few years, you're not likely to appreciate it as a unique throwback to the 1960s . If you're been driving recently, it's not likely you'll appreciate it .
 Day's Sunoco, 1275 Main St., at Westbrook Drive, is believed to be one of the few, if not the only surviving full-service station in the area, open seven days a week, 6m. until midnight .
 Day Son Inc. has become a family business in recent years . The name reflects that it has become more of a family company . Day Son is now officially Day Son, with the name Day Son .
 Besides filling your gas tank, you can have the air in your tires checked, have the vehicle lubricated and serviced, get help with automotive problems, buy tires, use the restroom and obtain directions .
 Free road maps and trading stamps earned with a purchase at Day's in the 1960s . The only things missing are the free road maps, trading stamps .
 You can buy candy, gum, soft drinks, potato chips, other snacks and cigarettes . You can also buy cigarettes, candy and other snacks .
 As in the 1960s, don't expect to buy beer, bread, milk, ice cream, groceries and the impulse items that temp you in the convenience store super stations . Super stations are where workers specialize in operating the cash register and selling lottery tickets .
 At Day's station, 10 employees actually know something about the automotive business . The station is based in Detroit, Michigan, and features a fleet of cars .
 When he started, Day said, the average length of survival for independent station owners was three months . Day: "When I started, I thought it would be three months. When I started ... it was just three months"
 A check of Williams' Hamilton city directories shows some of the local casualties . Williams: "Hamilton is a great city. It's a great place to go"
 Day also credits Sunoco as a factor in enabling him to operate a 1960s-style full-service station instead of a big store .
 The 1970s was an era of many changes in the service station business, starting with the 1973 oil shortage . Service station stations in the U.S. are now based in California .
 Day's offers self-service and pay at the pump, but employees will still pump gas for customers . Day's employees will pump gas to customers at the pumps .
 Day opened more than 44 years ago . Another change since Day opened was the switch from leaded to unleaded gasoline .