 Key developments in the crisis turned on messages from the Soviet President Khrushchev to the American President John F Kennedy . The messages were broadcast directly and publicly over Radio Moscow . This was because key developments in this crisis were broadcast over the radio .
 These were translated immediately by the monitors at Caversham and transmitted by teleprinter not just to the British government departments in London but to the White House and United States government agencies in Washington .
 The Americans had maintained a presence at Caversham since the Second World War . This was done via the American Foreign Broadcast Information Unit .
 In 1962, there was still no telephone hotline between the governments in Washington and Moscow . Diplomatic channels which depended on ciphered telegrams were extremely slow .
 During the final weekend of the crisis speed of communication was absolutely vital . Speed of communication is absolutely vital, says David Cameron . "Speed of communication" is vital, he says .
 The time difference between Moscow and Washington (which was between seven and eight hours) was another factor that hindered communications and contributed to the tension .
 In 1962, Radio Moscow broadcast both domestically and abroad in a wide range of different languages . During the Cold War it was a vital source of information about all aspects of the Soviet Union .
 Monitoring Service at Caversham was crucial in keeping the British public informed of developments in Moscow . BBC had no radio correspondent in Moscow until 1963 until 1963 .
 Summer time ended in both the UK and the U.S. overnight on 27/28 October . Its output in Spanish for Cuba went up tenfold 1 .
 It also made a number of unscheduled broadcasts not only in English but also in French, Spanish and German .
 It was midnight in Britain but the BBC stayed on air to broadcast it live . The BBC light programme stayed live to broadcast the event live .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the western hemisphere would be an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . Henceforth it would be American policy to regard any nuclear missile launch from Cuba as an attack on the U.S.
 There would be a ‘strict quarantine’ on any military equipment to Cuba which would be enforced by the United States . Called for immediate meetings of the UN Security Council and the Organisation of American States .
 From the moment of this broadcast the American and British public and people in all countries with an open media were consumed with anxiety . People in the U.S. and UK were consumed by anxiety, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 BBC followed every development in the crisis to the best of its ability . The BBC followed the BBC's coverage of the crisis in Syria .
 In the Soviet Union, the public mood was very different and there was nothing like the level of alarm and agitation felt in America, Britain and other European countries . In contrast, in contrast, the Soviet public mood in the USSR was very much different .
 Ambassador to Moscow reported that Moscow public were less excited and apprehensive than they had been during the Berlin crisis a year earlier . Sir Frank Roberts, the British Ambassador to Russia, reported that the Moscow public was much less excited .
 There was no run on the shops and no visible signs of nervousness or tension among the people on the streets .
 There was some ‘quiet apprehension’ among the domestic staff at the embassy . Other acquaintances reflected the unalarmed picture presented by Soviet leaders .
 Soviet Union presented as taking the lead in international diplomacy at the United Nations . Soviet Union was presented as leading the lead at the U.N.
 The Soviet government completely controlled the news outlets so they could withhold information, or simply impose a short delay on its release . The news outlets were controlled by the Soviet government .
 News was managed in such a way that the crisis was not fully evident to the Soviet public until the danger had passed . This produced an atmosphere entirely different from that in the west .
 For example, Kennedy’s broadcast and the announcement of a naval blockade around Cuba was not reported until 13.00 GMT on Tuesday 23 October .
 It affirmed Soviet support for the United Nations Charter . It called on all governments and peoples to protest against the aggressive actions of the U.S.
 Khrushchev proposed an international summit meeting which was designed to have a calming effect . This must have indicated that there was some problem but was followed by an announcement later the same evening by the announcement .
 Khrushchev and other leaders attended theatrical and musical performances, including one given by a Cuban orchestra, which were clearly intended to produce an impression of business as usual .
 One theme emerges strongly from the Radio Moscow news reports is the emphasis placed on widespread protests throughout the world against American imperialist aggression . One theme which emerges strongly is that widespread protests against American imperialism .
 B.68, October 1962. 3 and demonstrations in London were given particular prominence . Demonstrators in London demonstrated in October 1962 .
 Pro-Cuban demonstrators were arrested outside the U.S. embassy in Cuba . They are being tried for their part in the trial of Cuban protesters .
 Cuba was portrayed as a revolutionary beacon which required solidarity from the equally, if not more, indomitable Soviet people . Cuba's people were portrayed as an example of solidarity .
 The 470th anniversary of the discovery of Cuba, not usually a landmark on the Soviet horizon . The crisis reached its height on Saturday 27 October the lead item noted again from the previous day .
 It would like not only to blockade the island, but even perhaps completely to supress it . The island nation would like to blockade it, and perhaps completely suppress it, says the government .
 The next mentions of Cuba were much further down the running order and then the focus was on protests in Paris outside the American embassy . Tanganyika paper had condemned U.S. action and news that there had been demonstrations against United States actions .
 The role of radio was underlined by the slow and cumbersome nature of official diplomatic communications . Just how vital the role was during the crisis was highlighted by the importance of radio . Radio was vital during the height of the crisis in Afghanistan .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message on 26 October to try to reach a deal . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev talked of the horrific dangers of nuclear war and said that if it were to break out neither of them would have the power to stop it . This was a long, verbose and emotional letter .
 The embassy staff had to translate the letter and put it into cipher, then send it to the State Department . The State Department in Washington then decoded and typed up the letter .
 The final part of the letter was not ready until after 9pm Washington time on Friday evening, almost 12 hours after it had been delivered to the United States Embassy in Moscow . To speed things up the American embassy divided the letter into four sections .
 Khrushchev’s Friday message to Kennedy led the U.S. administration to believe that he was offering to withdraw the missiles from Cuba . The United States administration believed that he had offered to withdraw missiles .
 Khrushchev's move dashed hopes of a return to the Soviet Union in October . But then on Saturday 27 October, known as ‘Black Saturday’, there was a further move by the Soviet leader which dashed that hope .
 At 14.00 GMT the Soviet radio and television networks were aligned and the announcer on Radio Moscow proclaimed that they were transmitting a message from the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers to the President of the USA . The message was copied to the acting Secretary General of the United Nations, U
 It was a very long statement and the monitors translating and editing process is visible on the transcript . The monitors translated and edited the transcript of the statement .
 The Soviet Union would also promise to respect the frontiers and sovereignty of Turkey if the US would pledge the same and promise not to invade Cuba . The U.S. would also pledge to respect Turkey's sovereignty if the U.K. pledged not to attack Cuba .
 This broadcast was made at 10am Washington time and the President and his advisers were meeting in ExComm, the special committee managing the crisis, as the message came through from FBIS .
 The contrast between this immediacy and the length of time it had taken the Friday telegram to arrive is stark . So the contrast is stark.
 Khrushchev had publicly admitted that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba . This was the first time he had publicly acknowledged the existence of the missiles in the country .
 He still protested that they were for defensive purposes, but in acknowledging that the United States saw them as offensive he appeared to be moving towards trying to achieve a deal .
 Washington linked any withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba with equivalent withdrawal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . But this announcement caused consternation in Washington because it publicly linked it with an equivalent withdrawal .
 We now know that the obsolete Jupiter missiles, described by Robert McNamara, US Secretary of Defense, as a ‘pile of junk’, were in fact the subject of secret negotiations between Washington and Moscow .
 This new position of Khrushchev’s seemed eminently reasonable . There was consternation that it would go down well with international public opinion and put the U.S. on the back foot .
 Khrushchev’s offer on Radio Moscow at 14.05 GMT was broadcast almost immediately around the world . The news of the offer was broadcast around the globe almost immediately . The offer was announced at 14:05 GMT in Moscow .
 Presidium of the Soviet Union met at 10am on Sunday 28 October at Khrushchev’s country dacha outside Moscow . Presidium met at the beginning of the morning of October 28 October to discuss the situation .
 Kennedy had replied publicly to Khrushchev and stated that he would not invade Cuba . Kennedy said he would end the naval blockade if Soviet missiles were withdrawn .
 Kennedy ignored the difference in substance between the Friday diplomatic telegram and the Saturday radio broadcast . He made no mention of the offer of a deal on the Turkish missiles .
 Kennedy’s reply was released to the press to avoid the long delay in diplomatic communications . It was not reported on Radio Moscow until the next afternoon .
 An American U2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed . The pilot of the plane was killed .
 Moscow believed the Pentagon wanted air strikes against Cuba to begin Monday . Moscow believed that the Pentagon was behind the move . Russia believed that air strikes would begin on Monday .
 Reports had also come through from Soviet intelligence sources in the United States that Kennedy was to go on television to make an important announcement at 9am Washington time on Sunday morning .
 It was expected to say that the U.S. was about to bomb the missile bases and attack Cuba . It was also expected that the United States would bomb the bases .
 Khrushchev had already prepared the Presidium for a tactical retreat . The Presidium depicted the American promise not to invade Cuba as a great triumph for Soviet diplomacy .
 Khrushchev's response to Kennedy had to be transmitted publicly by radio rather than by coded cable . To save time he decided to use radio to transmit his response to the Kennedy threat .
 His style was particularly blunt, rambling and disjointed and had to be worked on by Soviet officials to bring it into the acceptable language and bureaucratic style of diplomacy .
 According to one account the car raced along at breakneck speed and was recognised as a Kremlin limousine and waved through by the traffic policeman .
 The final phrase of the broadcast was widely paraphrased when it became known as 'crate and return' In Washington it was just 9.08am, when the news started to come through on the FBIS teleprinter .
 McGeorge Bundy, the President’s security adviser, instantly rang Kennedy who was getting ready to go to church . Bundy's security adviser immediately rang Kennedy . Bundy said Kennedy was going to church when the incident occurred .
 Khrushchev was not making any conditions . A further news flash thirty minutes later confirmed that he had no conditions . The news flash was followed by a news flash that the government did not make any further announcement .
 Harold Macmillan and some of his ministers met at Admiralty House in London . This was greeted with huge relief in Washington, and in London, he says .
 There is some evidence (although it is not definitive) that he planned to call a Cabinet meeting for the Sunday afternoon where a move to the Precautionary Stage, the military and official preparations for nuclear war, would be on the agenda .
 When Macmillan says the news came by radio it does not mean that ministers and officials were clustered round the wireless . It doesn't mean they were clustered around the wireless.
 Monitoring was vital to keeping the British public informed of developments in the Soviet Union . Monitoring was also vital in keeping the public informed .
 BBC had no correspondent in Moscow at this time . BBC newsrooms and other programmes in London relied on Caversham for information on important developments .
 The archive does not give us much on the thought processes behind translating or editing process, or any details of exactly how the FBIS unit operated at Caversham operated .
 One is the Radio Moscow report of Kennedy’s reply to Khrushchev on Sunday 28 October, which has the note ‘checked against Reuter and found identical’ It shows that the Monitors must have checked that Radio Moscow was actually broadcasting an accurate account .
 Full archive of BBC Monitoring gives us much more detail and context . The full archive gives us a look at the history of the BBC Monitoring archive .
 The detailed running order of the news bulletins means that we know what the Russian people were told, and crucially not told, as well as exactly when they were told it .
 The verbatim record of these broadcasts, with their archaic language and quotidian details of daily life, enables us to build up a richer and more comprehensive picture of the Soviet interpretation of the crisis .
 "It transports us, as nothing else can do, directly into the mindset of the Soviet Union at the most dangerous moment of the Cold War," the author says .