 National Archives, missile site in Cuba, 1962 January 20, 1961 . John F Kennedy inaugurated as the thirty-fifth President of the United States .
 Kennedy issues executive order creating temporary Peace Corps . President asks Congress to authorize the program permanently . March 1, 1961 .
 Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin becomes the first man in space . April 12, 1961, Yuri became the first person in space in Soviet Union .
 1,500 Cuban exiles landed at Bahia de Cochinos on the southern coast of Cuba on April 17, 1961 . The Bay of Pigs was the first Cuban invasion of Cuba . The space race began in 1961 .
 The mission was to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro by inciting revolt among the Cuban people . Their mission was the overthrow of Castro's government . The Cuban government was overthrown by Castro's regime .
 Funded and supplied by the United States, this invasion ended in absolute failure . Some of the exiles killed and many captured by Castro's army . Many captured .
 President Kennedy wanted American involvement in the operation to remain covert . But signs of CIA sponsorship of the brigade were obvious . President John F Kennedy wanted it to remain secret .
 President's decision not to provide U.S. air support for invasion made him appear weak, he said . In addition, the President's . decision not . to provide American air support made him . appear weak .
 The disastrous invasion stands out as one of the major mistakes of Kennedy's presidency . Kennedy's disastrous invasion of Vietnam was one of his major mistakes .
 The plan for a covert invasion of Cuba originated in the administration of President Dwight D Eisenhower .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell had trained anti-Castro forces in Guatemala in preparation for an invasion . President Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon had been involved in the training . CIA Director Dulles, CIA Deputy for Planning for Planning, was in charge .
 Dulles briefed Kennedy on the operation shortly after his election victory in November . Dulles and Bissell briefed Kennedy about the operation .
 Kennedy chose to reappoint Dulles to head the CIA in his administration . Kennedy re-appointed Dulles as CIA chief in the 1960s .
 Some in the administration warned Kennedy not to follow through with this attack . Kennedy's administration warned him not to carry out the attack .
 Some foreign policy experts feared that the operation as planned was too small and would not succeed . Dean Acheson, such as Dean Aideson, feared that it would fail and would fail .
 Most of the President's advisers maintained that this operation would work and rid the U.S. of a Communist dictatorship 90 miles of the coast of Florida . Still, most of the . President's . advisers maintained this . operation would rid the United States of a . Communist dictatorship .
 President Kennedy wanted to blur any connections between the U.S. military and the Cuban operation . President Kennedy also wanted to avoid any connections with the operation .
 The American press threatened the secrecy of the mission, however, when they reported on the training of exiles and an impending invasion . The U.S. press threatened to reveal that the mission was a secret .
 Kennedy chose not to authorize any air strikes by American planes during the mission . Kennedy feared that a downed plane would expose the American role in the plan .
 The operation was limited to one round of air strikes in disguised planes . It followed by the CIA-trained exiles landing at the Bay of Pigs to invade Cuba .
 While they succeeded in destroying some of Castro's air force, their attack warned the Cuban leader of further assaults . The attack warned Castro of further attacks on his country .
 Castro quickly ordered his military forces to the area, trapping the exiles on the beach . When the invasion began on April 17, Castro ordered his troops to the beach, trapping them .
 The planners had claimed that the invasion would spark an uprising in Cuba . They had claimed it would spark a revolution in the country .
 Kennedy refused to allow additional air strikes to salvage the disaster . Kennedy hoped to maintain American invisibility, refusing to allow air strikes .
 President Kennedy had failed in the first major test of his administration . Criticism of the administration soon poured in from all political perspectives .
 Black and white youths set out on the first of several ‘freedom rides’ to challenge the lack of enforcement of ICC rules against racial discrimination in interstate travel .
 Mixed-race group of 'Freedom Riders' travelled together on busses from Washington, D.C. to New Orleans, Louisiana . They travelled through several southern states on the way to the city .
 Freedom Riders faced attacks and violence at the hands of those who supported segregation, including local police, leading to the injury and arrest of several Riders . The Freedom Riders were the first Freedom Riders in the United States .
 Their efforts were successful in exposing the unlawful nature of the enforcement of segregation in bus travel . Their efforts inspired similar efforts to rectify injustice across the United States .
 Alan Shepard Jr. becomes the first American in space. May 5, 1961 .
 President Obama asked Congress to find additional funds to support the nation's space program . He asked for more funds for the space program in Congress .
 The Soviet Union had surpassed the U.S. in the space race by launching Sputnik, an artificial satellite, in 1957 .
 Since space technology demonstrated potential weapons, this competition became an important aspect of the Cold War . The competition was an important part of the U.S. effort to develop space technology .
 Kennedy realized the importance of space exploration to the military . He remained committed to a civilian-controlled program of manned space flights .
 Kennedy appealed to Congress to increase spending on the space program in the hopes of surpassing the Soviets . With the encouragement of Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Vice President Johnson pushed for increased spending on space program .
 Astronaut John Glenn aboard the Mercury craft Friendship 7 became the first American to orbit the earth on February 20, 1962 . John Glenn was aboard the Friendship 7 when he was the first astronaut to orbit Earth .
 Glenn's space flight celebrated by Kennedy administration and the American people . Glenn was the first American to go to space . Glenn's mission was a success for Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy did not live to see his dream come true when Neil Armstrong landed on the moon in July 1969 . Kennedy's dream came true when he was killed in June 1969 .
 Kennedy spoke about the goal of sending a man to the moon . Read an excerpt of Kennedy's speech from the speech .
 Kennedy meets with Soviet premier Nikita S Khrushchev in Vienna . June 3, 1961 . Kennedy met with the Soviet premier in Vienna, Austria .
 East Germany began constructing a wall between the two sections of Berlin . August 13, 1961, began constructing the Berlin Wall between Berlin and Berlin .
 Refugees from East Germany and the eastern section of Berlin had been flooding into the western part of Berlin, creating an embarrassment for the Soviet and East German governments . Refugees from the east and west of Berlin were flooding into western Berlin .
 In June 1961, President John Kennedy met with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, Austria, but the conference failed to resolve the long-standing conflict over the status of Berlin .
 Khrushchev wanted the United States, Britain, and France to leave the western section of Berlin to Soviet-controlled East Germany since the city lay deep in the heart of East Germany . The U.S., Britain, France and France wanted the western part of Berlin left to East Germany
 He threatened to disregard the Western Allies and make an unilateral treaty with East Germany if the status of Berlin was not resolved . He threatened that he would disregard the West and make a unilateral treaty .
 On July 25, Kennedy addressed the American people explaining the Soviet threat to West Berlin . Kennedy said the U.S. was committed to protecting the city from the Soviet invasion .
 The President appealed to Americans to make sacrifices to win this conflict . The President has announced further increases in military spending .
 Despite these bellicose actions, Kennedy left open the possibility of negotiation, and he made no claims to the eastern sections of Berlin . Kennedy made no claim to eastern parts of Berlin, and left open to negotiation .
 The Berlin Wall ended the movement of East German citizens into West Berlin . East Berlin residents were able to leave the East to move to West Berlin in 1989 .
 Thousands of Berliners gathered on both sides of the new barricade . In an impromptu protest, thousands of people gathered in Berlin to protest the move .
 Kennedy privately expressed an unwillingness to go to war over East Germany's right to close its own boarders . Kennedy was under pressure to act, but privately expressed a reluctance to do so .
 He quickly sent General Lucius Clay and Vice President Lyndon Johnson as his personal ambassadors to Berlin to demonstrate the strength of Washington .
 Kennedy sent a force of 1,500 troops across East Germany into West Berlin . Kennedy sent the force into East Berlin in 1961 .
 While largely symbolic, these actions demonstrated to the Soviets that the U.S. was committed to supporting West Berlin . The actions were largely symbolic .
 With this demonstration of solidarity with West Berlin, Khrushchev ended his threats of a separate East German treaty . With this show of U.S. solidarity with the West Berlin it ended East German threats of separate East Germany treaty .
 The construction of the wall provided the Cold War with a tangible incarnation of the Iron Curtain . It marked the beginning of a de facto agreement between the superpowers .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union allowed the city to remain divided and limited their action to protecting their sphere of Berlin . Both the U.S. and the . Soviet Union .
 The resolution of the Berlin crises represented the end of an important point of conflict in the Cold War . It was an important moment of peace between the two countries .
 Geneva conference adjourns without reaching an agreement on a nuclear test ban . The fall of the Berlin Wall January 29, 1962, was the first anniversary of the fall .
 Kennedy halts virtually all trade with Cuba . February 3, 1962, ended almost all trade between the two countries .
 Astronaut John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth on February 20, 1962 . Glenn was aboard the Friendship 7, a Friendship 7 spacecraft .
 Glenn orbited the Earth three times and landed safely in the Atlantic Ocean . Glenn's five-hour flight was the longest ever to orbit the Earth . He orbited Earth 3 times before landing safely in Atlantic .
 President John Kennedy and the American people celebrated Glenn's space flight . Glenn was the first man to go into space in space .
 The United States had equaled the Soviet Union in scientific accomplishment . The U.S. had equalled the Soviet Russia in scientific achievement .
 The United States has trailed the Soviet Union in the space race since Sputnik launched in 1957 . The U.S. has been trailing the USSR since then .
 In April 1961, the Soviets launched the first man, Yuri Gagarin, into orbit . The first man was launched into orbit by the Soviets in 1961 .
 American followed suit sending Alan Shepard into space in 1961 and Virgil Grissom in 1962 . Alan Shepard was the first American to go into space . Virgil became the first person to go in space in space .
 Both Shepard's and Grissom's flights, however, were suborbital, failing to match the Soviet accomplishment . Shepard's flight was the first of its kind, but failed to match that of the Soviet feat .
 President Kennedy endorsed an aggressive space program in light of the Soviet successes . President Kennedy also endorsed a space program .
 Kennedy was committed to a civilian controlled program of manned space flights . While realizing the importance of space exploration to the military, Kennedy remained committed .
 Eisenhower reluctantly approved Project Mercury and its goal of sending Americans into space . Eisenhower had reluctantly approved the project .
 Kennedy increased spending on the space program hoping to surpass the Soviets . With the encouragement of Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Vice President Johnson increased the program .
 Kennedy envisioned an American victory in the space race . Despite lagging behind the Soviets, Kennedy envisioned a victory in space race. Kennedy envisioned winning the race .
 The Space Race February 26, 1962 . Segregation in transportation facilities deemed unconstitutional . The United States Supreme Court rules that segregation is unconstitutional .
 Kennedy announces reduction of U.S. import duties as part of an agreement to promote international trade . March 7, 1962 . Kennedy announces the reduction of United States import duties .
 Tom Hayden presents the “Port Huron Statement” to the annual convention of Students for a Democratic Society at Port Huron, Michigan . June 15, 1962 .
 The deadly riot that broke out forced President John F Kennedy to intervene . The episode helped change the President’s approach to civil rights .
 Governor Ross Barnett of Mississippi announced his opposition to the ruling . Barnett pledged that “Old Miss” would not be integrated .
 President and Attorney General Kennedy discussed how they could enforce the decision of the court with as little conflict as possible .
 Robert Kennedy remained in contact with Governor Ross throughout the crisis over Meredith’s admission . Governor Ross remained in touch with Robert Kennedy during the crisis .
 Kennedy administration followed a federalist doctrine that local police forces should maintain law and order in these situations . Kennedy administration: Local police forces must maintain law, order .
 They believe behind-the-scenes negotiations with Barnett could lead to a political compromise that would satisfy all parties involved . They also believed that behind the scenes negotiations would lead to an agreement .
 Kennedy and Barnett reached an agreement between the two sides of the fence . Barnett and Kennedy have been married for more than 20 years . Barnett is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 The President wanted to avoid the imposition of military power that would remind southerners of Reconstruction, and the governor would only back down if he could blame the desegregation of Old Miss on the federal government .
 Kennedys believed Barnett committed his state to maintaining order on the campus of Old Miss. Despite these obstacles, the Kennedy family said Barnett committed himself to keeping order on campus .
 An angry crowd of students and other local whites met Meredith on September 30 . Meredith arrived with a small contingent of federal marshals, but the crowd was angry .
 Fearing more violence, the President refused to allow the marshals to fire their weapons . The marshals were ordered to stop firing their weapons, fearing more violence .
 At 10m. the administration ordered Army units stationed in Memphis, Tennessee, to the campus . Finally, at 10:30pm, the administration orders Army units to campus .
 Due to a series of errors, the Army did not arrive until 2:15 am the next day . The Army arrived at the scene at 2:30 am the following morning .
 Twenty-thousand soldiers then restored order to the Old Miss campus and the town of Oxford .
 Meredith was the first African American to graduate from Old Miss in 1963 . Meredith was an important symbol of the Civil Rights Movement in Mississippi and throughout the South . Meredith graduated from the University of Mississippi in 1964 . Meredith died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 Kennedy administration learned important lessons from the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration was in the midst of a crisis in the early 1960s .
 First, they questioned the ability to solve these difficult issues through negotiations with politicians . Second, they said they questioned whether politicians can solve difficult issues with negotiations .
 Barnett demonstrated the ability of southern Democratic politicians to make certain commitments to the President, while taking a different stand with the people of his state . Barnett demonstrated that he can take a stand with his state's people . Barnett is a Democrat in the southern state .
 The desegregation of Old Miss led Kennedy to question his administration’s approach to civil rights . Without making any specific changes in policy, Kennedy questioned his approach to the civil rights movement .
 Kennedy is informed of the existence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba . October 16, 1962: Kennedy informed of existence of the installations .
 The President warned that the purpose of the Soviet missiles in Cuba could be “none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere” The President said he would protect the United States from such a threat no matter what the cost .
 The U.S. Navy would impose a “quarantine” or naval blockade around Cuba with the support of the Organization of American States . The blockade would be imposed by the United States, the president said .
 Once operational, the missiles could deliver nuclear warheads to much of the United States . These missiles could be used to carry nuclear warheads in the U.S. The missiles could also be used in nuclear warplanes .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy informed the President of the discovery the morning of October 16 . The discovery was made by the National Security Adviser to the President .
 Kennedy quickly called a meeting of his top military and diplomatic advisers as well as his most trusted confidants like Theodore Sorensen and his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . Kennedy called the meeting .
 This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or ExComm . ExComm is now known as a group of members of the Executive Council .
 Members of ExComm agreed that the Soviets must remove the missiles from Cuba . However, they disagreed about the best way to ensure the missiles' removal . ExComm: The best way of removing the missiles is to remove them .
 The President chose to use a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent further shipments of Soviet weapons from entering Cuba . International law considered a “blockade’s an act of war, the Kennedy administration chose the term “quarantine” instead of a blockade .
 The world waited in anticipation as Soviet ships approached the American blockade . Over the next few days, the world waited for an anxious anticipation .
 On the morning of Wednesday, October 24, conflict appeared imminent as twenty-five Soviet ships neared the quarantine . The Soviet Union was quarantined on October 24 .
 At 10m., the six vessels nearest the boundary all turned back . The six vessels closest to the border turned back at 10m .
 Despite the initial success of the quarantine, the crises continued without resolution . The crises continued to occur without resolution in the United States .
 Lines of communication opened with the Soviets on October 26, but White House received confusing messages . White House receives confusing messages from Soviets .
 Kennedy under increasing pressure from his military advisors to order an air strike on Cuba . Meanwhile, the downing of an American U-2 surveillance plane over Cuba exacerbated the crisis .
 The President realized he must act quickly to find a diplomatic solution . President Obama realized he had to act quickly and find a solution .
 The White House drafted a letter to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev explaining that once the Soviets removed the missiles from Cuba, the U.S. would end its quarantine and promise not to invade .
 In a secret conversation with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Robert Kennedy pledged that, in addition to the terms in the letter, the U.S. would also remove American ballistic nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 On November 20, Kennedy ended the naval blockade of Cuba after the Soviet Union dismantled and removed the weapons from Cuba .
 In one of the most dramatic crises of the Cold War, Kennedy and Khrushchev avoided violent conflict . Kennedy and his Soviet Union-era Soviet Union was at odds with the West .
 President Kennedy's Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba is published by President Kennedy . To read and listen to the full text of the President's address, click here .
 The United States will pledge not to invade Cub in exchange for the removal of the Soviet weapons . The U.S. will pledge to not invade Cub . The deal would remove Soviet weapons from Cub, Cuba .
 Kennedy lifts naval blockade of Cuba . November 20, 1962 . Kennedy lifts the naval blockade . November 22, 1962. November 23, 1962
 The Supreme Court rules in Gideon Wainwright that states must supply counsel in criminal cases for individuals who cannot afford it . March 18, 1963 . The court ruled that states had to supply counsel for those who could not afford it.
 April 3, 1963, The Southern Christian Leadership Conference begins a movement in Birmingham, Alabama, to integrate public spaces in the city . April 3 is 1963 .
 Activists worked to expose the violent nature of Birmingham's law enforcement, led by the notorious Eugene ""Bull"" Connor . Connor met activists' nonviolent, peaceful protest with high-pressure firehoses and police dogs .
 Activists were successful in revealing the unlawful actions of Birmingham's civic authorities, leading to changes in the city's discrimination laws . Because these events which lasted over a month were widely publicized in film and print media, they were successful .
 In it, he addressed relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and a nuclear test ban treaty . In the speech, he spoke about relations with the Soviet Russia and nuclear tests .
 The idea of a nuclear test ban treaty originated in the administration of President Dwight Eisenhower . The two sides never could agree on the details of a pact .
 At the end of 1962, Khrushchev wrote Kennedy of his desire to create such an agreement . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union at the time .
 Kennedy's statements began to take a softer stance toward his Soviet adversaries . Meanwhile, Kennedy was taking a tougher stance .
 This speech called for more than simply a ban on atomic testing . This speech, however, called for a more than just a ban .
 Both nations shared a common interest in preserving the planet for future generations, President Obama said . Both nations agreed to take part in the initiative .
 Agreeing to a nuclear test ban would only be the first step toward the long-range goal of complete disarmament . The goal is to prevent nuclear weapons testing in North Korea from being tested again .
 After surviving one of the most dangerous moments of the Cold War, Kennedy envisioned an end to arms race . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to war. I'm going to end the arms race. I want to end it"
 A teletype hot line was installed providing direct communication between the Kremlin and the White House . Soon, a new teletype hotline was installed to connect the two countries .
 This system would end the miscommunication that proved so dangerous in the missile crises . This would end miscommunication between the U.S. and Russia .
 The President also sent a delegation to Moscow to negotiate the long-awaited nuclear test ban treaty . The President is also expected to negotiate a nuclear test test ban .
 The “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water” was a significant step in decreasing tensions between the superpowers . While the resulting agreement met the demands of neither side, the agreement was significant .
 After coming on the verge of violent conflict in the missile crises, Kennedy and Khrushchev attempted to foster a new period of détente . After coming close to violent conflict, the two leaders tried to foster an era of peaceful relations .
 Medgar W Evers was a field secretary for the NAACP in Mississippi and one of the Civil Rights Movement's most significant activists . He was shot in the back outside his home in Jackson, Mississippi, in 1963 .
 Evers was rushed to the hospital where he was initially denied entry because of his race . He was found by his wife, Myrlie, after being denied entry due to race . Evers' wife found him in the hospital .
 Once he was finally admitted, he died within the hour leaving behind his wife and three children . He was the first black person admitted to an all-white hospital in Mississippi .
 Byron De La Beckwith was finally convicted of Evers' murder on February 5, 1994 . Myrlie's persistence in pursuing her husband's killer led him to the conviction . Byron was convicted of the murder of Myrlie Evers in February 1994 .
 250,000 people traveled to Washington, D.C. to demonstrate their support for civil rights legislation . August 28, 1963, March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom .
 The leaders of the major civil rights organizations led a nonviolent march from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial . The march was led by civil rights leaders .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. gave his famous “I Have a Dream” speech . King gave the speech before a large crowd and a national television audience .
 With a large turnout and peaceful demonstration, the civil rights leaders increased the pressure on Congress and President John Kennedy to pass meaningful civil rights legislation . The demonstration was the first civil rights demonstration since 1964 .
 Before the summer of 1963, the Kennedy administration had disappointed many of those involved in the civil rights struggle . The Kennedy administration failed to fulfill many of the promises made by those involved .
 The President had often attempted to avoid conflict with Southern Democrats on issues regarding race .
 President Kennedy met with African American leaders to gain their support for civil rights . Kennedy was a firm commitment to legislation for the civil rights movement . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Leaders proposed a march on Washington to pressure Congress to pass a strong civil rights act . Despite Kennedy's opposition, many of the leaders at this meeting proposed a March on Washington . Kennedy was opposed .
 The march created a moment of unity among the fractured civil rights organizations . The march was the first of its kind in the civil rights movement .
 They emphasized the peaceful and orderly nature of the march . There would be no civil disobedience, they said . The march was peaceful, orderly .
 He began speaking from the written text he had completed the night before, but soon drifted off onto a theme he had spoken of several times . He was speaking from a piece he had written the night night before .
 King continued to give his most famous address presenting a vision of racial equality and harmony for the nation . King's most famous speech was delivered at the White House in 1963 .
 King, Wilkins, and others pressed the President for a more aggressive civil rights bill . King and Wilkins discussed strategies to garner political support for the bill . The bill was passed in the House of Representatives .
 Despite the success of the march, the civil rights bill moved slowly through Congress . The bill was eventually passed by Congress in 1964 .
 King and other activists had an important effect on President Kennedy as his administration lobbied in support of the civil rights bill . King's actions helped Kennedy secure passage of the bill .
 After Kennedy was assassinated, President Lyndon Johnson continued to work for civil rights legislation .
 On July 2, 1964, he signed the Civil Rights Act, ending segregation in public facilities . He signed the act, which ended segregation .
 President Kennedy's June 11, 1963 speech was recorded in 1963 . Kennedy spoke to the nation on the day of the day he was assassinated .
 Four African-American girls are killed at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, when at least 15 sticks of dynamite planted by four members of the KKK blow a 7 foot hole in the basement of the church . September 15, 1963, The Civil Rights Act of 1964
 The blast destroyed the basement lounge, several nearby parked cars, windows two blocks away and all but one of the church's stained glass windows . More than twenty others were injured .
 The FBI closed their investigation without convicting any of the four suspects in the case .
 Kennedy signs a limited nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom . October 7, 1963, President Kennedy signs the treaty in Washington .
 Ngo Dinh Diem is assassinated in U.S.-supported coup in 1963 . November 1, 1963, was the South Vietnamese president .
 President John Kennedy was shot and killed while traveling in a motorcade in Dallas, Texas . November 22, 1963, The Diem Coup was the first Diem coup in the world .
 The President and First Lady had gone to Texas in an attempt to bolster Democratic support for his presidency in the South . The president and the First Lady were in Texas to boost Democratic support .
 While the President and First Lady were riding in a motorcade with Texas governor John Connally and his wife, the open limousine turned into Dealey Plaza and gunshots rang out . The president and first lady were riding with Gov. Connally .
 Kennedy, shot in neck and head, rushed to Parkland Memorial Hospital . Kennedy was shot in the head and neck and the head .
 With a blood-stained Jacquelyn Kennedy at his side, Vice President Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as President of the U.S. Vice President Johnson is sworn in in Washington, DC .
 Oswald was shot dead in the basement of the Dallas police station as he was being transfered to a jail . Two days later, Jack Ruby, a Dallas businessman and nightclub owner, shot Oswald dead . Ruby shot Oswald two days later in Dallas .
 This strange turn of events quickly cast doubt about who had perpetrated the assassination . It was the first time the president had been assassinated .
 President Johnson appointed Chief Justice Earl Warren to head a commission to investigate the incident . Chief Justice Warren was appointed to head the commission .
 In less than a year, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald, working alone, was guilty of the act . Oswald was the only person responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Many Americans remain unsatisfied with this simple explanation for such a horrific event . Many Americans are unsatisfied by the lack of an explanation .
 Kennedy's death proved to be a political asset for the Johnson administration . Kennedy died in 1963, but his death was an asset for Johnson's administration .
 Johnson passed the most significant civil rights legislation in American history . Framing his programs as a way of fulfilling Kennedy's legacy, Johnson's programs were meant to fulfill JFK's legacy . Framed his programs in a way to fulfill Kennedy's dream, Johnson signed the bill .
 Kennedy's death would symbolize an end of a time of innocence and the beginning of a turbulent period in American history . Still, for a whole generation of Americans, the death of Kennedy symbolized an end to innocence . The Kennedy assassination was the first time the president had been assassinated .
 Jack Ruby shoots and kills Lee Harvey Oswald . November 24, 1963 . Ruby shot and killed Oswald .
 Kennedy is buried at Arlington National Cemetery . November 25, 1963, Kennedy was buried in 1963 .