 Community Press is a vibrant and healthy free press . Support Community Press by becoming a voluntary subscriber to our community .
 The book includes eight pages of photographs and two maps that illustrate the severities and realities of this 13-day event . The book also includes two maps and photos .
 In 1962, the United States learned that the Soviet Union planned to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles off the coast of Florida, to support the new Caribbean Communist nation . The U.S. learned in 1962 that the Soviets planned to put nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 The wily Khrushchev thought Kennedy would back down when confronted . The youthful Kennedy would not have backed down in the face of the growing opposition . Khrushchevski thought the youthful Kennedy wouldn't back down .
 Kennedy was adamant that Russian ships transporting missiles to Cuba would not be allowed to cross his naval blockade . Kennedy insisted that the ships would not cross his American naval blockade.
 Castro encouraged the Soviet government to breach the blockade by threatening an alliance with China . Castro encouraged Soviet government by threatening to break the blockade . Meanwhile, Castro encouraged government to break embargo by threatening alliance .
 The situation changed hourly as Kennedy, Khrushchev and aides made decisions that had the potential to trigger a nuclear holocaust at any slight miscalculation by either side . The situation was constantly changing hourly during the war .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev finally ‘stood down’ due to fear of nuclear war and the resulting impact on their nations . The two leaders "stood down" due to the fear of a nuclear war . Both were forced to stand down in fear of their nations' fate .
 Plokhy breathes new life into the story with recently uncovered information from Ukrainian KGB documents on the drama . The series is set to be shown on PBS' The Walking Dead .
 Documents show that the Soviets had over 40,000 troops at the ready in Cuba . According to those documents, the Soviet Union had 40,500 troops in the country .
 U.S. intelligence sources estimated only 10,000 Soviet troops at the time of the invasion . United States intelligence sources estimate only 10-000 Soviet forces were involved .
 This nonfiction account appeals to history buffs and especially individuals who lived through the crisis . It appeals to people who lived in the U.S. during WWII .
 The book reads like a Tom Clancy thriller that explores what really happened as the world watched in suspense . Extremely well-written, the book reads as well as Tom Clancy's .