 Sports audiences focused on television and Internet stories from the 2014 winter games in Sochi, Russia . We are all learning more about this fascinating country .
 America has had a long and complex history of relations with Russia, from both the Soviet Union era and now as the Russian Federation . America's relationship with Russia has been described as one of the most complex in the world .
 The U.S. and Russia have covered the gamut of different roles over the centuries . From allies to adversaries, the two nations have been at times both at the same time .
 Russia’s role as both an adversary and ally during the Second World War lays the foundation for its complicated but critical relationship with the rest of the world today . World War II Russia's role as an ally and an adversary during the World War laid the foundation .
 Britain's victory over Nazi Germany is still studied and admired today . But its historic triumph over its former ally, Nazi Germany, is still a feat still studied .
 The planning and execution of the German offensive against Russia in 1941-1942 are reviewed . Decision in the East is reviewed by the historian .
 The German Defeat in the East describes the German defeat by the Russians in World War II . The events that resulted in the Soviet Union becoming a dominant military power in Europe . The book is based on the events that led to the collapse of Germany in the war .
 In response to West Germany’s inclusion in NATO, the Warsaw Pact was signed in May 1955 in Warsaw, Poland, as a mutual defense treaty between eight Cold War communist states of Central and Eastern Europe . The Warsaw Pact signed in response to the inclusion of NATO in NATO .
 Warsaw Pact members included Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovak Republic, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Romania . Warsaw Pact countries included the U.S.R. and the Czech Republic . Poland, Romania, Albania, Romania and Czechoslovakia .
 Soviet military planning for conflict in Europe after World War II from the outset harnessed East European capabilities to Soviet military purposes . East European military capabilities were harnessed to Soviet purposes .
 Instruments of Soviet Control includes a wealth of newly declassified Central Intelligence Agency documents covering the Warsaw Pact period . The book and accompanying DVD include documents from the CIA, CIA and KGB documents .
 Soviet-East European Military Relations in Historical Perspective; Sources and Reassessments is a collection of hundreds of recently declassified documents . It is designed to take stock of where we are twenty years after the collapse of East European Communism .
 Soviet and Warsaw Pact military journals from 1961 to 1984 uncovered in newly opened archives across former Warsaw Pact nations . The journals provide a view into Warsaw Pact's military strategy .
 At the end of World War 2, the Soviet Union was a major player in the world and again an adversary . At the conclusion of the war, it was again an ally of the West .
 It was referred to as a ‘cold war’ because there were no major world wars or direct conflicts between the two sides . There were significant regional wars in Korea and Vietnam, although there were also regional wars .
 Essays on CIA's Analysis of the Soviet Union focuses on the organizational evolution of the CIA’s analysis of the . Soviet economic, political, military, and scientific and technological developments during the Cold War .
 It assesses the extent to which Western analyses of the Soviet Union may have influenced the USSR’s policy making process . Interestingly, it also assesses how Western analysis of the USSR influenced its policy making .
 In addition to watching the West, Soviet leadership had a constant struggle to keep its own member states in line . Some members of the Soviet Union began to chafe under the communist system .
 Czech communist leadership embarked on a radical program of dramatic liberalization of the Czechoslovak political, economic, and social order that was not approved by Moscow . Dubcek was the leader of the communist party in Czechoslovakia in the early 1950s .
 The CIA reviewed, redacted, and released hundreds of documents related to the 1968 Czechoslovak-Soviet crisis . The CIA and Strategic Warning; The 1968 Soviet-Led Invasion of Czechoslovakia .
 During the period of 1967 to 1979, there was an easing of Cold War tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Détente Era was a period of tension between the two countries .
 Referred to as détente, the era was a time of increased trade and cooperation with the Soviet Union . However relations cooled again with the invasion of Afghanistan until the fall of the Soviet Soviet Union and the founding of the Russian Federation .
 Documentary tells story of how U.S. and Soviet Union moved from Cold War to détente during 1969 to 1972 . With foreword by Henry A Kissinger, this unprecedented joint documentary publication .
 Both the U.S. and Soviet accounts of Henry Kissinger and Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin are published side-by side . The so-called Kissinger-Dobrynin confidential back channel, related documents, and the full Soviet and United States record of the first Moscow
 The Soviet documents are being released in the volume for the first time anywhere . It is the first volume of Soviet documents to be released in a volume anywhere .
 One of the crowning achievements of Russia and the Soviet Union has been its space program . Russia's space program is one of the world's biggest achievements .
 Russia is proud of its achievements in the space race and participation in the International Space Station . The launch of Sputnik, the launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite, triggered a space race . Russia is justifiably proud of their "stellar" accomplishments .
 Russian spacecraft designer Boris Chertok continues his fascinating memoirs about the history of the Soviet space program . This time, he covers 1968 to 1974, the peak years of Soviet human lunar program . The book is translated from its original Russian version to English .
 Russia or the Russian Federation continues to be a major power, politically, militarily and economically . The Russian Federation is now the world's most powerful country .
 Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation has continued to have issues with insurgencies and disagreements among its population . But since the break-up of the USSR, the country has been plagued by insurgencies .
 Tanks in the Cities provides an up-to-date analysis of the utility of tanks and heavy armored forces in urban combat from across the world . Includes an analysis of Russian use of tanks in quelling the insurgency in the Chechen Republic in 1995 .
 Russia still has a number of social welfare programs that differ from the rest of Europe . No longer a communist nation, Russia today has a social welfare program that differs from other countries .
 Russian social security programs are analyzed and compared to other nations in Europe . Russia's social security program is compared to those of other countries in Europe. Europe 2012 will be presented at the end of this year's program .
 Essays in Memory of Mary FitzGerald includes essays by top U.S. and Russian analysts to assess current Russian military thinking on warfare . The essays give insight into the Russia of today .
 They say one must study history to understand where we today and where we are heading . They say history must be studied to understand today's current and future .
 This listing is just a smattering of the many thoughtful publications about Russia and the Soviet Union that can add to your understanding of where this major power has been, where it is today and where it might go .
 Search for one of these publications in a nearby Federal depository library . Find them in a local library .