 Vietcong with North Vietnamese support attacked South Vietnamese government . Vietcong led the attack on the government of South Vietnam .
 U.S. intervened to stop fall of a ""row of dominoes"" to Communism . United States intervened to prevent fall of 'dominoes'
 Highlights include the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Tet Offensive and the Fall of Saigon in 1975 . The Fall of Vietnam in 1975 marked the end of the Vietnam War .
 Tet Offensive: In 1968, the Vietcong launched a massive offensive throughout South Vietnam, seizing many major cities, including the capital city of Saigon . The Tet Offensive took place in 1968, when the Vietnamese government was overthrown .
 Nixon increased U.S. bombing of North Vietnam and provided military aid to South Vietnam . At the same time, Nixon increased American bombing of N. Vietnam .
 After President Nixon introduced Vietnamization, American forces were gradually reduced in Vietnam . American forces in Vietnam were reduced in 1973 .
 By 1975, what remained of the South Vietnamese Army was incapable of preventing the advance of the North Vietnamese . The North Vietnamese army was unable to prevent the advance .
 President Nixon and Vice President Agnew insisted that most Americans still supported the war . The Silent Majority was Silent Majority . Nixon and Agnew said Americans still support the Vietnam War .
 Young Americans objected to the country's involvement in Vietnam . Nowhere was this discontent more evident than among young Americans who objected to it .
 The anti-war movement greatly influenced U.S. military policy . Anti-war movements influenced the United States military policy in the 1960s .
 26th Amendment lowered the voting age to 18 . Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events .
 In 1964, Johnson announced that the North Vietnamese had attacked U.S. ships in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin . Johnson announced the attack in 1964 . The incident was the first time the United States had been attacked by the North Vietnam in international water .
 Presidents have sent American troops into extended combat without first obtaining a declaration of war from Congress . In both Korea and Vietnam, Presidents had sent . American troops in extended . combat without . first obtaining first . declaration of . war .
 Roy Benavidez carried wounded members of his platoon to rescue-helicopters . In May 1968, he faced constant enemy fire, carrying wounded soldiers to rescue helicopters . He was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor in 1968 .
 At first, Benavidez was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroism . When the full story of his daring became known, President Ronald Reagan awarded him the Congressional Medal of Honor in 1981 .
 The exiles invading the Bay of Pigs disobeyed orders to say they were acting independently . They disobeyed their orders, but disobeyed the orders of the Cuban government .
 In October 1962, Kennedy gathered a group of his top officials to form a special committee in the White House . The committee was formed by Kennedy in October 1962 .
 In good decision-making, one examines all of the alternatives and weighs the pros and cons of each option . In good decisions, one considers all the pros, cons and pros of each choice .
 President Eisenhower had suggested that the fall of French Indochina might create a ""domino"" effect . Explain reasons and outcomes for United States involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory .
 In South Korea, a non-Communist state was established with an elected government . South Korea was established in 1950s with the support of the Korean people .
 In 1950, North Korean forces invaded South Korea in an attempt to unify the country under Communist rule . North Korea invaded the Korean peninsula in 1950, and it was later ruled by the Korean government .
 Stalin felt that Americans would not care enough to become involved in the conflict . Stalin felt the conflict would not be worth the effort to get involved .
 He immediately decided to oppose the North Koreans rather than give in . He decided not to give in, but to oppose them .
 Truman ordered U.S. forces into South Korea to resist the invasion . Truman ordered United States forces into the South Korean invasion to resist invasion .
 The Soviet Union had recently walked out of the United Nations in a protest . The United States was able to pass a resolution sending United Nations troops, mostly United States soldiers, to South Korea .
 This action marked the first time an international peace organization successfully used military force to halt aggression . This action was carried out by the International Organization for Peace Organization .
 After the Geneva Conference, the United States replaced France as South Vietnam's principal supporter . The U.S. became a major ally of Vietnam in Vietnam .
 What types of scientific discoveries in the 1950s improved the standard of living in the U.S. The post-war period saw many advances in medicine .
 The success of antibiotics in treating infections gave new hopes for cures . Antibiotics have been used to treat many of the world's most common infections .
 Jonas Salk developed the first vaccine for polio in 1953 . The disease attacks the central nervous system and can cause paralysis or death . Salk's polio vaccine was developed by Salk in the 1950s .
 He tested it on himself and his family before setting up a field test with almost two million volunteers . He tested the technology on himself, his family and his friends .
 Other medical advances during this period included a measles vaccine, the first heart transplant, and the discovery of streptomycin, an antibiotic to treat tuberculosis . Other advances included a heart transplant and the first measles vaccine .
 Barry Goldwater won the Republican nomination for President in 1964 . In 1964, Goldwater was a Senator from Arizona . Goldwater is considered one of the country's most prominent political leaders .
 In the 1960s, literature became much more open in its treatment of human consciousness and sexuality . In the same era, literature also became more open to human consciousness .
 In the early 1960s, the Motown Sound from Detroit swept the nation . African-American artists like the Temptations, the Four Tops, and the Supremes were among the stars .
 Aided President Nixon in adopting the policy of Vietnamization where the army of South Vietnam gradually took over the brunt of the fighting against the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army, allowing the withdrawal of United States forces .
 These included the Job Corps, to train underprivileged youths, and a domestic ""Peace Corps"" to help in depressed areas . The Job Corps was created to train young people and help depressed people .
 This act ended poll taxes, suspended literacy tests where they were used to prevent African Americans form voting, and led to a substantial increase in the number of African-American voters .
 A joint federal and state program helps low-income individuals or families pay for the costs associated with long-term medical and custodial care, provided they qualify .
 Medicaid is largely funded by the federal government . Medicaid is run by the state where coverage may vary . Coverage may vary depending on state coverage .
 Social Security was expanded to provide medical care, hospital insurance, and post-hospital nursing for people over age 65 . Social Security is now providing medical care and hospital insurance for those over 65 .