 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was born on August 13, 1926 in Oriente, Cuba . He was a Communist dictator of Cuba from 1959 to 2006 . He died on November 25, 2016 .
 His father, Angel, was a wealthy sugar plantation owner originally from Spain . His father is a wealthy plantation owner .
 Fidel Castro was educated in private Jesuit boarding schools . Raised in affluence while surrounded by poverty, Fidel Castro grew up in poverty . Fidel Castro attended Jesuit boarding school .
 He attended El Colegio de Belen and pitched for the school’s baseball team . He was a member of the baseball team at the school .
 In 1947 Castro participated in a effort to overthrow the dictator Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . In 1947 he participated in an effort to oust the dictator .
 Its founder, Cuban presidential candidate Eduardo Chibas, lost the 1948 election but became a hero of sorts to Castro . The group was founded by former Cuban president Fidel Castro in 1959 .
 In 1948 Castro married Mirta Diaz Balart, who hailed from a wealthy Cuban family . Castro's first wife was a wealthy woman from the wealthy family of his own .
 The couple had one child, Fidelito, before the marriage was dissolved in 1955 . The couple were married in 1950s .
 In 1952 Castro ran as a candidate for a seat in the Cuban parliament, but a coup led by the country’s former president, General Fulgencio Batista, overthrew the existing government and cancelled the election . Castro ran in 1952 but the election was cancelled .
 Batista established himself as a dictator. Solidifying his power with Cuba’s military and economic elite, Batista became a dictator . Batista was a dictator of Cuba .
 The attack failed and Castro was captured and sentenced to 15 years in prison . Castro was convicted of attempted murder in 2009 . Castro is now serving a 15-year sentence .
 Castro was set free in 1955 under an amnesty deal with the Batista government . He traveled to Mexico, where he met Ernesto “Che” Guevara .
 The pair conspired to overthrow the Batista regime by means of guerrilla warfare . Guevara became an important confidante and advisor to Castro . The pair plotted to overthrow Batista with guerrilla warfare.
 On December 2, 1956, Castro and 81 fellow insurgents returned to Cuba, near the eastern city of Manzanillo, to begin their protracted guerrilla campaign . Castro was one of the first to return to Cuba in 1956 .
 Castro organized resistance groups in cities and towns across the country . Castro organized anti-Castro resistance groups across the U.S. Castro organized a series of resistance groups .
 Batista fled to the Dominican Republic, and Fidel Castro seized control of Cuba . Castro was a 32-year-old Fidel Castro when he took over the Cuban government . Batista was killed by Fidel Castro's assassination attempt .
 Leftwing Monster Fidel Castro entered Havana on January 8, 1959, to wild acclaim from all quarters . Castro entered Cuba in 1959 to be greeted with wild acclaim . Castro was the Cuban dictator of Cuba .
 Castro was promising an end to the corrupt governments that had plagued Cuba since independence . Most Cubans were jubilant; Castro promised end to corrupt governments . Castro's government was corrupt; he was promising end to corruption .
 Private property would be secure, a free press guaranteed, friendly relations with the U.S. were essential . Free press would be guaranteed, a friendly relationship with the United States was essential . Private property was secure, the free press was guaranteed .
 Jack Paar never treated a guest on his Tonight Show as deferentially as he treated honored guest Fidel Castro . Paar's Tonight Show was hosted by Fidel Castro, who was a guest of honor .
 Harry Truman called Castro a “good young man trying to do what’s best for Cuba” Retired president Harry Truman said Castro was “a good young man .”
 U.S. accorded diplomatic recognition to Castro's government more quickly than it had recognized Batista's in 1952 . The United States actually recognized Castro’s government in 1952.
 The promptness of this recognition set a record for recognition of a Latin American government . The U.S. government has been recognized by the U.N. since 2008 .
 Cubans own 5,911 businesses worth $2 billion . U.S. properties on island were confiscated . Cubans owned most property and businesses owned by Cubans . Cuban president took over island in 2010 .
 President Eisenhower finally declared, “there’s a limit to what the United States in self-respect can endure” On January 3, 1961, Eisenhower said there was a limit . Eisenhower: “There’ll be a limit on what the U.S.
 They say you can boil a live frog in a pot by gradually turning up the heat . The frog is boiled slowly in pots by gradually heating up the pot .
 "He will not jump out, because he can’t tell the temperature’s changing," he says . "He won't jump out because he will not be able to tell the weather's changing"
 Castro's Revolution was a stealth revolution, done in stages, dividing and conquering till he had the whole prize . Castro’s Revolution was done by stages, divided and conquering until he had a whole prize, he says .
 I didn't protest because I didn’t have a Sugar mill; I had a small tobacco farm . Then they came for the big landowners, he says . He says he didn't .
 'I was a small shopkeeper not a factory owner. Then they came for the big businessmen and I didn’t protest because I was a shopkeeper'
 Large landholdings were initially “nationalized” on the pretext of “land reform” where the massive latifundia would be parceled out to landless peasants . Large land holdings were initially "nationalized" on the . pretext of 'land reform
 As with so much else regarding pre-Castro Cuba, major misconceptions abound in this editorial . The editorial is based on the fact that some of the country's citizens were in Cuba at the time of Castro's rule .
 The average daily wage for an agricultural worker in Cuba in 1958 was $3. According to the Geneva-based International Labor Organization, the average daily daily wage in Cuba was $2.50 .
 The average daily wage in France at the time was $2.73; in Belgium, Belgium, Denmark, Denmark and West Germany . In the United States, the average wage was $4.06; in France, $3.06 .
 Confiscated farms remained in Cuban government hands as state farms on the Soviet model . Confiscation farms remained state farms in Cuba on a Soviet-style model .
 Soviet advisers from the Ukraine were already directing Castro’s Institute of Agrarian Reform . By early 1959, Soviet advisers had already directed Castro's Institute of Agriculture Reform .
 As the pattern became clear, a major rebellion broke out in the Cuban countryside . A major rebellion erupted in the country's countryside in 2009 .
 It took the Castroites 6 years, tens of thousands of troops, scores of Russian advisors, squadrons of Soviet tanks, helicopters, flame throwers, and a massive and brutal “re-location” campaign . Thousands of rural families were uprooted at gunpoint and relocated
 One individual who was fortunate enough to escape to Miami recalls that “e fought with the fury of cornered beasts” against the occupation of Cuba that the Soviet Union carried out through its proxies, Castro and Guevara . One individual . escaped to Miami .
 Cuba took in more immigrants in the 20th century than the United States took in . This includes the Ellis Island years . As a percentage of population, Cuba took more immigrants than the U.S. took in in the past century .
 In 1958, the Cuban embassy in Rome had a backlog of 12,000 applications for immigrant visas from Italians clamoring to immigrate to Cuba . In 1958 the embassy had 12,500 applications for immigrants to be granted .
 Back then, people were as desperate to enter Cuba as they now are now to escape . Back then people were desperate to get into Cuba as now, now they are now .
 By 1992 two million Cubans had fled Cuba, most against staggering odds and with only the clothes on their back . By 1992, two million Cuban refugees had fled the island nation .
 By most estimates this is a tiny fraction of those who desired to leave the country . The majority of those wanted to leave were not willing to leave .
 A causeway from Havana to Key West in 1961 with the same free travel as existed in Cuba in 1958 would have emptied the island in two months . Cuba in 1961 would have been emptied in two weeks .
 83,000 Cubans have died at sea while attempting to leave Cuba . Armando Lago says 83,00 have died trying to sail out of Cuba .
 At that point the Cuban government ceased publishing the statistics on the self-slaughter .
 Cuba had a higher standard of living than any Latin American country and half of Europe . In 1958 Cuba had the highest standards of living in Latin American and European countries .
 Cuban workers are more unionized than U.S. workers . The average wage for an 8-hour day in Cuba 1957 is higher than for workers in Belgium, Denmark, France and Germany . Cuban workers also unionized .
 Cubans had the 3rd highest protein consumption in the hemisphere in 1958 . Cubans have the highest protein intake in the world . In 1958 Cubans were the 3th highest in protein consumption .
 In 1962 Castro’s government introduced ration cards that persist to this day . The ration cards were introduced by the Castro government in 1962 .
 Food Ration in 1842: meat, chicken, fish — 8 oz 2 oz. Ration since 1962: meat and chicken — 8oz 2oz. 2oz . Ration for slaves in Cuba: Meat, chicken and fish .
 The half-starved slaves on the ship Amistad ate better than the average Cuban eats today .
 And a revolutionary must become a cold killing machine motivated by pure hate, he says . And that's what he calls a "cold killing machine"
 Given the rate of firing squad executions in Cuba in the early 1960s, thousands of gallons of perfectly good blood gushed from the bodies of young men only to soak uselessly into the mud, wash into gutters, or get sopped up by buckets of sawdust .
 By 1961 Cuba’s government was already desperately short on foreign exchange . Cuba was desperate for foreign exchange in 1961 . By 1961 the Cuban government was short of foreign currency .
 In two short years Castro had rendered a nation with a living standard higher than half of Europe and with a peso always on par with the U.S. dollar, utterly destitute .
 Soviet subsidies could never compensate for the destruction of Cuba’s vibrant pre-Castro economy . The massive Soviet subsidies never compensated for the loss of the pre-Cuba economy . Cuba's economy was devastated by the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 In 1961 an ocean of fresh, plasma-rich Cuban blood was being freed from its confines by bullets and spilling daily . In 1961 the blood was spilling daily from the Cuban blood . Blood was being released daily by bullets .
 Dozens of those murdered after sham trials were U.S. citizens . Dozens of the victims were United States citizens .
 Eighteen thousand bodies would eventually join Howard Anderson’s in mass graves . The bodies of 18,000 people would eventually be found in the mass grave .
 Carlos Machado was 15 years old in 1963 when the bullets shattered his bound body . He was 15 when he was shot in the head with a gun . Machado's body was found bound in 1963 in a shallow grave .
 Carlos's twin brother and father collapsed beside Carlos from the same volley . Carlos's father and twin brother also died in the same attack . Carlos was hit by a volley in the back of the volley .
 On Christmas eve 1961, Juana Diaz spat in the face of the Castroite executioners who were binding and gagging her . The executioners were bound and gagged by the Castroites .
 When the blast from that firing squad demolished her face and torso, Juana was six months pregnant . Juana died at the age of 18 .
 Traditionally, firing squads have only two of its members with loaded guns . The firing squad has only two members of a firing squad .
 In his, all ten members shot live ammunition — all ten bullets ripped into the staked hero or heroine . In his version of this story, all 10 members of the group shot live bullets .
 This incorporated more members into Castro’s criminal organization, more members to resist desperately any overthrow of the system with the consequent settling of accounts . Castro's criminal organization is more than a criminal organization than any other .
 According to Freedom House, 500,000 Cubans passed through Castro’s prison camps . According to the human rights group Freedom House .
 At one time during 1961-62, some 300,000 Cubans were jailed for political offenses islandwide . At the same time, over 100,000 people were imprisoned for political crimes .
 Castro's political incarceration rate was higher than Stalin's and Hitler's . Castro’s political incarceration rates were higher than those of Stalin and Hitler . Castro was imprisoned for political reasons, not political crimes .
 The longest serving political prisoners of the century spent their hell in Castro’s Gulag . Also, the longest serving . political prisoners spent their . hell in the . Gulag.
 Senores Mario Chanes de Armas, Angel de Fana, and Eusebio Penalver all served thirty years in Castro’s dungeons .
 Alexander Solzhenitsyn served 8 years in Stalin’s Gulag . Natan Scharansky spent 8 years as did Natan . Solzhenityn served eight years in the Gulag. Natan.
 Armando Valladares' prison memoirs titled Against All Hope, released in 1984, helped expose the horrors of Castro’s Gulag to a mass international audience . The memoirs were released in 1985 .
 Castro’s extensive and murderous Gulag had been in operation for over two decades by then . Castro had been exposed and denounced by many, as had Stalin's in the 1930s and ’40s . Castro's extensive Gulag was exposed by many in the 1980s and
 Armando Valladares exposed Castroism to the mainstream, however late in the game . It took the novelist Alexander Solzhenitzyn to finally shake the world awake about the Gulag thirty years ago .
 In 1960 Valladares was arrested in his office for the crime of refusing to display a pro-Castro sign on his desk . In 1960 he had been arrested for refusing to show a pro, Castro Castro sign .
 They rejected any “rehabilitation,” or ‘re-education” by their jailers . Which is to say, they rejected any . ‘Re-education,’ they rejected . The prisoners are still in jail in the United States .
 To this day he remains crippled from the beatings and starvings he endured in Castro’s Gulag . Castro's Gulag remains crippled to this day .
 Valladares managed to get his writings smuggled out of prison and into Europe . Valladare's writings were smuggled into Europe after he was convicted of murder .
 In December 1977, forty-seven United States Senators signed an appeal for his release . Amnesty International took up his cause . Forty-seven U.S. Senators signed a plea for him to be released .
 International pressure, including personal appeals to Castro by Francois Mitterand, finally won Valladares’ release in 1982 .
 Ronald Reagan appointed Valladares United States ambassador to the United Nations Human Rights Commission in 1986 . In 1984 he released his prison memoirs titled Against all Hope, titled Against All Hope . In 1986 he was appointed ambassador to U.N. Commission .
 The Kennedy-Khrushchev deal, with its subsequent roundup and jailing of anti-Castro fighters in the United States, pulled the plug on much of the resistance . The deal was the result of a U.S. government crackdown on the Cuban government .
 Youths were the target here, with special emphasis on long-hairs, rock & roll listeners and — especially — homosexuals . Long-haired, rock and roll listeners were targeted .
 Youth who didn't display a gung-ho ‘revolutionary’ attitude was fair game . In fact any youth who didn’t display a “revolution’s’happy” attitude is fair game.
 Jehovah’s Witnesses, active Catholics and Protestants, along with children of political prisoners, were swept up in the dragnet .
 The initials stood for Unidades Militares del Ayuda de Produccion, or Military Units to Help Production . They were a special set of forced labor camps set up for young prisoners .
 The official title did little to hide the pretext for the camps — forced labor . The camps were known as forced labor camps . The camp's official title was "forced labor"
 These camps were completely enclosed by high barbed wire, had machine guns in each watchtower and ferocious dogs keeping watch below . Machine guns were used in the camps, with machine guns keeping watch on each tower .
 In 1945, Ramon Grau San Martin was elected President of Cuba . In 1945 he was elected by the Cuban people . Ramon San Martin .
 Homosexuals were rounded up and thrown in prison where their uniforms sported a big P . Out outing a homosexual to the police was a common practice for those seeking special favors or hoping to ingratiate themselves with the authorities .
 The UMAP camps featured brutal labor in the tropical sun, and summary beatings and executions for any laggards . The camps were notorious for their brutal labor practices .
 Word about this savagery soon got out amongst the general population and discontent was rife . Word about the Savagery was soon out of control and discontent rife .
 None of the prisoners had been convicted, even in the sham Castroite courts, of any counterrevolutionary crimes . After all, none of these prisoners were convicted . None of them were convicted of any crimes .
 Military and police trucks would simply surround an area of Havana known as, say, a homosexual hang-out . Every person in sight would be herded into the military trucks at gunpoint .
 In 1968, according to official government notice, the UMAPs were disbanded . The UMAP was disbanded by the British government in 1968 .
 In the mid 1980s over one hundred Cuban youths deliberately injected themselves with the AIDS virus . In a film titled Cursed Be Your Name, Liberty, Cuban exile Vladimir Ceballos documents how in the mid 80s over 100 Cuban youths injected themselves .
 At the time, Castro’s Cuba had developed a very efficient method of dealing with the malady . At the same time, the country had developed an efficient way to deal with it .
 The patients were banished to ‘sanatoriums’ in the middle of the countryside and were basically left alone till they died . Patients were banished .
 Banishment in AIDS sanitoriums smacked of freedom, as compared to life on the outside . Apparently to some tortured souls, banishment in those AIDS sanitorsiums .
 Jorge Pérez, an exiled Cuban physician and AIDS specialist, now living in Spain, reports that in the mid ’80s the Cuban government ran ads on national television showing that these AIDS sanitoria featured air-conditioning, color TVs, swimming pools, and three meals
 Cuba’s population, of course, savored these things only in their dreams . Cuba's population savored them only in dreams .
 The ad was actually an attempt to snare volunteers for government experiments with AIDS vaccines . It was actually a government attempt to recruit volunteers for AIDS vaccine experiments .
 Any successful vaccines discovered as a result would translate into a deluge of foreign currency for Castro . Any successful vaccine discoveries would help Castro's coffers .
 As expected, the response to the ads was overwhelming . Volunteers were interned in a sanitorium near Santiago de las Vegas in Havana province . They were injected with the AIDS virus .
 Pérez reports that the strain used was particularly strong, and ninety percent of the volunteers died the typically agonizing and prolonged AIDS death within two years . The strain used is particularly strong and the strain was especially strong .
 Khrushchev documents in his memoirs how Castro pleaded with him to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack on the U.S. in October of 1962 . Castro said he wanted to attack the United States with pre-nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev feared Castro’s officers somehow getting hold of the nuclear buttons . Some think the ‘blockade’ imposed by the Kennedy administration around Cuba at the time was a bigger factor in his decision to remove missiles .
 The prudence of Khrushchev’s decision was revealed the following month by Che Guevara, Castro’�s second-in-command, Che Guesvara . Khrushchevara was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s
 In this struggle to the death between 2 systems we must gain the ultimate victory. In this . struggle to . the death . between two systems, we must win the . ultimate victory, says the author .
 Castro emerged the big winner of the Missile Crisis . He didn't get his hands on the missiles but he was a big winner . Castro emerged victorious in the crisis .
 It would be too much of a political embarrassment for us,” said Robert F Kennedy to Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 We ended up getting exactly what we’d wanted all along, security for Fidel Castro’s regime, and American missiles removed from Turkey . The U.S. removed American missiles from Turkey, and the Cuban regime, from Turkey.
 With these factors in mind, the Castro regime’s longevity becomes much easier to understand . The Castro regime's longevity is much easier than to understand, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 The Cuban Program and Other Atrocities’s “program” was to determine how much physical and psychological agony a human being could withstand . One of the primary objectives of this ‘program’ was to discover how much pain a human could withstand, author says .
 A Cuban nicknamed “Fidel,” the main torturer at the Zoo, initiated his own personal reign of terror . The Zoo's torturer was Cuban nicknamed "Fidel," and the Zoo's main tortureor .
 Among Fidel's torture techniques were beatings and whippings over every part of his victims’ bodies, without remission . Among Fidel’s torture techniques, beatings over all parts of the body without remission. Fidel Castro was known for his brutal beatings .
 Fidel forced Col. Earl Cobeil into cell of fellow POW Col. Col. E. Earl, a F-105 pilot, as Fidel forced him into a cell . Col. Cobeill was forced into the cell of a fellow POW .
 He was bleeding everywhere, terribly swollen and terribly swollen, and a dirty, yellowish black and purple from head to toe . He had been bleeding everywhere . He was bloody everywhere .
 Fidel smashed a fist into the man’s face, driving him against the wall . Fidel smashed the man's face into the wall, then drove him to the wall. Fidel smashed his fist in the face, knocking the man to the ground .
 He was brought to the center of the room and made to get down onto his knees . Then he was made to kneel in front of the crowd . He was then made to sit on his knees and kneel down .
 Fidel took a length of black rubber hose from a guard and lashed it as hard as he could into the man’s face . Screaming in rage, Fidel lashed the man with the hose . Fidel took the hose from the guard, and it hit the man's face .
 "Fidel smashed the man’s face with the hose. Again and again and again, a dozen times," he said . "I’m sure he’ll be able to get his hands on him," he added .
 Castro's reign of terror against American POWs in Vietnam was just another reflection of the communist dictator’s barbarism and sadism . Castro was a dictator of the Castro regime, but his sadism was a reflection of his barbarism .
 After the end of the war, U.S. investigators launched a manhunt for the Cuban Program torturers . The U.N. government launched a search for torturers after the war .
 Investigators cataloged over 2,000 Cubans who had been in North Vietnam during the late 1960s . They found 2,500 Cubans in Vietnam during that time .
 The Cuban Revolution started devouring its own children very early . More about Castro & His Revolution is available on CNN iReport.com .
 Revolutionary Cuba’s first figurehead president, Manuel Urrutia, fled into exile for his very life exactly 6 months after his appointment by Castro, who went on TV to brand Urutia a “traitor” and threatened him with the paredon .
 The badly rattled Urrutia watched Castro’s TV tirade from his very Presidential office that night in July of 1959 while convulsing in sobs . Urruttia watched the tirade with sobs in his Presidential office .
 Later that night, he slunk into the Venezuelan embassy disguised as a milkman . Quickly gathering his wits, he scrambled out the back door of the building .
 Commander Huber Matos was credited by Castro with “saving the revolution” when he flew a planeload of arms into the Sierra Maestra from Costa Rica in March of 1958 .
 The arms were donated by leftist Costa Rican President Jose “Pepe” Figueres . The arms may have originated with the CIA, who in keeping with its support of the ‘Democratic Left” at the time, was very friendly with both Figuere and Castro
 Reynolds made his pronouncement during a “Bay of Pigs, 40 Years After” Conference held in Havana, Cuba, in April 2001 . Reynolds made the remark during a friendly chat with Fidel Castro himself .
 Matos, a July 26th underground operative till then, was quickly named a “comandante” in the Rebel army as well . After arriving with the arms, Matos was soon named a commander in the rebel army . Matos arrived with arms and was a July
 In December of that year he led a rebel column into the city of Santiago, then entered Havana on January 8th atop the same Sherman tank with Fidel Castro . In January of that same year he entered Havana atop a Sherman tank .
 Matos appointed Matos military commander of Camaguey province . Matos signed off on the firing-squad executions of over 60 Batista soldiers .
 Fidel Castro: "We fought in the name of Truth, for all the sound principles that bind civilization and mankind together. Fidel, we fought"
 Raul Castro and Che Guevara wanted him immediately lined up at the paredon and executed . Che died in 1953 at the hands of Soviet Union forces in Cuba .
 Matos’ trial most of the ‘moderates’ still in Castro’s government had to finally face the music . Matos' trial was one of the last few days of the Castro-era government .
 Most resigned, went underground, and then went into exile — in that order . Most of them resigned, then went to exile . Most resigned and went underground in order to escape .
 He refused any and all “rehabilitation” by his jailers and suffered horribly for it . He refused to be ‘rehabilitated’ and suffered terribly for it.
 He was finally released in 1979 and lived in Miami until his death in February 2014 .
 Matos was one of two Revolutionary "Comandantes" who fought alongside Castro against Batista . Humberto Sori Marin and William “El Americano’s” Morgan were among those who served early in Castro's regime, but weren’t quite as
 Humberto Sori Marin was arrested in April of 1961 as a counterrevolutionary . His brother Mariano went to visit Castro, pleading clemency for his brother . Mariano's brother was arrested and died in 1961 .
 If for no other reason than ‘for old times sake,’ pleaded Mariano, recalling when Fidel and Humberto had been Revolutionary comrades . Mariano: "For old times,” recalls Fidel, who was Fidel's Revolutionary comrade .
 The next day Mariano collapsed at the sight of his brother Humberto’s mangled corpse in a mass grave . Mariano's brother died in a car crash in the city .
 Castro’s firing squad had pumped over 20 shots into his brother's body that very dawn . Castro's firing squad shot him over 20 times before he was shot dead .
 Humberto Sori Marin’s head was almost completely obliterated, his face unrecognizable . Marin was killed in a car crash in Buenos Aires, Argentina .
 Castro’s executioners taunted the bound and helpless William Morgan as he glowered at the firing squad in April 1961 . William Morgan was bound in shackled and helpless as he was executed .
 Four more bullets slammed into Morgan, all carefully aimed to miss vitals . Over the next few minutes as he lay writhing, four more bullets were aimed at him .
 Finally an executioner walked up and emptied a Tommy gun clip into Morgan’s back . Morgan was shot in the back by a machine gun .
 Cienfuegos was right up there with the Castro brothers and Che in the Revolutionary hierarchy . He was one of the leaders of the Cuban Revolution .
 The Granma expedition leader fought in the Sierra from day one, climaxing the rebellion by commanding rebel forces in the decisive “battle” of Santa Clara . Batista was forced to lose hope and flee the island . He landed on the Granma Expedition from Mexico, then fought
 Camilo entered Havana before Castro, where he promptly took command of the military headquarters at Camp Colombia . Camilo actually entered Havana .
 Camilo Cienfuegos was handsome, charismatic, and in the eyes of many, actually outshone Fidel at early Revolutionary rallies . He often stole the limelight with his ready smile and humor .
 Fidel asked such deference was — to say the least — not a Castro trademark . Fidel asked the Cuban leader to show respect for his countrymen .
 Camilo had flown to Camaguey from Havana from Havana for the task of arresting his friend and ally Matos . Camilo was arrested for the arrest of Matos and Camilo .
 The two had often discussed, with growing alarm, what they saw as the Communist usurpation of the Cuban Revolution . The two were often concerned about what they had seen as the Communists taking over .
 Once in Camaguey, Camilo had a violent row with Raul Castro, whom he’d always loathed . Camilo’s always hated the Castro family, but he was never in touch with them .
 They were on the verge of fisticuffs and drawn pistols when finally separated . They were finally separated when they were separated by police .
 Camilo Cienfuegos disappeared without a trace on the flight back to Havana . He dutifully arrested Matos, but disappeared on the plane back to Cuba .
 His plane crashed and vanished, though the evening had excellent weather according to all records . Authorities say the evening was excellent weather .
 Castro brothers made a big show of a search and rescue but nothing turned up . Castro brothers had been missing for more than a decade . Castro's brother was killed in a car crash in 2009 crash in Cuba .
 To many, including Huber Matos, Camilo’s death seemed much too convenient . The death of Camilo Camilo was also too convenient, according to many .
 To this day, most Cuban-exiles blame Fidel and Raul for Camilo’s death . Most Cuban-Exiles blame the deaths of Camilo on the death of Fidel and Fidel .
 Two of Camilo's loyal lieutenants died in ‘accidents’ within days of their commander’s disappearance . Two of the loyal officers died in "accidents" days after their commander's disappearance .
 The head of Camaguey’s small airport, from where Camilo had taken off, was also suspicious . Camilo was starting to ask questions about the rescue effort . He said: “I’m not sure what happened to Camilo, but I’
 Two weeks after Camilo’s disappearance, he was found with a bullet through his head . Camilo was found two weeks after his disappearance .
 Camilo Cienfuegos was far from the last Fidelista Comandante to run afoul of Fidel’s megalomania .
 Arnaldo Ochoa was the Cuban General credited with Cuba’s victories in both The Angolan Civil War and the early crushing of the Eritrean rebellion . He was also credited with Ethiopia's victory in the Ethiopian Civil War .
 They say he was a soldiers’ general, who always showed genuine interest in the welfare of his men . So had the respect and admiration of the lowliest troops, they say .
 Arnaldo Ochoa had fought in the Sierra as a Rebel and helped crush the Escambray peasant rebellion in 1961 . Arnaldo helped crush a peasant rebellion against the government in 1961.
 In 1963 he infiltrated Venezuela to train and lead guerrillas trying to overthrow Romulo Betancourt . In 1963, he infiltrated the country to train, train and fight against the government . He was killed by the government of Venezuela in 1963 .
 Later he transferred to Nicaragua where he led the fight against the Contras . Later he led to Nicaragua . He led the Nicaraguan government .
 General Arnaldo T Ochoa was executed by a firing squad outside of Havana, Cuba . General Ochoas was executed in the dawn hours of July 13, 1989 .
 Nothing of the sort occurred with Fidel Castro and his generals, no matter how battle-hardened or loyal they were . Fidel Castro's generals were loyal to him, even though they were loyal .
 The official charge was drug smuggling, and Ochoa was almost certainly guilty . He was charged with drug smuggling . He is almost certainly not guilty .
 In Africa, Ochoa had used black marketing of everything from elephant tusks to diamonds to liquor, to help finance his military operations .
 By 1989, United States Federal prosecutors had uncovered the Cuban military’s role in cocaine smuggling into the U.S. Fidel and Raul watched the case building against them with growing alarm . The case was uncovered in 1989 .
 Castro executed Ochoa “to rid himself of an independent-minded man while diverting public attention from the island’s mounting problems,” says a defecting Air Force General . The defecting General says the execution was to “divertiate public attention
 Castro used the excuse of corruption to destroy Ochoa because he often chose his own course in making decisions . Castro used that excuse of . corruption to . destroy Ochea because of . his own . decisions .
 Ochoa was a pragmatic, non-ideological man, who was flexible enough to recognize the sense behind Gorbachev’s reforms of the time . He recognized the sense of the reforms in the Soviet Union .
 That Glasnost and Perestroika stuff could be contagious, in other words . "Glasnost" and "Perestoika" stuff is contagious .
 Ochoa and De la Guardia's deaths did nothing to curb Cuba’s role in drug smuggling . Cuba has a history of drug smuggling in the past .
 Colombian police seized seven tons of cocaine in Cartagena, Colombia, in 1998 . Police seized the cocaine in Colombia in December 1998 .
 Four grand juries at the time had disclosed Cuba’s role in drug smuggling into the United States . The Clinton administration refused to press ahead with the case against the Castro brothers’ dope trafficking .
 He was credited with the murder of fellow student Manolo Castro, and the attempted murder of Leonel Gomez, who survived . He shot through the throat but survived .
 Fidel Castro shot Fidel Castro point-blank in the chest with his son on his knee . The off-duty Caral sat on his doorstep with his 5-year-old son . Fidel Castro approached and shot Caral in the heart .
 Raphael Diaz-Balart, Castro’s brother-in-law at the time, recalls an agitated Fidel bursting into his apartment that day . Castro was the Cuban president of the United States .
 Castro was among the ringleaders in the Bogotazo, a Communist-inspired riot that ended up killing 5,000 people . That same year Castro traveled to Bogota, Colombia, where he was part of the riots . Castro was one of the ring leaders in the famous Bogot
 Castro’s July 26th Movement — his anti-Batista revolutionary group — was actually a pioneer in 20th century terrorism . Castro was a leader in the anti-Battista movement .
 In 1958, members of Castro’s movement hijacked three different Cubana airliners at gunpoint . In the last months of 1958, three different Cuban airliners were hijacked at gun point .
 The last one was a flight from Miami to Varadero that was diverted at gunpoint to rebel-held territory in Cuba’s eastern Oriente province .
 The plane was forced to attempt a landing on a tiny airstrip near Raul Castro’s rebel camp, where it crashed in a huge fireball . The plane crashed in huge fireball after it landed on a small airstrip .
 Castro’s rebels had kidnapped 50 U.S. citizens near Guantanamo in 2009 . A few months earlier, Castro's rebels kidnapped 50 United States citizens . Castro's rebel group also kidnapped 50 Americans .
 A few civilian workers from a U.S. mining company were also present .
 Castro’s guerrillas used American hostages as ‘human shields’ against the Batista air force . The term was not in vogue at the time, but the term was used to refer to the hostages .
 The last thing Batista wanted was more raging by the U.S. media against him . Batista was angry that the media was raging against him in the United States media .
 Castro had only been in power for two months when he started sending armed guerrillas to try to overthrow neighboring nations . Castro was only two months in power when he sent armed guerillas to attempt to overthrow neighbors .
 The Dominican Republic, Panama, Nicaragua, Haiti and Venezuela were the early targets . Haiti and the Dominican Republic are among the countries targeted by the CIA .
 Castro was given massive loans, financial aid and shipments of free oil to Castro from Venezuela . Basically this involved massive loans and financial aid from the Venezuelan government .
 Castro returned home empty-handed, but was soon planning subversion in Venezuela . Betancourt balked, and no sooner had Castro returned . Castro was planning subverting in Venezuela, including assassination attempts against him . Castro: "No matter had Castro come home empty handed"
 By mid-2005, some 160,000 barrels of oil were flowing from Venezuela to Cuba daily . By the same time in 2005, 160,00 barrels were flowing daily from Venezuela .
 Most of this oil was resold to Central American nations by Cuba, who pocketed the profit . This was much more oil than Cuba’s refineries could process . Cuba pocketed a handsome profit, according to the report .
 Castro had originally proposed to Romulo Betancourt, who is now president of Mexico . Castro's plan was the second half of the “master plan against the gringos,” that Castro had proposed .
 U.S. Defense Department estimated 42,000 foreign guerrillas and terrorists had received their training in Cuba . Castro’s subversion — not just of his neighbors, but throughout Latin America, the Middle East and Africa — reached a point where the United States estimates 42,
 On November 17, 1962, the FBI uncovered a terrorist plot that targeted Grand Central Terminal and the Statue of Liberty . Macy’s, Gimbels and Bloomindales department stores were among the targets .
 The explosions were planned for November 27, 1962, the day after Thanksgiving, the busiest shopping day of the year . The explosions took place on the same day as Thanksgiving .
 Chief plotter was Roberto Santiesteban, chief aide to Cuba’s U.N. ambassador, Carlos Lechuga . The chief plotter of the plot was chief aide for the ambassador to Cuba .
 The rest of the conspirators belonged to The Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Under him were Elsa and Jose Gomez, also employed by Cuba’s diplomatic mission at the United Nations .
 Had those detonators gone off, thousands of people would have died in a matter of seconds . The detonators would have been detonated in seconds . Thousands of people were killed in the blast .
 The plan was for both Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan to be assassinated during the Republican National Convention in San Francisco . Ford and Reagan were both Republican presidential candidates of the day .
 The Emiliano Zapata Unit, a Bay Area radical-terrorist group, was slated to make the hits . The group's hits were intended to be made by the Emiliano Zapata Unit .
 When arrested, one of the would-be assassins named Gregg Daniel Adornetto, revealed the Cuban connection . When arrested he revealed the connection to Cuba .
 Adornetto had met him years earlier when he’d traveled to Cuba for training and funding as a member of the Weather Underground . He’s met him when he was in the U.S. as part of a group that trained in Cuba .
 Evidence points to an earlier assassination plot by Castro against a U.S. President succeeding . Much evidence points to earlier assassination plots by Castro succeeding .
 Castro made good on his boast, according to those closest to the early evidence . Castro is believed to have been involved in the assassination of Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Haig served as a military aide under both the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . Haig also served as an aide to the Kennedy, Johnson administrations.
 A few days before the Dallas assassination, Lee Harvey Oswald, accompanied by Castro intelligence agents, had been spotted in Havana, where he’d traveled from Mexico City . The classified intelligence report that so rattled Haig and caused so many faces to go ashen, was classified .
 A letter from Jacqueline Kennedy to Nikita Khrushchev dated just ten days after the assassination . The letter was part of a stack of declassified Soviet correspondence that Yeltsin made available to President Bill Clinton in the early 1990s .
 Kennedy assures the Soviet leader that she doesn’t suspect Soviet involvement in her husband’s assassination . Kennedy assures her that she does not suspect any involvement in the assassination .
 Markus Wolf was the chief of East Germany’s foreign intelligence service, a branch of the STASI with many contacts and operations in Cuba . For 34 years Markus Wolf worked for East Germany's foreign intelligence agency .
 It was the STASI rather than the KGB that undertook the training of Castro’s police and intelligence services . It was not the KGB, but the agency was responsible for training .
 Wolf’s autobiography is titled Man Without a Face, and subtitled The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster . Wolf is known for his role in the Soviet Union's secret affairs .
 Wolf was once asked about the Kennedy assassination and quickly replied . Wolf quickly replied to the question: "Yes, yes" Wolf was asked about Kennedy's assassination, but quickly replied: "I'm not sure what happened" Wolf is now retired from politics .
 Vadim Kotchergine set up massive terrorist training camps in western Cuba . Kotcher gained up massive terror training camps and set up terror camps in Cuba .
 Castro sent military instructors into Palestinian bases in Jordan to train Palestinian Fedayeen . Castro sent instructors into Jordanian bases in 1968 to train Palestinians .
 In November 1974 Castro personally decorated his brother-in-arms, Yasir Arafat, with Cuba’s highest honor, the Bay of Pigs Medal . Arafat was awarded the award in November 1974 .
 Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, the infamous “Carlos The Jackal” known as the world’s most notorious terrorist throughout the 1970s . Sanchez received his training in Cuba and lived there for years .
 The U.S. State Department listed Cuba prominently among its “State Sponsors of Terrorism” from 1982-2015 . Cuba was listed as a state sponsor of terrorism from 1982 to 2015 .
 Victor Gerena was responsible for a $7 million heist of a Wells Fargo truck in Connecticut in 1983 . He was a member of the Puerto Rican terrorist group Los Macheteros . Among them were cop-killers Michael Finney, Charlie Hill, and Joanne Chesimard
 All requests for their extradition have been repeatedly ignored or rebuffed . All requests to extradite them have been ignored or rejected .
 By 1976 Castro’s intervention abroad became more blatant when he sent tens of thousands of troops to Africa . By 1976, Castro's intervention abroad was even more blatant .
 Most — 50,000 of them — went to fight Jonas Savimbi’s UNITA forces in Angola . Most of the troops went to Angola to fight against UNITa forces in the country .
 Thousands more went to prop up the Marxist Mengistu regime in Ethiopia . Thousands more were spent in the pro-Mengistu government .
 Others were scattered throughout the continent from Guinea Bissau to Bourkina Fasso to Sierra Leone to Mozambique to Zimbabwe . And others were scattered across the continent .
 By 1983, Cuban troops were stationed in 20 sub-Saharan African nations . All told, by 1983, the Cuban troops had been in 20 countries .
 Castro’s own sister brought the unmistakable message to Congress . After defecting in 1964, Castro defected to the U.S. after defecting from Cuba .
 General Rafael del Pino defected in 1987 during the U.S. invasion of Grenada . He says Castro ordered military plans for the destruction of the Turkey Point Nuclear Plant south of Miami .
 Castro's nuclear weapons had been snatched back by Khrushchev in October of 1962 . Castro was opting for the next-best thing .
 Castro made alliance with Iran in pursuit of his obsession to harm America . Castro also made alliance to Iran . Castro's obsession with Iran also led him to make alliance with the country .
 In late July 2006, Castro handed the reins of Cuba’s government temporarily to his brother and a few cabinet ministers, after undergoing emergency abdominal surgery . Castro was forced to give up control of Cuba's government temporarily .
 Fidel Castro remained in poor health even after the surgery . He continued to play an active role in running government affairs from behind the scenes over the years .
 On February 19, 2008, Fidel Castro announced his permanent resignation in a letter to his countrymen . Five days before the Cuban National Assembly was scheduled to meet to select a new head of state . Fidel Castro's resignation was read on Cuban radio and television .
 The Endowment for Cuban American Studies, 1994 . Johnson, Stephen, Time For a Concensus on Cuba. Time For A Concensus On Cuba . Time For The Concensus is Time For Cuba.
 Investment In Cuba, 1958: Enrique Encinosa, Escambray; La Guerra Olvidada . Encinza was a member of the Communist Party of Cuba . The Cuban Revolution was first organized in Cuba in 1959 .
 Alberto Bustamante, Notas y Estadisticas Sobre Los Grupos Etnicos En Cuba, Revista Herencia, volume 10, 2004 Juan Tamayo. Editorial SIBI, 1989 Alberto Bustanante. Alberto Bustaante. The Cuban government.
 Fidel Castro y la Revolucion Cubana, Transaction Publishers, 1984 . Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution were the Cuban leader's first two decades in power . Castro died at the age of 50 in 1959 .
 Enrique Ros, Che; Mito y Realidad, Ediciones Universal, 2002 Author interview with Eusebio Penalver . Michael Beschloss, The Crisis Years .
 Camilo Cienfuegos, Editorial Seix Barral, Barcelona, 2001 . Benemiles, Juan. Camilo . Camilo. Cienferes, Juan . Cienfo .
 Raphael Diaz-Balart was the father of two Republican Congressmen . He is the son of two of the late Congressmen, Mario and Lincoln Diaz- Balart .
 Fontova, Humberto, Fidel, Fidel; Hollywood’s Favorite Tyrant . Fontova: “I’m not a fan of Fidel. I’ll always be a fan,” says Fontova .
 Castro, Jacqueline y la Muerte de Kennedy, El Nuevo Herald, August 27th, 1999 . Blazquez, Agustin. Blazquez: "Jacqueline and Jacqueline were the victims of the Kennedy assassination"
 Benemiles, Juan. Castro’s Anti-Semitism and the PLO, Newsmax, April 15, 2002 . CNN Report, Jan. 1999, CNN Report: Castro's anti-Semitism .
 The United States actually accorded diplomatic recognition to Castro's government more quickly than it had recognized Batista's government in 1952 . Castro was the Communist dictator of Cuba from 1959 to 2006 .
 President Obama broke diplomatic relations with Cuba . That limit has now been reached .
 He will not jump out, because he can't tell the temperature is changing . He won't jump out of the water, he says .
 Castro's Revolution was a stealth revolution, done in stages, dividing and conquering till he had the whole prize . Castro says he didn't protest because he had no connections with Batista's government .
 "I didn't protest because I didn't have a Sugar mill; I had a small tobacco farm. Then they came for the big landowners and I didn\u0026#8217;t protest," he says .
 "I didn't protest because I was a small shopkeeper not a factory owner. Then they came for the big businessmen," he says .
 Large landholdings were initially . initially . nationalized on the pretext of .land reform . The massive latifundia would be parceled out to landless peasants . We have heard this song before .
 By early 1959, Soviet advisers from the Ukraine were already directing Castro's Institute of Agrarian Reform .
 Cuba took in more immigrants in the 20th century than the U.S. took in in the United States . This includes the Ellis Island years .
 By 1992 two million Cubans had fled Cuba, most against staggering odds and with only the clothes on their back .
 Cuban workers are more unionized than U.S. workers . The average wage for an 8-hour day in Cuba 1957 is higher than for workers in Belgium, Denmark, France and Germany .
 Cubans had the 3rd highest protein consumption in the hemisphere in 1958 . In the United States the figure is 68 per cent of Cubans covered by Social legislation .
 In 1962 Castro's government introduced ration cards that persist to this day . In 1962 ration cards were introduced in Castro's Cuba .
 Chicken, fish, fish and rice have been rationed since . Ration since .
 By 1961 Cuba was already desperately short on foreign exchange . By 1961 the Cuban government was desperately short of foreign exchange. Cuba was desperate for foreign exchange money .
 The massive Soviet subsidies could never compensate for the destruction of Cuba’s vibrant pre-Castro economy .
 Carlos Machado was 15 years old in 1963 when he was shot in the head . He was 15 when the bullets shattered his bound body . Machado's death was the result of a drug war in Colombia .
 Juana Diaz spat in the face of the Castroite executioners who were binding and gagging her . All had resisted Castro’s theft of their humble farm .
 When the blast from that firing squad demolished her face and torso, Juana was six months pregnant . They found her guilty of feeding and hiding .
 In his, all ten members shot live ammunition with live ammunition . All ten bullets ripped into the staked hero or heroine . In his version of this article, all 10 members of the group shot live bullets .
 This incorporated more members into Castro\u0026#8217;s criminal organization, more members to resist desperately any overthrow of the system with the consequent settling of accounts . Cuba's population in 1960 was 6. million, Cuba had 6 million .
 According to the human rights group Freedom House, 500,000 Cubans passed through Castro’s prison camps . The human rights organization Freedom House says the camp was a prison camp .
 The longest serving political prisoners of the century spent their hell in Castro\u0026#8217;s Gulag . This made Castro’s political incarceration rate higher than Stalin and Hitler . Castro spent most of his political life in the Gulag.
 Senores Mario Chanes de Armas, Angel de Fana, and Eusebio Penalver all served thirty years in Castro’s dungeons .
 Alexander Solzhenitsyn served 8 years in Stalin's Gulag . Natan Scharansky spent 8 years as a prisoner in the Gulag. Alexander Solzhitsyn spent eight years in the gulag .
 Many Cubans served over three times as long as others . Eusebio Penalver was held in a 6 x 4 foot cell .
 It took Armando Valladares to expose Castroism to the mainstream, however late in the game . It took the novelist Alexander Solzhenitzyn to finally shake the world awake about the Gulag .
 In prison, Valladares, like Eusebio Penalver, Chanes De Armas, Ernesto Diaz Rodriguez, Huber Matos and so many others, refused to commit spiritual suicide . He was summarily sentenced to 30 years of prison for the offense .
 They balked at any confession of their political sins . They balk at any . any . confession of any political . sins .
 To this day he remains crippled from the beatings and starvings he endured in Castro . He managed to get his writings smuggled out of prison .
 The book was dedicated to Valladares\u0026#8217; fellow prisoners and described their plight in harrowing detail . International pressure, including personal appeals to Castro by his friend Francois Mitterand, finally won his release in 1982 .
 There has been a continuing love affair on the part of the media and many intellectuals with Fidel Castro, he says . Valladares had his work cut out for him .
 The thousands of accusations of violations of human rights in Cuba conflicted with the double standard then current at the United Nations . The posture of many countries was governed by their hostility against the United States, and they excused Castro out of a reflexive anti-Americanism .
 Castro regime needed pretext for mass jailings and the cowing of the population . Youths were the target here, with special emphasis on long-hairs, rock listeners and homosexuals .
 The initials stood for Unidades Militares del Ayuda de Produccion,\u0026#8221; or Military Units to Help Production, which were a special set of forced labor camps set up for prisoners .
 The official title did little to hide the pretext for the camps: forced labor . The camps were used as a form of forced labor, with the official title "forced labor"
 Outgoing homosexuals were identified, rounded up and thrown in prison where their uniforms sported a big P . In the early and mid 1960s in Cuba, outing a homosexual to the police became a common practice for those seeking special favors .
 Military and police trucks would simply surround an area of Havana known as, say, a homosexual hang-out . Every person in sight would be herded into military trucks at gunpoint .
 At the time, Castro\u0026#8217;s Cuba had developed a very efficient method of dealing with the malady . The Cuban government had developed an efficient way to deal with it .
 AIDS patients were banished to sanitoriums in the middle of the countryside and were basically left alone till they died . The patients were left alone .
 Cuban AIDS sanitoria featured air-conditioning, color TVs, swimming pools, and three meals of excellent food daily . Jorge Pérez, an exiled Cuban physician and AIDS specialist, now living in Spain .
 The ad was actually an attempt to snare volunteers for government experiments with AIDS vaccines . Cuba's population, of course, savored these things only in dreams .
 We ended up getting exactly what we wanted all along, security for Fidel Castro, and U.S. missiles removed from Turkey .
 Castro played a direct and instrumental role in the torture and murder of American POWs in Vietnam during the Vietnam War . After Kennedy's death, his successor Lyndon Johnson assured us that he would keep the promise not to invade Cuba .
 The Cuban Program and Other Atrocities’s “program” was to determine how much physical and psychological agony a human being could withstand . One of the primary objectives of this ‘program’ was to find out how much pain a human could endure .
 Jack Bomar: "The man could barely walk; he shuffled slowly, painfully" Jack Bomber: "He shuffled very slowly. He shuffled painfully"
 In the midst of their search, investigators cataloged over 2,000 Cubans who had been in North Vietnam during the late 1960s .
 Revolutionary Cuba’s first figurehead president, Manuel Urrutia, fled into exile for his very life 6 months after his appointment by Castro, who went on TV to brand him a traitor and threatened him with the paredon .
 President Urrutia’s offense had been some mild criticism of Communism . The president had been critical of the government's policies .
 The badly rattled Urrutia watched Castro’s TV tirade from his very Presidential office that night in July of 1959 while convulsing in sobs . Castro was the President of Cuba in 1959 .
 Matos signed off on the prompt firing-squad executions of over 60 Batista soldiers . In December of that year he led a rebel column into the city of Santiago, then entered Havana on January 8th atop the same Sherman tank with Fidel Castro .
 Matos, alarmed at what he saw as the Communist usurpation of the Revolution, had written to Castro . Nine months later Matos was facing a firing squad himself, accused by Castro of treason .
 Castro thought it over and countered that he didn't want to make Matos a martyr . With Matos trial most of the . government had to finally face the music . Castro had to face the . music .
 Matos ended up suffering 20 years in Castro’s dungeons . Most resigned, went underground, and then went into exile .
 He refused any of all . all ...rehabilitation . by his jailers and suffered horribly for it . He refused . any . all . and suffered terribly for it. His jailers .
 Matos headed the political group Cuba Democratica y Independente . Humberto Sori Marin and William Morgan also served early in Castro's regime .
 Humberto Sori Marin was arrested in April of 1961 as a counterrevolutionary and his brother Mariano went to visit Castro, pleading clemency for his brother . Castro saw it, they were the traitors, not him .
 Fidel and Humberto had been Revolutionary comrades . If for no other reason than . old times sake, . pleaded Mariano . Mariano, recalling when Fidel and . Humbto had . been Revolutionary . comrades .
 Castro\u0026#8217;s firing squad had pumped over 20 shots into his brother’s body that very dawn . Castro was shot to death by a firing squad that had been assembled in Castro”s honor .
 He fought in the Sierra from day one, climaxing the rebellion by commanding rebel forces in the decisive battle of Santa Clara that forced Batista to lose hope and flee the island .
 Camilo Cienfuegos was handsome, charismatic, and in the eyes of many, actually outshone Fidel at early Revolutionary rallies . Camilo actually entered Havana before Castro .
 Once in Camaguey, Camilo had a violent row with Raul Castro, whom he always loathed . Camilo says he loathed the Castro .
 Camilo Cienfuegos disappeared without a trace on the flight back to Havana . They were on the verge of fisticuffs when finally separated .
 To many, including Huber Matos, Camilo's death seemed much too convenient . Camilo\u0026#8217;s death seemed too convenient.
 Most Cuban-exiles blame Fidel and Raul for Camilo's death . Cienfuegos was too obviously their competitor for leadership . To this day, most Cuban ex-cibes blame Fidel .
 Two of Camilo's loyal lieutenants died in accidents days after his disappearance . Two of his loyal officers died in days after their disappearance .
 The head of Camaguey\u0026#8217;s small airport, from where Camilo had taken off, was also suspicious . Camilo was starting to ask questions about the rescue effort, says the mayor .
 Two weeks after Camilo's disappearance, he was found with a bullet through his head . Camilo\u0026#8217;s disappearance was found two weeks after his disappearance .
 He was an austere individual devoted to military life and his hands are not stained with blood . They say he was a soldiers who always showed genuine interest in the welfare of his men .
 Arnaldo Ochoa had fought in the Sierra as a Rebel and helped crush the Escambray peasant rebellion in 1961 . He was close and on very friendly terms with both Fidel and Raul Castro, the latter being his immediate superior .
 General Arnaldo T Ochoa was executed by a firing squad outside of Havana in 1989 . In 1980 Fidel himself personally awarded him the medal of the Revolution .
 A court martial found Ochoa guilty of corruption and dishonest use of economic resources . Nothing of the sort occurred with Fidel Castro and his generals, no matter how battle-hardened or loyal .
 Some of the evidence used against Ochoa at his trial is rumored to have originated with the FBI . The evidence was used in his trial .
 Castro executed Ochoa to rid himself of an independent-minded man while diverting public attention from the island's mounting problems, says a defecting Air Force General .
 Ochoa was a pragmatic, non-ideological man, who was flexible enough to recognize the sense behind Gorbachev's reforms of the time . He recognized the sense of the reforms in the Soviet Union .
 Ochoa, like many other Cuban military officers, was trained in the Soviet Union and had close ties to the Soviet leaders involved in the reforms . That Glasnost and Perestroika stuff could be contagious .
 Castro's anti-Batista group was actually a pioneer in 20th century terrorism . Castro's July 26th Movement was actually the group behind the Batista revolution . Castro was a pioneer of terrorism in Cuba .
 In the last months of 1958, members of Castro's movement hijacked three different Cubana airliners at gunpoint . Members of Castro\u0026#8217;s movement hijacked three different airliners .
 The last one was a flight from Miami to Varadero that was diverted at gunpoint to rebel-held territory in Cuba's eastern Oriente province . The last time a plane was diverted was diverted to rebel territory .
 The plane was forced to attempt a landing on a tiny airstrip near Raul Castro's rebel camp . Despite the pilot’s frantic pleas, the plane crashed in a huge fireball .
 Castro's guerrillas used American hostages as human shields against the Batista air force . The term was not in vogue at the time, but Castro used them as shields .
 The last thing Batista wanted was more raging by the United States media against him . Not that it could have gotten much worse .
 Most of this oil was resold to Central American nations by Cuba, who pocketed a handsome profit . This was much more than Cuba's refineries could process, because most of the oil was sold to Central America .
 On November 17, 1962, the FBI uncovered a terrorist plot that targeted Manhattan's Grand Central Terminal and the Statue of Liberty . The plot also targeted Macy's, Gimbels and Bloomindales department stores in New York .
 The chief plotter was Roberto Santiesteban, chief aide to Cuba’s U.N. ambassador, Carlos Lechuga .
 The rest of the conspirators belonged to The Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Under him were Elsa and Jose Gomez, also employed by Cuba's diplomatic mission at the U.N.
 The Zapata Unit\u0026#8217;s Cuban intelligence officer was named Andres Gomez . Gomez was a member of the Zapata unit in Cuba .
 Kennedy assures Soviet leader she doesn't suspect Soviet involvement in her husband's assassination . Kennedy assures her that she doesn\u0026#8217;t suspect any Soviet involvement .
 Markus Wolf was the chief of East Germany\u0026#8217;s foreign intelligence service, a branch of the STASI . She wrote that she was convinced the culprit was Castro .
 It was the STASI rather than the KGB that undertook the training of Castro\u0026#8217;s police and intelligence services . It was not the KGB .
 Wolf's autobiography is titled Man Without a Face and subtitled The Autobiography of Communism of Communism . Wolf is known for his role in the Cold War .
 Castro's intervention abroad became more blatant when he sent tens of thousands of troops to Africa . All requests for their extradition had been ignored or rebuffed .
 Most of the 50,000 UNITA troops went to fight Jonas Savimbi's forces in Angola . Most of them went to Angola to fight Savimba's UNITa forces .
 Fidel Castro remained in poor health even following the surgery, though he continued to play an active role in running government affairs from behind the scenes .
 Encinosa, Enrique, Cuba En Guerra . Random House, 1962. Random House .
 TIME Magazine, Nov. 1958 . Carlos Bringuier, Carlos, Carlos . Carlos .
 Chas Hallberg, Humberto Fontova, Carlos Bringuier and Alexander Haig are among the stars of the 2005 Regnery films .
 Fundacion Elena Mederas, 2002 . Fundacion Elba Medera, 2002. Fundacion elba .