 Arturo Lopez-Levy: "When I saw the rockets being fired at Mario’s house, I swore to myself"
 Ike Eisenhower’s Washington. D.C. considered communism, nationalism anathema to Ike Eisenhower's Washington. Following this logic, not only communism, but most types of nationalism were considered .
 Fidel Castro became the most popular Cuban leader in history in 1959 . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of the late 1960s . Castro is now the leader of Cuba .
 In less than 72 hours, Fidel Castro and his followers had defeated the U.S.-trained force . Fidel Castro's followers defeated the United States-trained forces .
 By the end of 1961, Castro’s only choice was to prepare for a fight against an invasion by American troops . Castro was preparing for an invasion of the U.S. in 1961 .
 Khrushchev proposed installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a way to change the global nuclear balance and prevent any U.S. military “adventure” against Cuba . Castro's petition to install nuclear missiles was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy declared that the U.S. would not tolerate any action of this kind in the Western Hemisphere . Kennedy declares that the United States .
 When the United States discovered the weapons, the nature of the conflict changed . The U.S. found the weapons in Afghanistan .
 Kennedy was forced to choose between appeasement and resisting the menace . Kennedy was faced with the threat of a nuclear bomb .
 As the noted Yale historian Donald Kagan has argued, reputation and honor have a place in the calculations of national power . Reputations and honor are important to national power, he says .
 The crisis of the missiles in Cuba was a test of the U.S. resolve to stand against Soviet adventurism . The crisis was the test of America’ resolve to face all risks, the author says .
 The specter of Munich 1938 weighed in the analysis of all policymakers . Munich 1938 was the focus of the Munich massacre .
 Even scholars as prestigious as James Blight appeared in a video psychoanalyzing Fidel and presenting his attitude as a simplistic continuation of a children’s game of crashing bikes against a wall that he is said to have played in high school years .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev ultimately saved the world from a nuclear cataclysm . Kennedy: "I'm sure we're not going to have a nuclear war," says Khrushchchev . "I don't believe in nuclear weapons," says Kennedy .
 The Obama administration has taken some minimal steps toward engagement with Cuba . But the necessary presidential leadership has been absent from the Cuban issue .
 Obama once advocated a policy of dialogue with Raul Castro and other adversaries not as appeasement but as a proper tool to promote American interests in the world . It was Obama who once advocated such a policy as a policy .
 Mitt Romney's policy towards Cuba consists of kowtowing to the property claims and narrow interests of a hard right-wing segment of the Cuban exile community . Although the president has largely backed away from this policy, nothing positive can be expected from Mitt Romney .
 There is evidence that Kennedy began to explore an accommodation of Cuban nationalism if the Cuban regime was willing not to ally with U.S. enemies elsewhere .
 Cuban-American writes frequently about Cuban issues and U.S.-Cuba relations . He is Cuban American and writes about Cuba .