 USA had recently tested an atomic bomb and had a new President Truman, who was more anti-communist . Also, USA had tested an atom bomb, and had recently had President Truman .
 Germany divided in 1945, split into France, USA, USSR and Britain sectors . Germany divided into France and USA, split between France and USSR .
 March 1946 14 of 70 Explain the 'Iron Curtain' 9 months after potsdam Stalin dominated most E.Europe, dominated most .Europe, making allies wary of allies .
 Britain and USA worried about how much control Stalin had . Truman saw it as an attempt to spread communism by stalin and viewed it as a potential threat . 21 of 70 explain the Greek civil war in the book .
 After ww2 there was a civil war with royalists & communists, as communists wanted to enforce communism in Greece . The war was a war between royalists and communists .
 In places where communism threatened to takeover, America promised to stop them doing so against the country's will . America promised not to allow communism to take over the country .
 The truman doctrine said that america would send money, supplies and aid to any country under communist threat who needed it . America would send aid to communist countries under threat .
 France and Britain joined their zones as had similar ideas, and created a new currency which they said would help trade .
 Stalin saw currency change as a threat & next day cut off all road&rail links to West . Stalin saw the currency change a threat . Cut off all roads & rail links to the West .
 Wasn't told about currency change or election plans, so became suspicious of the West . Also suspicious of West after being told of currency change and election plans . Also became suspicious about West's economic policies .
 Nato was important as it proved the U.S. was committed to protecting and defending West Europe . Nato proved the United States was committed and defended West Europe. Nato proved that it was important to protect and defend West Europe, he said .
 MAD was an agreement between the USSR and USA that said if one of them launched an attack, there would be an immediate response, causing the destruction of each country . MAD was a deal between the two countries that said an attack would be carried out within an hour of the attack .
 Khrushchev signed a trade agreement giving Cuab 100mil in economic aid . Khrushchev signed a deal to give Cuab an economic aid package . Cuab received 100mil of economic aid from Soviet Union .
 Castro was suspicious of U.S. and asked USSR for help, khrushchev sent them soldiers, arms and supplies . Castro asked for help from the USSR and asked them for help .
 No, as they were aware it was purely defensive after having just been attacked by America . No, it was simply defensive after just being attacked by the U.S. No, they are aware of it .
 Were worried Russia may supply them nuclear missiles, allowing them perfect access to america . However, were worried that they may have nuclear missiles . Were worried that Russia would supply them with missiles .
 Air attack:destroy missiles before use, but can't guarantee complete destruction & would induce retaliation . USA had greater nuclear power could easily destroy them, but didn't wanna look weak . air attack: destroy missiles before they are used, but don't want to look weak. air strike:
 Khrushchev sent letter to Kennedy:would dismantle missiles if didn't attack Cuba . Khrushchevsvs: Would dismantle missiles dismantle if not attacked Cuba . Would dismantle missile if not attack Cuba.would dismantle missile missiles if no attack was made . Would not dismantle missiles would dismantle missiles
 Kennedy replied, sent 2nd letter &demands remove missiles in Turkey, u2 shot down same day . Kennedy replied. Before Kennedy replied he sent 2 second letter . U2 was shot down as Kennedy replied .
 USA had more long range missiles than them, by putting in Cuba easy access and restores nuclear balance . Cuba had more missiles than the U.S. and had more of a long-range missile than them .
 Secuirty & independence of Cuba guaranteed . Cuba guaranteed & missiles removed from turkey . Cuba's independence guaranteed . missiles removed .
 The Origins of the Cold War 5. / 5 . / 5 based on 3 ratings . GCSE HISTORY COURSE PLANNER 0.0 .