 All major areas of legal considerations are discussed, including both American and Soviet perspectives . All major legal issues are discussed in the book .
 An analysis of the American approach to the crisis exemplifies the participation of various departments of the Executive .branch, Congress, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, and the President .
 The approach by the Soviet Union in justifying the deployment of offensive nuclear weapons and the Kremlin's objection to the U.S. quarantine of Cuba were influenced by legal considerations .
 The time period that this study encompasses is August 1962 through October 1962, a period much'longer than is usually associated with the crisis . The study covers August 1962 to October 1962 .
 There had been repeated warnings by the United States that such weapons would not be tolerated . U.S. had repeatedly warned such weapons were not tolerated in Syria .
 Major Rudolph Anderson photographed evidence of emplacement of offensive missiles in Cuba . U-2 was flying a long-range reconnaissance mission on October 14, 1961 .
 The President summoned a group of close advisers after receiving the news of the situation .
 This group, later to be offiscially named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, met almost continuously from October 16 to 28 . This group was later to become the Executive Council .
 The decision of the United States to blockade--quarantine--the Cuban coastline was reached . The U.S. government has imposed a blockade on the Cuban coastline .
 On October 28, the Soviet Union capitulated to the American demand . The U.S. demanded the end of the Cold War .
 Most often, this period serves as the parameter in which the Missile Crisis is discussed . The period is often used as the basis for discussion of the crisis .
 Several in-depth studies of the period have been written by men who held government positions as well as others who did not possess that vantage point .
 This study does not confine itself to this thirteen-day period, for the influence of international legal considerations was not confined to so short a time . This study, however, does .
 Chapter IV illustrates the legal influences on the President and the members of the ExCom as demonstrated by them between October 16 and 28 . Chapter IV shows the legal influence of the President on the legal aspects of his actions .
 Chapter VI examines the disagreement between Congress, noted journalists, and President Kennedy regarding the interpretation of an important international legal principle based on the Monroe Doctrine . Chapter VI explores the disagreement .
 Nations are not impervious to legal considerations in their dealings in international crisis situations . But it would seem that nations are not . But they are . Not impervious .
 There are some who make this contention, 3 a contention which seems shallow in light of the evidence presented in this study . Yet, there are those who say this is a contention that seems shallow .
 International law is not a set of fixed, selfdefining categories of permissible and prohibited conduct. One must understand that international law is . International law does not define what is permissible or prohibited conduct, it says .
 This study makes no effort to construct a legal theory that indicts or exonerates either the U.S. or the Soviet Union for their chosen courses of action . This study does not attempt to construct any legal theory to exonerate either the United States or Soviet Union .
 Legal scholars have to answer such questions, but it's not easy to do so . That task is left to those legal scholars who want to answer those questions .
 It was determined in a world susceptible to destruction by the men making the decisions . "It was determined to destroy the world," says President Obama's spokesman .
 These men were influenced by legal considerations as they contemplated their decisions in attempting to prevent the world from being destroyed . Yet, these men were also influenced by .legal considerations .
 Congress was a period of vigorous and decisive debate pertinent to the Soviet buildup of armaments and technicians in Cuba . Congress discussed arms and technology in Cuba, Cuba, during the period .
 This period was the culmination of the discussion in Congress, which had begun much earlier, of the Cuban situation . The Cuban situation was the subject of much of Congress's discussion .
 Critics of the Kennedy administration maintained scrutinizing vigilance on the apparent Castro-Khrushchev alliance from the moment John Kennedy took office as President of the United States .
 Although adequate support for the resolution was lacking at that time, such was not to be the case in September, 1962 .
 The debate touched on a variety of topics,2 this examination will concentrate on the points where international law entered the discussion . This examination will focus on the effect international legal considerations had on the adoption of the resolution .
 This chapter will observe President Kennedy's position toward the Soviet military buildup in Cuba . Also, this chapter also observes the President's position on the Cuban military buildup .
 The opposition to the President's position played a key role in the debate over Senate Joint Resolution 230 .
 On September 13, President Kennedy clarified for everyone, including Congress and the Soviet Union, his position on the Communist military buildup in Cuba . Kennedy clarified the position on September 13 .
 If Cuba should ever try to export its aggressive purposes by force or the threat of force against any nation in this hemisphere, the U.S. will do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies, he says .
 The President had made it clear that this country would act, but not until the material in Cuba constituted an offensive capability, he said . The President made the President's comments clear, he added .
 Some Congressmen believed that the weapons and personnel already present in Cuba constituted a threat to the security of the U.S. and the Western Hemisphere . Some members of Congress believed the weapons already . were already in Cuba .
 Soviet military technicians numbered 3,500 . The European power supplied Cuba with Mig jet fighters, T-34 and 35-ton tanks, JS-2 tanks, and anti-aircraft artillery .
 Patrol vessels and torpedo boats were equipped with guided missile launchers having a range of fifteen miles . Patrol vessels were armed with missile launchers with a range of 15 miles .
 Senator Kenneth Keating adamantly rejected the President's distinction between offensive and defensive weapons, labeling such differentiation as ""dangerous and unrealistic" Senator Kenneth Keating admitted that distinction was "unrealistic"
 The shipments of arms and technicians had not worried Senator Keating as much as had the thought of complete Soviet takeover of Cuba . The shipments were not worried about the prospect of a Soviet takeover .
 Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations and Committee on Armed Services, Situation in Cuba, Hearings, 87th Cong., 2nd sess., September 17, 1962, 7. 7. If he doesn't do exactly what they want him to do they will take him out and
 President Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy . Obama administration has responded to the criticism of the administration's policy .
 The President was portrayed as the great violator of one of the most sacred principles of international law . Within this predominant criticism, the criticism was that he was portrayed .
 President Kennedy had irresponsibly disregarded the Doctrine put forth by President Monroe in 1823 . Simply by allowing Soviet extension'into a portion of this hemisphere--for offensive or defensive purposes is irrelevant .
 The President's critics were prepared to publicly castigate him for this dastardly neglect . The President was not expected to be publicly castigated for his neglect of the country .
 There were many who believed that the cautious path upon which the President had embarked was the proper course to follow at the time . President Obama's cautious path was the correct course of action .
 The Senate passed the Joint Resolution on September 20 by the vote of 86 to 1 . The Joint Resolution was passed by the Senate by an 86-1 vote .
 Presidential critics desired that the Resolution's purpose be to pressure the President into taking strong immediate action . Presidential critics, however, desired that that the resolution's purpose was to pressure him to take action . The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives .
 By encouraging the President to do whatever may be necessary, including the use of arms, Congress had knowingly consented to the imposition of a blockade, if the President should choose to follow that course . Congress also agreed to impose a blockade of Israel .
 The concept of using a blockade as a solution to the Missile Crisis was not originated during the meetings of the ExCom . The concept was not discussed in the meetings during the 1960s .
 One may be left with the erroneous impression that someone simply mentioned blockade as a possible solution on Wednesday, October 17 . This may be the case of the Missile Crisis .
 Congress cannot be credited with the idea of imposing a blockade in this particular situation any more than the ExCom can . However, Congress cannot impose a blockade, any more . ExCom cannot do this more than Congress can .
 Another source, one which played a far greater role than is commonly understood in the Missile Crisis, had much to do with the development of that idea . As shall be demonstrated later, another source of the crisis had a much greater role .
 The time spent on debate is no indication of the degree in depth with which blockade was discussed . The blockade has been described as a 'barbaric' blockade .
 The blockade is a violation of the principles of international law under international law . Should it have been otherwise, one would have been well schooled in this case .
 Some members of Congress seemed to know little about the subject they were discussing and even less about the implications of the act of blockading . Instead, it seemed as if some members of the Congress knew little .
 The cry heard most often was that blockade would constitute 'an act of war ., 15 . Usually, nothing followed these pronouncements which would indicate why or under what circumstances a blockade would be a war . A blockade would not have to be decided under international law .
 Senator Wayne Morse hinted that there existed an international legal concept pertinent to the high seas in general . Senator Morse, on the other hand, hinted that an international concept exists . Morse: "There is an international law that is relevant to high seas"
 John Colombos defined the high seas as ""the sea beyond the limits of territorial jurisdiction" The high seas is considered the sea beyond territorial jurisdiction .
 The legal basis of the doctrine of freedom of the high seas is explained by the concept res nullius, ""belonging to nobody" David McKay Company, Inc., Inc., 1967), 47. 12 . David McKay: The doctrine is based on the concept of "res nullius
 The term high seas may be said to refer, in international law, to those waters which are outside of the exclusive control of any state or any group of states, and hence, not regarded as belonging to the territory of any of them .
 The ocean, until it envelopes the shores of a littoral state and constitutes its maritime belt, is not a part of the domain of any territorial sovereign . The ocean is not part of a sovereign's domain, but it is part of its territory .
 According to another viewpoint, the high sea represents that which is common to everyone,"" res communis,""Res communis" .
 Article XIII provides that no state or group of states may claim any right of sovereignty, privilege or prerogative over any portion of the high seas or place any obstacle to the free and full use of the seas . This concept of the freedom of the sea is not outdated nor governed by
 That which was agreed on at the Vienna Conference of 1926 was reiterated in 1958 at the United Nations Conference on the Freedom of the Seas . The Vienna Conference was held in 1926 .
 The high seas being open to all nations, no State may validly purport to subject any part of them to its sovereignty . No State may . validly . purport any part . of the high seas . to be subject to sovereignty .
 Freedom of the high seas is exercised under the conditions laid down by these articles and by the other rules of international law . Freedom is exercised in accordance with the conditions set down by international law, says the UK .
 International law says freedom of the high seas must be exercised with reasonable regard to the interests of other States in their exercise of freedom .
 Some members of Congress proclaimed that the imposition of a blockade constituted an act of war, but they offered little information to substantiate that claim . 21.
 Senator John Cooper noted that blockade implied a state of belligerency, i.e., state of war . Senator Cooper said blockade implied state of belligerency i.e. war .
 Blockade, he noted, would be an act of aggression under international law . Blockade would be a 'act of aggression', he said . Blockaded, he said, is therefore, a 'action of war' under the law .
 The analysis presented here will be placed within the context of certain principles of international law . The analysis will be taken into account that the use of these principles will be considered in light of certain international principles .
 When the coast represented the besieged place, the sea depicted the line of investment . The sea represented the coast . When the coastline represented the sea, it was the place for investment .
 A blockade is a belligerent operation intended to prevent vessels of all states from entering or leaving . Besides Senators Cooper and Morse who were mentioned in this chapter of thesis, others supported this view .
 Before the First World War, the U.S. maintained it would not recognize a blockade under any circumstances unless a state of war existed . The U. S. maintained that a blockade would not be recognized unless the war broke out .
 He held firm to the position that a blockade of Siberian ports by the Japanese would not be recognized as legal unless a state of war existed between the Soviet Union and Japan .
 The thought of blockading Red China in 1954 was labeled a resort to war by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles . Dulles: Blockading China would be a 'resort to war'
 Congressional leaders who advocated that blockade was an act of war were correct . In the traditional sense, and in light of the official U.S. position throughout history, the blockade was a war .
 Article 5 of the Declaration of London, 1909, stipulated that a blockade must be applied impartially to the ships of all nations . Article 5 stipulated a blockade should be applied imparially to all nations, according to Article 5 . The blockade was declared by the Declaration
 Before the Declaration of London, the stipulation of impartiality was recognized in Great Britain by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council .
 In 1855, the Right Honorable T Pemberton Leigh concurred that a blockade could not be considered legitimate if it conceded to either belligerent a freedom of commerce which had been denied to those states not engaged in war . In the case of The Franciska, in the
 Declaration of Paris, 1856, Article 4: Blockades in order to be binding must be effective, that is to say, maintained by a force sufficient really to prevent access to the coast of the enemy .
 If the blockaded state possesses paramount sea power, the effectiveness of the blockade cannot be maintained for any lengthy period of time and will no longer be considered binding . The effectiveness of a blockade can't be sustained for a lengthy period, and will not be maintained .
 The words of the afore mentioned three Articles should be interpreted with caution and not taken literally . However, the words should be taken seriously, not be taken literally.
 If a single ship broke through a blockade, the effectiveness of that blockade would be questionable . One might be inclined to argue that if a single vessel broke through, it would be doubtful .
 It would appear that no state would refuse to recognize a blockade on those grounds . The blockade would appear to be illegal in the U.S. State Department .
 Practically, effectiveness is demonstrated when a blockade is supported and enforced by a sufficient number of vessels to quell communications and to pose a high risk of capture to ships attempting to run it . The blockade is shown to be effective when a large number of ships are involved .
 The Supreme Court demonstrated its agreement with the Declarations of Paris and London. Supreme Court . Supreme Court demonstrates its agreement .
 In the case of The Olinde Rodrigues, the Court concluded that the effectiveness of a blockade was a question of fact . The court ruled that the effective blockade was fact, and that it was a fact .
 The fact of effectiveness was not dependent upon the number of warships employed in the maintenance of the blockaded area, it was said . Furthermore, the fact of effective effectiveness was also not dependent on the size of the warships employed .
 "It is not practicable to define what degree of danger shall constitute a test of the efficiency and validity of a blockade," says President Obama .
 If any part of the declaration is defective, the entire declaration is void and another one must be affirmed . The declaration must also be affirmed and the declaration must be upheld .
 Neutral powers must be notified of the blockade at the same time that the authorized representatives of the port or coastline under blockade are notified . Neutral powers are required to notify the blockade of a port or coast under blockade .
 Congress of blockade in conjunction with war emerged the counter argument that blockade was not an act of war . Not anAct of War emerged from the clamor in Congress .
 Those who supported this view, as far as can can be determined by the debate in Congress, were few in number . Those who backed this view were few .
 Senator Keating interjected that there have been 3. 6 U.S. Reports, Vol. 6, in the United States .
 If not an established knowledge of international law, at least his presentation was organized and well-prepared .
 Senator based his argument on twentieth century phenomena . Senator used his argument to defend his position . Senator's argument was not prepared to defend himself .
 Those who contended that blockade was an act of war became too imprisoned by traditional concepts and arguments to expand their thoughts and analyses to the world order of the 1960's .
 This is not to imply that Senator Miller's idea of a ""limited war material blockade,"" a pacific blockade, constituted something new and unihibited by tradition . It is not the idea that a "pacific blockade" is something new to be considered by many .
 The pacific blockade principle is steeped in tradition, much as that of the principle of blockade in time of war . To the contrary, it is steep in tradition . The idea of a blockade in times of war is not a new thing .
 In the first half of the nineteenth century, it was generally felt that a war blockade might also be governed by the laws of peace . In the early years of the 19th century, this was thought to be the case .
 The term ""pacific blockade"" refers to denying ships access to or egress from a foreign port or coast by a state's vessels . The term is used in reference to denying access to the foreign ports or coasts .
 Such action is pacific when the blockading state desires to remain at peace . Such action would be pacific if the blockaded state wanted to remain in peace .
 Peace is contingent, however, upon the response of the blockaded state, the government says . Peace will be contingent upon the state's response to the blockade, the president says .
 The blockaded state must assess the blockading action as an act short of war, and thus not feel compelled to declare war on the blockingading state for peace to remain . The blockading state should assess the blocking action as a act of war .
 Pacific blockade subject to same qualifications as is a belligerent blockade . Pacific blockade is subject to the same qualifications that is a belligering blockade .
 A pacific blockade differs only in respect to the absence of a state of war . A blockade differs from a blockade to a blockade of third states or states not a party to the controversy .
 The interference with vessels of third states while a pacific blockade is being imposed is not justified by international law . The interference by third states in the Pacific is not legal, it is said .
 "Freedom of trade and commerce cannot be curtailed during the time of peace," says President Obama . Freedom of trade, commerce can't be restricted during peace, he says .
 Third states may themselves choose to limit the activity of their ships as a precautionary measure . Of course, third states may . themselves .
 The U.S. has consistently agreed with the concept of noninterference in the rights of neutral states upon the implementation of a pacific blockade . The U S. has . consistently agreed to the concept . of non interference in the . rights of . neutral states .
 U.S. made it clear that action which might adversely affect neutral states would not be tolerated . In anticipation of a blockade of Venezuela in 1902 by Great Britain, Germany, and Italy, the U. S. made a clear statement .
 The U.S. stressed that such action in the 42Digest of International Law, Vol. 42, in 1916, as the Entente Powers prepared to blockade Greece, the U. S. stressed such action .
 The absence of a state of war must not interfere with the trading rights of neutral countries, says Hackworth, 157. VI, Hackworth .
 Senator Miller's idea was a traditional one, but his justifications for its use were supported in contemporary terms . Miller's ideas were supported by contemporary terms, such as the use of modern technology in the U.S.
 The failure to employ this type of approach in September, 1962, was precisely the failure of those Congressmen who contended that blockade was an act of war and could be nothing else .
 Senator Miller utilized the nineteenth century concept of pacific blockade, while applying it to the context of twentieth century institutions and world order . Senator Miller used the concept to create a world of peace in order .
 In advocating a pacific blockade, he contended that the question one must face was how would such a blockade be permissible under the United Nations Charter, particularly in respect to Paragraph 4 of Article 2 and Article 51 .
 Article 2, Paragraph 4, states that U.N. members refrain in international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations . Article states that all members should refrain in
 The ""threat or use of force"" by the U.S. would not now violate this Article . U. S. would no longer use force in violation of this Article.
 Charter is concerned with the right of self-defense in the event of an armed attack . Charter: Self-defense is not simply self-defence in general in general, but self-protection . Charter says it is concerned about the right to defend yourself against an attack .
 Nothing in the present charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security . Senator Miller asked whether a pacific blockade, an act of
 He contended that a limited blockade would not be contrary to this Article . He said a limited blockage would be not contrary to the Article .
 An armed attack literally would not have to occur before a sovereign state could act to defend itself . A sovereign state would be able to act in response to an armed attack on its own .
 In the present armament situation, he argued, no state could be expected to wait for an initial attack by one's adversary . He argued that no state can't expect an attack by an adversary .
 Some of the defeated insurgents sought and obtained refuge in the U.S. where they endeavored to recruit Americans who were sympathetic to their cause and to regroup their forces .
 British troops crossed into U.S. territory, seized the Caroline, and sent it over Niagara Falls .
 Great Britain claimed that this action by British troops was a legitimate means of selfdefense, even though an actual attack in which the Caroline would have taken part had not occurred . Great Britain said it was self-defense against an attack that would have occurred .
 This claim of self-defense by the British Government received no argumentation from U.S. officials . This claim was rejected by the U. S. government .
 S agreed that force could be used prior to or in the absence of an armed attack for the purpose of self-defense . Force could also be used before or in absence of armed attack .
 McDougal and Feliciano have suggested that necessity and proportionality of the response must be interpreted with reasonableness in each particular situation .
 International law did not serve as the focal point during the debate on Senate Joint Resolution 230 . His answers indicated that a blockade was not an act of war .
 It was not interjected in any great depth even in those areas where legal concepts had been discussed in the debate .
 The concern for international law did not serve as the focal point of Congressional debate . The concern over international legal concepts did play a role in the Resolution's adoption .
 Congress recognized the existence of international legal concepts and understood that they must be reckoned with . Congress also recognized that international concepts are a matter of international law .
 If the President or his advisers had confined themselves to that period of time, they might not have chosen so wise a course . President or advisers should have limited themselves to the time, he said .
 If President Kennedy had relied solely on his closest advisers for input, perhaps the decision reached would not have been the same . Furthermore, if President Kennedy . had depended solely on the advice of his closest . advisers, perhaps it would not be the same.
 Such a limited study deprives oneself of a thorough understanding of the crisis, particularly in regard to the role of international legal considerations and that of executive legal counsel closely associated with the crisis .
 The Department of Justice is preparing a legal memorandum pertinent to the Cuban situation . In the middle of August, the department began preparing the document .
 It was soon followed by a similar one prepared under the auspices of the Department of Defense . It was the first of its kind .
 It shall be the purpose of this chapter to discuss those memoranda and the role of the Government's legal advisers prior to the discovery of offensive weapons in Cuba .
 Presidential policy will be traced to observe the influence of the legal advisers on the President . Also, Presidential policy to be traced .
 The influence of legal considerations, or at least the acknowledgement by the administration that international legal criteria would have to be consulted, was explored much earlier . The influence was also explored by the Obama administration .
 Attorney General Kennedy approached Norbert Schlei, the newly commissioned Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel, and told him of the buildup of Soviet weapons and military technicians in Cuba .
 Schlei was well aware of the increase of Soviet weapons and military technicians in Cuba . He probably did not know that the first task to be assigned to him at his new position would be as a participant in assessing what the U.S. might do .
 President Kennedy was contemplating issuing an official warning to the Soviet Union, Schlei says . The warning would state unequivocally that the U.S. would not tolerate the installation of long-range, offensive missiles in Cuba .
 Before this advance warning was issued, it was thought that a serious study should be undertaken to evaluate whether the U.S. could take action to preclude the installation of long-range missiles in Cuba . "as a matter of international law, "" could take . action to . preclude the
 Schlei's letter indicated when and in what manner the President and the Attorney General were concerned with law in the ensuing situation . The President and Attorney General are currently in the midst of a national crisis .
 Legal implications were explored before a warning to the Soviet Union was issued and while the U.S. was in the process of formulating a policy . Legal implications are explored before the U S. issued a warning issued .
 It cannot be determined from the information available whether it was the President or the Attorney General who first suggested that an international legal study should be pursued before public warning was made to the Soviet Union .
 President might have instructed his brother to investigate how a warning should comply with international law .
 Attorney General might have suggested that before such a move was made, a legal study should be pursued . Second, the Attorney General, upon hearing his brother indicate that he would issue an official warning to the Soviet Union specifying that long-range .
 Understanding Robert Kennedy's position as Attorney General and his incessant concern with law, the latter seems more plausible . Robert Kennedy is more likely to have been the Attorney General .
 An obligation would exist to have recourse first, if time should permit, to the procedures of collective security organizations of which the U.S. is a member, he says .
 The United States would further be obliged to confine any use of force to the least necessary to the end proposed . The U.S. would be further constrained by the United States .
 Defensive action, it was noted, should be limited to the rule of proportionality . It was noted that proportionality should be used to protect the public .
 In this instance, the U.S. demanded that Great Britain show that it did not act unreasonably or excessively when British forces sent the Caroline over Niagara Falls . The U. S. demanded to show that Britain did not .
 Schlei recognized that this would place a strict limitation on U.S. action, but it was felt that it would be unlawful to destroy missile installations unless there was evidence that an actual attack was imminent . Schleis: It would be illegal to destroy missiles unless there is evidence
 One discouraging limitation, however, did not mean that it would be either difficult or difficult . 2,8.8.9.
 From such an analysis, different conclusions would likely evolve, some of which might indicate that the U.S. would have to be cautious no matter what its decision was .
 Neither the Charter of the U.N. nor the 'Charter of the Organization of the . American States prohibits unilateral preventive action in self-defense .
 Members of both organizations have an obligation to employ the organization's procedures, if possible, before taking unilateral action . However, membership in either of these organizations carries with it an obligation .
 Pan American Union, Treaty Series, Charter of the Organization of American States, , 6.6.5.5 . Pan American . Union .
 Schlei: U.S. might take action if the sovereignty of any American State is affected by an aggression . Schleis suggested a specific course of action the U. S. might engage .
 This procedure would assert the right to stop only those vessels transporting offensive weapons . It would assert that only those ships carrying offensive weapons are stopped .
 To reduce the possibility of any confrontation on the high seas, the U.S. should offer to make inspections .
 The concept of visit and search is not unprecedented in international law . It is not the first time it has happened in the world's most restrictive countries .
 Principally, it is regarded as an act of war, but it can be exercised in time of peace, particularly as a means of self-defense . It can be used in times of peace as well as self defense .
 When the Virginius sailed from Jamaica in 1875, she was transporting men and munitions to Cuban insurgents . The Virginius was the first ship to sail from Jamaica to Cuba .
 Many members of Congress viewed the picture in simplistic terms--a blockade was an act of war or it was not a war . The blockade was a war, but the blockade was not war, the author says .
 Congress maintained prerogative to debate in whatever manner it desired, including a judgment on the legality or illegality of a resultant action of one of its resolutions .
 If the President plans to base any part of his decision on legal norms, he will seek advice from departmental legal counselors whose jobs entail legal thought .
 It had been written for use in the preparation of a forthcoming statement by President Kennedy .
 Assistant Attorney General recalled, "Bob proceeded to send copies . . to various people in the government. At this time, the assistant attorney general recalled .
 I know the President and Rusk got copies, and I believe McNamara and Dillon were also on the list . McNamara, Rusk and McNamara got copies of the book .
 In view of the distribution, I would guess Bundy and Allen Dulles were included . Bundy and Dulles are included in the list .
 Chayes corrects this by indicating that Schlei was referring to the Director of the CIA, John McCone . However, he says he was talking to the CIA Director of Operations Director John McCones .
 All of the above mentioned people, except Dulles, were included in what was to be known as the ExCom . The ExCom is now known as what is known as "ExCom"
 On Labor Day, September 3, Nicholas Katzenbach, the Deputy Attorney General; Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State; and Robert Kennedy met to discuss this analysis . Robert Kennedy: "This analysis is an important part of our understanding of the U.S. Constitution"
 This meeting may be labeled a harbinger of the meetings of the ExCom, not due primarily to the participants but because of the subject matter discussed . The subject matter was discussed, not primarily to participants .
 The following day, September 4, a meeting was held at the White House to discuss the draft of a Presidential statement prepared by Schlei . The meeting was the first of its kind .
 Those present included McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; Edward Martin, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America; and Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury .
 Other participants were Katzenbach, Schlei, Robert Kennedy, and high officials from the Central Intelligence Agency .
 At his press conference on August 29, President Kennedy spoke with circumspection about the developing situation in Cuba . At his speech, Kennedy said: "I'm sorry for what happened to Cuba"
 No evidence of the presence of troops was apparent, he stated that this country would maintain close surveillance of what might appear to be military activity . He said that the country would keep close surveillance .
 Only six days later, September 4, the President issued a much stronger statement . President Obama issued a stronger statement on September 4 .
 Department of Justice releases strong statement on Cuba . Move not due to discovery of further evidence of missiles in Cuba, but result of Justice's research . Justice Department research conducted by the DOJ .
 I 34 hardly be taken as the trigger for the President's statement on September 4. I 34 will hardly be the trigger . I 34 could hardly be . taken as a trigger for President's . statement on Sept. 4.
 The August 29 flight was the first of a continuous series of flights over Cuba which did not culminate until November . The first of the series was a continuous flight over Cuba over Cuba .
 surface-to-air missile sites were discovered in the photos taken that day . Surface-air missiles were discovered on the site .
 SAM sites are part of a larger concern for the U.S. Geological Survey . The SAM sites were discovered in the 1970s and '80s .
 The situation had been under surveillance since the drastic increase in Soviet dry cargo and passenger ship arrivals in Cuba since the early months of 1962 . This concern entailed a situation under surveillance .
 By August, the increased number of Soviet ship arrivals had aroused grave suspicion in the U.S. leaders . American leaders had become suspicious of the increased ship arrivals .
 President Kennedy felt it necessary to officially warn the Soviet Union about the possible result of the increased Soviet supply of armaments and personnel to Cuba . The discoveries of the August 29 U-2 flight were not the reason for the quick change in his public statements from August 29 to September 4 .
 The shift in the President's position was due primarily to the input of the legal advisers of the Department of Justice . The shift was largely due to the advice of the Justice Department .
 Schlei intimated that action should be taken only when offensive armaments could be identified . Schlelei: Action should only be taken when armaments are identified . He said action should only come when offensive weapons can be found .
 There is no evidence of any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country . No evidence of military bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1934 treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of offensive ground-to-ground missiles .
 The United States, in conjunction with other hemispheric countries, will make sure that while increased Communist armaments will be a heavy burden to the unhappy people of Cuba themselves, they will be nothing more . The U.S. will ensure that increased Cuban armaments are nothing more than
 President does not categorically state that he will seek 0.0 per cent of the vote in 2016 .
 A S. A. S. involvement, the above quotation certainly hints at that possibility . The above quotation suggests that S.A. may have been involved .
 A S. A. S. participation, it is most likely that that is what the President had in mind . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 President's position remained firm. From this initial definitive response, the President's stance remained firm . The President's initial response to the incident remains firm.
 President Kennedy maintained this position throughout the crisis and did not waver when confronted by criticism from Congress . When conditions in Cuba approximated those referred to in his comments to the press on September 13, as determined by U-2 photographs taken October 14, the U.S. acted .
 Neither the date this legal study began, nor the period over which it evolved, can be precisely determined from the information available . The date of the legal study is not known .
 The U.S. could legally act if the U.N. Security Council concluded there existed a threat to peace . For example, the U S. could act if there was a threat of peace .
 The third and final suggestion involved the participation of the Organization of American States . The OAS is a member of the U.S. Congress .
 Measures taken by Members in the exercise of the right of self-defense shall be immediately reported to the Security Council . Measures not in any way effect the authority and responsibility of the Council under the present Charter to take at any time such actions as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore
 Department of State, Charter of the United Nations, Conference Series Pubn. The U.N. is a member of the U.S. Council of States .
 Both documents assessed the right of self-defense and the involvement of the U.N. and/or the Organization of American States . Both documents assess self-defence and involvement of United Nations .
 The legal officers of the Departments of Justice and Defense had examined the international legal questions involved in a U.S. response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba well in advance of the time the missiles were actually discovered .
 These analyses were not retained by the legal offices but were distributed to at least eight men who were to be part of the ExCom . The analysis was not retained but distributed to eight men involved in ExCom.
 It seems that the men present at the meeting on September 3 had foreseen what was to constitute the major portion of the debate of the ExCom between October 16 and 28 . The debate is scheduled for October 16 to 28 .
 Of those men listed by the President on October 16 to participate in a special advisory capacity, there is strong reason to believe that most of them were familiar with the legal questions .
 Views had already been aired on blockade and air strike issues by members of the ExCom . Furthermore, views were already aired on blockades and air strikes .
 The meetings beginning on October 16 were not inundated with material unfamiliar to the participants . So, the meetings began with the new material .
 Before the creation of the ExCom, arguments had been formulated, thoughts had been provoked . The ExCom was created by a committee of experts and experts .
 The legal advisers of the various Departments and their analyses of international law were definitely an influence on government officials long before the ExCom was created . The ExCom has been created by the Department of Justice .
 The purpose of this chapter is to explore those thirteen days, concentrating primarily on those situations in which legal considerations played a role . This chapter focuses primarily on the situations in those situations where legal considerations were a factor .
 It will be illustrated that in a crisis situation where national security was at stake, the advisers and the decision-maker, i.e., the members of the ExCom and the President, were influenced by legal considerations as they moved .
 To demonstrate the influence, or lack of influence, of legal considerations on a decision, one cannot approach the subject in as simplistic a manner as William P Gerberding does. To demonstrate, or . lack of . influence, the influence of legal . considerations on the decision, cannot be
 The question posed above is of too limited a nature to be of value in any scholarly analysis . Furthermore, the question posed is of a limited nature and is not of value to be used in any analysis .
 To judge the influence of legal considerations upon reaching a decision by stipulating that legal criteria must be ""consciously applied, "" results in an erroneous judgment . To judge a decision based on legal considerations must be conscious, "" is an error .
 This chapter will discuss other phenomena of those thirteen days . In addition to this chapter, this chapter will also discuss the effects of the time .
 The Department of Justice and the Department of Defense were called upon for legal opinions . During the months of August and September, as-has been previously indicated, the legal advisers of the DOJ and the Defense were asked to provide legal opinions.
 When it appeared that a decision had been reached in October, legal advisers were summoned to participate in the deliberations . Again, when it looked that the decision was reached, lawyers were summoned for deliberations .
 The missiles would have increased Soviet capabilities to destroy parts of the Western Hemisphere . They would have changed the balance of power in the United States .
 President Kennedy stressed this dual probable consequence two months after the Missile Crisis began . Kennedy stressed the dual probable consequences of the missile crisis .
 The President recalled, ""This was an effort to materially change the balance of power, it was done in secret, steps were taken really to deceive us by every means they could . It would have politically changed the 5 .
 Perhaps the Soviet leader had misjudged Kennedy's will, his determination to stand firm . Perhaps he'd misjudge Kennedy's decision, perhaps he'd been wronged by his will .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco and the Vienna meeting may have encouraged Khrushchev to question the President's willingness to defend himself . The young President may have allowed the Soviet leader to verbally discredit him .
 If Khrushchev were guilty of this misjudgment, he would have to be corrected . The former Soviet leader would have been corrected, says historian .
 President Kennedy sought to create an atmosphere of cooperation and trust with Chairman Khrushchev . President Kennedy wanted to create a trust-in-trust atmosphere between the two countries .
 On October 16, the President learned that Khrushchev had lied to him . President learned he had deliberately deceived him about his intentions in placing Soviet weaponry in Cuba .
 The U.S. began warning the Soviet Union that this country would not accept Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . The Soviet leadership vehemently affirmed that it had no such intention .
 Our nuclear weapons are so powerful in their explosive force that there is no need to search for sites for them beyond the boundaries of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union has so powerful rockets to carry these nuclear warheads, that there are no need for them to be found beyond the borders .
 The President realized that khrushchev was apparently willing to take new risks to further the interests of the Soviet Union and to. challenge America's prestige and power .
 The Chairman had challenged John Kennedy, testing the young President's courage to initiate, an action which might ultimately lead to nuclear war . John Kennedy was tested by the Chairman of the Committee .
 If the President did not accept this challenge, some noted authorities believed that Khrushchev would declare himself victor of this round . Some noted authorities thought that some of them believed that .
 Khrushchev might feel that victories in future rounds would come just as easily . More importantly, he may feel that victory in future elections would come easily .
 The probable consequence, according to some authorities, could have possibly been on the President's mind .
 Less than vigorous action would destroy the confidence of key members of his administration and weaken the chances for the election of his fellow Democratic Congressmen who actively supported his Cuban policy .
 "Inaction would encourage leaders of other countries, friend and foe alike, to look with suspicion and skepticism on his courage and commitments," says President Obama .
 President Kennedy was convinced that the U.S. must act, and act forcefully, to rid the Western Hemisphere of this Soviet threat . Therefore, President Kennedy decided to act . President Kennedy believed that the United States must act .
 Most any course that would be followed, except perhaps nuclear war, would directly threaten the prestige of Khrushchev . Most any of the course that was followed would be directly threaten Khrushvic's prestige . Most of the world's most dangerous course would be nuclear war .
 S. S followed fortunately prevented both a humiliating defeat and a nuclear war . S.S. S. avoided both humiliation and nuclear war.
 The ExCom consisted of approximately fourteen members . Robert Kennedy, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorensen, George Ball and George Ball were the members .
 Others participated at various meetings, including Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State . Others participated in various meetings .
 Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, Ball, Gilpatric, Acheson, Stevenson, and Adlai Stevenson . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 These were the men who presented alternative policy positions to the President . They argued, debated, and some changed their minds about which course of action would be the best to follow .
 The bitter arguments and the changing of positions do not discredit these men, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Each presented their arguments vigorously, for each felt his plan was the right course to save the nation . Each presented his arguments vigorously .
 The role that legal considerations played in the decision was affected by the men who made up the ExCom . The decision was made by the members of the committee of ExCom, who made the decision .
 Each of these men brought with him different experiences, different backgrounds, different perspectives . Each had different experiences and different backgrounds .
 Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury; Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State; Paul Nitze, Assistant Secretary of Defense; and Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defence .
 Lyndon Johnson, Vice President; Adlai Stevenson, Ambassador to the United Nations; Ken O'Donnell, Special Assistant to the President; Don Wilson, Deputy Director of the U.S. Information Agency; Robert Lovett, former Secretary of Defense; and Charles Bohlen, who
 It can only be demonstrated that there was an effect, for many other factors were a part of the decision-making process . The decision was made in a bid to save the city from bankruptcy .
 There will always be dark and tangled stretches in the decision-making process, even to those who may be most intimately involved .
 Legal considerations were filtered through the diverse backgrounds and perspectives of the participants, resulting in the consideration and application of law both consciously and subconsciously . Instead of legal considerations, the participants' perspectives were filtered .
 The President had already stated unequivocally his position against the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The President's position had already been stated unequivocally .
 The U N. could have been authorized to decide the issue, or a secret emissary could have sent to Moscow to demand action . The U.N. could also have been able to decide whether to send an official to Moscow .
 As the missiles belonged to the Soviet Union and were under the complete control of Soviet personnel, no significant gains would be realized . The missiles were kept under the control of the Soviets .
 Castro would be removed from Cuba . Castro would also be removed as a result .
 Through a conventional air strike, the missile sites would be eliminated . A conventional strike would eliminate missile sites in Syria .
 This approach would be a less belligerent response than invasion or an air strike . It would prevent further military shipments to Cuba, while conveying America's determination to stand firm .
 Members of the ExCom viewed the crisis from different perspectives . They all came together for a common purpose--to help determine a course of action which the President could follow .
 Theodore Sorensen, Kennedy, 675. 49. 49 equality. As the president of the U.S. House of Representatives, the Senate will hold a hearing on the issue of equal rights to all Americans .
 "Experience mattered little in the crisis which had no precedent," he said . Further, he continued, he said: "Experience matters little in a crisis which has no precedent"
 George Ball was arguing, on October 17, that ""every nation ought to act in accordance with its own traditions,,"" 17 he was arguing . Ball is arguing, at the minimum, a moral norm . Ball: Every nation should act according to its traditions .
 Gerberding takes a position similar to the one above and stipulates that only if one is willing to define American traditions as an element of international law is it possible to construe this as an invocation of such law . Gerbering takes a similar position .
 To him, legal considerations had little, if any, influence on the decision . The decision was made in the wake of Hurricane Katrina . The mayor of New York City says the decision was "a matter of principle"
 Gerberding indicated his unwillingness to comprehend international law within certain contexts . Gerbering indicated he was not prepared to understand international law in certain contexts, he said . This statement indicated he would not understand the concept of international law .
 Ball himself would christen his statement of October 17 a moral position . Perhaps, Ball himself himself would Christen himself .
 Experienced policy makers, moreover, more or less.knowingly assimilate what the law requires, in the gross at least, and it inevitably shapes their inclinations and deliberations . Experienced . policy makers . know what law requires .
 An example will better demonstrate how moral norms contain legal overtones . An example of moral norms will be used to explain moral overtones in the law .
 Members of the ExCom did not preface or conclude their statements with an indication that their positions could be substantiated by any specific law . During their arguments, some of which can be denominated ""moral"
 S , Department of State, Charter of the United Nations, Conference Series Pubn. S . U.N. S. A. U.S. S is a member of the UN Security Council of Security Council . S . A. S has been involved in the creation of the
 A sense of natural law may be expressed by a decision-maker as he prescribes his case in terms of what ought to be . They recognized that there is a direct connection between the rules prescribed and the prevailing ethics and morality .
 The idea of what ought to be is usually the significant factor in the creation of law itself . The idea is often the most important factor in creating law itself, the author says .
 Myers McDougal and Florentino Feliciano have asserted that values constitute a part of decisions . The values of decisions are a key part of the decisions, they say .
 The values to which they referred are concepts of human dignity .25 Although they do not specifically link moral norms and legal considerations, their acknowledgement that moral norms affect decisions .
 The second concept within the realm of international law to which this study refers is justification for action . The study refers to the concept of justification for military action .
 The cost of this legal failure then, may well be in terms of political responses by other nations to the nation which fails to justify its action . The cost may be in the political response to the country's failure to justify the action .
 The concept of justification often produces the thought that a decision was made, an action was taken, a justification was proffered, in that order . The concept is often thought of a decision being made, action being taken, and a justification being given .
 Some feel that the justification is formulated after the decision has been reached . In essence, some feel that it is not enough to justify the decision .
 The justification for an action may even bear little resemblance to the facts of the situation, the author says . The justification may even be based on the fact that the situation is in fact different .
 He employed Sorensen's observation that the blockade's ""legality much strengthened by the 0.0.0" blockade . The blockade's "legality much strengthened" by the blockade, he said .
 Gerberding concluded that the legality of the blockade decision had been worked out after the decision was reached . A S.A. endorsement had been carefully worked out, he said . The decision was made after the blockade was made .
 Perhaps, there have been instances where the justification for action was formulated after the decision was reached . Perhaps, perhaps, there were times when the justification was formulated following the decision .
 Some members of the ExCom consistantly integrated justification with their choice of response, specifically, those who advocated blockade .
 26 Kaplan and Katzenbach, 344; Louis Henkin, How Nations Behave , 48. Kaplan, 344 . Henkin: "As they put forth their position, 26 Kaplan ... ... As they put forward the position, . 26 Kaplan .
 From the completed work of the legal advisers, the members of the ExCom were cognizant of the fact that reliance upon 0.0 per cent of 0.5 per cent is dependent on 0.3 per cent .
 The problem seemed to become, in part, the problem of determining a response which could be justified through 0.5 per cent .
 S in this instance, from which an action could be justified, the choice of action itself was limited . S in the case of the case, the decision to take action was made in this case was made by the police .
 Two concepts within the scope of international law--moral-legal norms and justification for action--influenced the decision of the ExCom . These two concepts were discussed and defined within the preceeding analysis .
 Theodore Sorensen recalled that, on first observation, an air strike was generally favored . The air strike is generally favored by air strikes, he said . The U.S. Air Force was involved in the Second World War .
 As he viewed it, this pressure, limited though forceful, could be strengthened as circumstances changed, he said .
 Ball: An air strike was inconsistent with American traditions . Diplomatic overtures were also considered in the beginning of the conflict .
 McGeorge Bundy tended to veer away from military action because he feared events would escalate into a nuclear war . Bundy was wary of military action as he feared it would lead to nuclear war in the future . Bundy's military career spanned four decades .
 Bundy argued that the U S. should inform either Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister, or Khrushchev that the missiles in Cuba had been discovered . Bundy argued persuasively that the United States should demand the missiles be removed from Cuba . Bundy: The U.S.
 If diplomatic channels could resolve the issue, the threat to Khrushchev's prestige in the eyes of the world would be obviated . If diplomacy was possible, it would be a boon to the Soviet Union .
 Sorensen concluded that Kennedy's letter to the U.S. was nothing short of peaceful intentions . Kennedy, 34, was killed in the shooting .
 Sorensen convinced himself that an air strike was not the answer . He decided not to use the tactic, but decided to use it .
 By Thursday, October 18, two distinct groups began to emerge, the blockade team and the air strike team . October 18: Two distinct groups emerged, one blockade team . The blockade team was formed from a blockade team, one from a military team .
 Those favoring a blockade were confronted with the question of what type of blockade to recommend . Those favoring the blockade were faced with the choice of what to do .
 Offensive weapons would be the only material prevented from reaching Cuba . They decided that the lowest level of action was preferable .
 Various arguments surfaced at this juncture, however, over the nature of the low level response . Various arguments were raised over whether the response was appropriate .
 McNamara voiced his opinion that a limited blockade would maintain the options for further, more forceful action . McNamara: A limited blockade of Syria would maintain options for more forceful actions .
 If this limited step failed, the President could have another course readily available . If this failed, there could be more options available .
 Those who favored blockade did not feel that it would produce the desired success . Moral-legal norms have greater significance when one realizes that those who favored it did not think it would succeed .
 Both Sorensen and Kennedy admitted that blockade was probably not the course to follow if the U.S. wanted 3 3 Soresen and Robert Kennedy .
 Sorensen recognized that a limited blockade would have the least adverse effect on innocent Cubans . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The strongest advocate for this concern for innocent Cuban citizens throughout the week was Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was the strongest advocate of this concern . Kennedy was a strong advocate for the Cuban citizens .
 I could not accept the idea that the U.S. would rain bombs on Cuba, killing thousands and thousands of civilians in surprise attack . "I couldn't accept that the United States would ... kill thousands of ... civilians," she says .
 "I simply did not see how we could accept that course of action for our country. Maybe the alternatives were not very palatable, but I simply did . Maybe it was not very . palatable," she said. "Maybe it was very difficult to think how we would accept that
 Douglas Dillon changed his position to support the use of a blockade . Because of Robert Kennedy's proposals, Douglas Dillon supported a blockade of Cuba .
 He attributed this change of position to a norm which had alluded him in earlier deliberations . He attributed it to the fact that he had changed his position to the norm .
 He continued, ""Frankly, these considerations had not occurred to me until Bobby raised them so eloquently.,""39 Concerns for what the role of the 0.0.0 should be considered in the future .
 A S.S. should be was evident in the meetings of a subgroup of the ExCom--the blockade team--which favored the use of a blockade . The blockade team favors a blockade of S.A. Russia .
 Justification for establishing a blockade accompanied this subgroup's decision for blockade and was not formulated later . "Justification" for establishing blockade accompanied decision to establish blockade accompanied by decision to blockade .
 Robert Kennedy recalls meeting with advisers who outlined legal basis for action . Suggestions included an outline of the legal basis of the action, Kennedy recalled .
 0.41 Martin attempted to dispel the trepidation of those who were, to some extent, skeptical of the feasibility of the blockade . Thompson emphasized the added legal justification such endorsement would give the blockade under international and maritime law .
 He stated, ""We could not even be certain that the blockade route was open to us. He said . He said, "We were not even certain" that the route would be open .
 Robert Kennedy, as did Sorensen, Thompson, and Martin, placed great weight on the 0.0.0 . Robert Kennedy . The Kennedy family is proud of their achievements .
 The other team of advisers, the air strike team, did not concern themselves very much with legal approaches . The air strikes team did not worry about legal approaches, they say .
 Air strikes would only postpone, not prevent, the use of air strikes to protect U.S. security, he said . Its use, he believed, would only postponed, not prevented, the U.N. would only protect its leadership position in the Western Hemisphere .
 The nuclear weapons were already there . . . were capable of killing eighty million Americans . The nuclear weapon was already there, says President Obama .
 The ill-executed Bay of Pigs invasion failed to rid the Western Hemisphere of 42 of the world's 42 enemies .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff felt another opportunity was presenting itself in the Missile Crisis . It was felt by the Joint chiefs of Staff that another opportunity had been presented .
 Joint Chiefs advocated air strike, invasion and overthrow of Castro Castro . Joint Chiefs called for air strikes, invasion, overthrow .
 There is no indication that the air strike group considered how their prescribed course of action could be justified . There is, however, one indication that .
 A comment by Llewellyn Thompson spurred further legal considerations of the general situation for the following day . October 19 was the first meeting of the evening meeting of October 18 . The meeting was adjourned on October 18, October 19 .
 Lawyers prepared to present their evaluations the following morning . Lawyers worked through the night to get their evaluations in place .
 Katzenbach's position and close association with the Attorney General, reflected primarily the concerns of Robert Kennedy, who had become the chief advocate of using the blockade .
 U.S. military action could be legitimated under 49 the principle of self-defense, he said . At the same time, however, in order to foreclose the possibility of military responses of greater proportions, he stated .
 Meeker presented the legal views of the Department of State . Since Chayes was not in Washington at that time, Meeker was not present .
 Meeker aired his thoughts with Ball, Johnson, Martin, Ball, and Martin . Meeker: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to defend my position"
 This was the first occasion that quarantine was mentioned, even though other contributors to the deliberations of the ExCom laid claim to its origin . This is the first time quarantine has been mentioned in the deliberations .
 The advantage of this substitution implies a less bellicose act than blockade itself . The advantage is that it is less likely to be a more belliose act, rather than blockade .
 Meeker presented his position with a sense of assuredness of purpose and with a deep personal commitment to and respect for legal solutions to problems . Following Katzenbach's statements before the ExCom, Meeker .
 "Having acquired a respect for the capacities of international organizations, it is understandable that he supported their jurisdiction in this matter," he said .
 President Obama hesitated to justify U.S. action, particularly unilateral action, purely as a matter of self-defense . He hesitated to defend U. S. action .
 Charter allows regional organizations to deal with matters pertinent to peace and security . Charter is based on regional organizations that deal with issues pertinent to the peace . Charter allows the region to discuss matters with peace, security .
 S. A. S. acted within the provisions of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance . S.A. A S. B. acted in accordance with treaty .
 Meeker demonstrated his legal acumen and provided a firm legal case for those who advocated quarantine . Meeker's argument was restrictive though sound, but sound .
 The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance for the approval of U.S. action was a misconception . A S. A. S. or the I.A. treaty of reciprocity for the . approval of . action was not a misconception.
 Acheson argued that legal niceties were irrelevant to the threat to U.S. security . He did acquiesce in one of Katzenbach's points, agreeing with her .
 If it were necessary that questions of international law be followed, he noted, U.S. action could be justified by self-defense . Acheson would concede the role of legal considerations in the Cuban situation .
 I conclude that the propriety of the Cuban quarantine is not a legal issue . I must conclude that . I have concluded that . The propriety . of the . Cuban quarantine was not a . legal issue, it is not an issue .
 The power, prestige and position of the United States had been challenged by another state . Law simply does not deal with such questions of power--power that comes close to the sources of sovereignty, he says .
 "I cannot believe that there are principles of law that say we must accept destruction of our way of life," she said . She said: "I can't believe that . There are principles that say . We must accept . destruction of the way we live," she added .
 One would be surprised if practical men, trained in legal history and thought, 5 3 Chayes, 33. They thought, '5 3 Chayses' would be a practical men .
 The U.S. is not charged with deciding what the United States would do or how it would do it . But they are charged with the responsibility for deciding what it would be or how to do it.
 The latter was the role of the decision-maker, the task of the President, and he would have to bear the consequences of that choice . The President would have been the decision maker, and the decision was made by him .
 He, and he alone, would have to choose from among the proposed alternatives, unless his own perspectives and prejudices dictated otherwise . He would have had to choose among the alternatives .
 All Soviet ships carrying offensive weapons to Cuba would be quarantined . A quarantine of all Soviet ships with offensive weapons would also be implemented .
 President occasionally vacillated on how to bring this confrontation to a successful end . He was consistent in the procedure used in the search for an answer .
 This maneuver was intentional on his part, for he desired that these men be as candid with each other as possible, he said .
 His presence, he felt, might inhibit the expression of straightforward thinking . He felt that his presence might inhibit his own thoughts .
 He often summoned individual participants to his office to obtain their reflections on what the U.S. response should be . Though he was 55, he was absent from most of the ExCom meetings .
 President's thoughts can partially determine his thoughts as he considered what action should be taken . The President made his comments at ExCom meetings .
 President Kennedy called Adlai Stevenson to his office on the first day of the ExCom meeting . The ExCom met on October 16, 1963 .
 Stevenson had not been present at the initial morning session of the advisers . Stevenson did not attend the session .
 The President exhibited the photographs indicating the missile launch areas andexpressed his opinion to the Ambassador . The President also exhibited photographs of missile launch sites .
 Stevenson replied that it would be more appropriate if a diplomatic solution were sought, before the U.S. resorted to an air strike .
 In March, 1965, Stevenson recalled this first meeting with the President over the Cuban Crisis . Stevenson and President Richard Nixon met in March 1965 .
 At that time he recalled, "I was a little alarmed that Kennedy's first consideration should be an air strike," he said . He said he was "a little alarmed" by Kennedy's decision to strike .
 Acheson expressed his view that an air strike was the course which the U.S. should pursue . The U. S. should strike, he said .
 In support of his argument, he indicated that the imposition of a blockade would only postpone the issue while allowing time for the missiles to become operable . He indicated that a blockade of the region would only delay the issue .
 When the President spoke, he indicated that an air strike was tantamount to a Pearl Harbor in reverse . An air strike would be akin to a bombing in reverse, he said .
 A Sunday-morning surprise attack was not consistent with our heritage, our ideals. A Sunday morning surprise attack is not inconsistent with our ideals, says the UK's president .
 President was arguing a moral-legal principle much the same as his brother, the Attorney General, had in ExCom meetings . He argued that thousands of Cubans and Russians would be killed without warning .
 President Kennedy and Attorney General Acheson discussed Pearl Harbor analogy . President Kennedy was impressed by it, as he used it in private consultation . President was impressed with the analogy .
 Robert Kennedy argued what he considered to be the stigma of Pearl Harbor before the ExCom . Kennedy had argued that Pearl Harbor had a stigma of being a war hero .
 He stated that he did not believe that with all the memory of Pearl Harbor and all the responsibility we would have to bear in the world afterward, the President of the United States could order an air attack .
 Having heard the Pearl Harbor theory now for a second time, Dean Acheson told the President 59 Dean Achonson, "I'm not surprised," he said .
 Congress and President have reiterated warning against establishment of weapons in Cuba . President Obama has also reiterated the warning against the establishment of these weapons .
 President Kennedy applied legal considerations in his decision to establish a blockade . Besides moral-legal norms, there is evidence of further legal considerations, he says .
 Traditionally, blockade had been regarded in most circumstances as an act of war . The blockade was seen as a 'act of war' in the past .
 In the 'realm of legal justification for the action to be taken, one incident dembnstrstrated the President's legal concerns . The President said the incident 'dembstrated his legal concerns' in a statement .
 It seems to indicate that-he was thinking that the quarantine would be legitimated, and thus possible, under the provisions of the 0.0.1.0 .
 These considerations, in part, possibly influenced his choice of quarantine, may have influenced his decision .
 Given his knowledge of August legal Memoranda and his statement of October 18, legal considerations would appear to have influenced his decision to impose the quarantine .
 The American public had to be informed, parties other than the ExCom had been consulted, and appropriate procedures must be followed . The U.S. should be informed and the public should be consulted, he says .
 These developments demonstrated that there existed an interplay between law and action, thus suggesting that legal considerations were still a part of the administration's thinkings . These developments demonstrate that there is still a legal interplay .
 The U.S. A S. A. and the resulting resolution, and the U. S. quarantine proclamation, were the result of a U.N. quarantine . The quarantine proclamation was followed by a resolution of Congress and President Obama .
 President Kennedy announced to the American people what U.S. intelligence activities had discovered and verified in Cuba on October 22, 1962 .
 This urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base is an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas . This is in flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Rio Pact of 1947, the . traditions of this Nation and the . U.S. and hemisphere .
 It was important that the American people be aware of this specific threat to American peace and security . The American people understand the global consequences if such action were not halted, he said .
 Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U.N. recognizes the existence of collective regional security . The U. N. has been involved in the creation of regional security in the past .
 Within the guidelines of Chapter VIII, the U.S. called for a meeting of the Organ of Consultation under the 0.0.0 rule . The meeting was held under the rules of the U S.
 This threat to hemispheric security, since it did not specifically constitute an armed attack, could be considered under Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty . It could also be considered as a violation of Article 6 and . 8 of Rio Treaty, which includes Article 8 and Article 6 of
 The U.S. urged the Organ of Consultation to invoke. It was these Articles which the U. S. urged . The U S. requested the use of these Articles .
 The U.S. requested an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council, President Obama said .
 The U.S. planned to offer a resolution demanding the withdrawal of all Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . The resolution would also demand a withdrawal from all Soviet weapons .
 The role of the U N. would be to supervise and confirm the U.N. position, according to the United Nations . The U. N. is supposed to be a 'supervisor' of the situation .
 American officials believed that it was important to take their case to the U.N. But they were convinced that the Soviet Union would veto the resolution . The Soviet Union was determined to block the resolution, but it was eventually blocked .
 Nevertheless, this approach to the U.N. cannot be construed as a mere token move . Nevertheless, it is not a mere gesture, it will not be taken as a token move, it says .
 If an organization such as the United Nations is to be a viable institution, it is to provide an adequate forum for discussion . Nations must be willing to approach these organizations with all problems, complicated or trivial, whether or not they can be resolved through regional arrangements .
 Abram Chayes offered another insight into the President's speech to the American people . Abram Chayses: "I'm sure he'll be able to talk to the people again"
 Chayes argued that the quarantine's legal basis should be established under Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty . He said the quarantine should be set up under the treaty . The quarantine has been quarantined in the Philippines since 2002 .
 Specific references to Article 51 were deleted from the speech . As a result of his contentions, specific references were deleted . Article 51 was removed as a result .
 Such references, he argued, would have indicated to the other nations that the U.S. did not con70 sider seriously the legal issues involved in the situation .
 The U.S. and Latin American countries felt the need to amend this understanding . The U S. and the Latin American . countries felt it was necessary to amend the understanding .
 Their concern was not directed solely at the Soviet Union and this particular crisis . Instead, they were concerned about their own country's fate .
 This situation, however, brought about their concern and awakened them to the need for a new international principle to apply to all nations at all future times . The situation brought about the concern .
 The alteration of existing principles should include the understanding that a stealthy and rapid deployment of nuclear weapons was intolerable . It should include understanding that the rapid deployment was intolerable.
 The U.S. was going to act whether or not it received a favorable vote from the 0.0. vote . And, the U. S. would act regardless of the vote, the president said .
 "S was threatened, and it was not going to foreclose its inherent right of self-defense," police say . "S. was threatened. S was threatened," police chief says .
 Throughout the speech there were references such as, ""1.73" which signified that the U.S. was going-to act and that that action was justifiable . The speech was made in reference to the defense of the entire Western Hemisphere .
 The U.S. was defeated in the first round of voting this week . It was the first time it had been allowed to vote in a presidential election . The White House has been criticized for its position in the past .
 Organ of Consultation had not yet convened at the time of the President's speech .
 The possibility of not receiving support from the administration had to be considered by the administration .
 The uncertainty, yet the hope, that the quarantine would receive 0.75, is the hope of the quarantine . A S.A. endorsement, he deliberately obscured the question in the speech .
 A S.S. endorsement affected the timing of the actual quarantine imposition . The S.A. endorsement of the S.J. decision to quarantine the region affected the quarantine .
 By unanimous approval, the delegates adopted a resolution supporting the U.S. position .
 Member States invoked Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty . As the President suggested, the President had suggested, it was a matter of principle . The United States invoked Article 6 and Eight of Rio Treaty, it said .
 In addition, the resolution was carefully worded to point out previous 0.0.0 resolution errors .
 S. A S. warnings' that intervention in the Western Hemisphere by Sino-Soviet Powers would not be tolerated would be tolerated . S.A. warned that intervention by the Soviet-Sino-Chinese Powers would be not tolerated .
 A resolution was adopted in January, 1962, at the Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics in Punta del Este . A reassertion of that same resolution was made at an informal meeting of the ministers of foreign Affairs in October,
 The signing ceremonies occurred on the same day the resolution was passed . The signing ceremony was held in honor of the resolution .
 Sorensen, Kennedy, 699. Now, the justification for the U.S. position which had long been discussed, began with the Department of Justice 75 . Now, it is clear that this is not the case .
 S. A S. approval, demonstrates that the legal considerations and actions were a concern of the administration . The administration's approval of the S.A. approval of S.S. approval shows that it was a concern for the law .
 The U.S. has taken legal position for the actions to be taken against the emplacement of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . S. S. was taking legal position against the actions .
 Staff members worked throughout the night of October 22 and the morning of October 23 . Staff members were at the scene of the massive fire .
 By Article 6 of the Rio Treaty, the American States were authorized to deal with aggression that was not an armed attack . Article 6 was the provision for dealing with aggression not armed aggression .
 Organ of Consultation was to meet immediately to deal with the threat to peace and security . When alleged aggression did occur, it was to be met immediately to discuss it .
 If it found that aggression had occurred, as defined under Article 6, the victim could respond in a variety of ways, including the use of armed force . The victim could use armed force if it was found to have committed aggression .
 In the Cuban situation, the Organ of Consultation concluded that Soviet action constituted aggression under Article 6 . In the Soviet situation, it concluded that . Soviet action . constituted aggression . Under Article 6. in Article 6, Soviet action was deemed an act of aggression .
 It recommended that the Member States ""take all measures . . including the use of armed force,"" to deal with the Soviet threat to peace . Further, it recommended that . Member States take all measures including armed force .
 The recommendations of the adopted resolution were consistent with the terms and procedures of the Rio Treaty . 78 the U S. quarantine was in accord with the resolution, the U.S. said .
 The second question which the official U.S. legal position entailed was whether or not the 0.0. 0.2 billion pounds of water was allowed to be used in the United States . The 0.3 billion pound of water is now being used to fund the U.
 Article 52, Paragraph 1, of the Charter recognizes the existence of regional organizations . It gives them express authority to deal with problems of peace and security . Article 52: Par paragraph 1: Of the Charter, the regional organizations have authority to solve problems of security .
 Generally, enforcement action could be equated with quarantine in the Cuban case . The case could be likened to a quarantine .
 The definition of enforcement action had been narrowed in the past within the meaning of Article 53 . However, the definition of the action has been narrowed by Article 53.
 The Soviet Union alleged that the embargo measures recommended by the Organ of Consultation constituted enforcement action . One example shows that in September, 1960, the Soviet Union .
 The Security Council rejected this Soviet plea as the action was only recommendatory in nature . The move was rejected by the Security Council as it was only recommendedatory .
 Article 20 *of the Rio Treaty provides that no Member State shall be-compelled to use armed force . S.S. S.' action was purely recommendatory since Article 20 of the Rio treaty provides that . no Member States shall be . be- compelled to . use armed
 If the Soviet Union had a respect for law, it would be expected that the Kremlin would employ legal concepts when the opportunity presented itself, Thompson says . Thompson: If Lewellyn Thompson's evaluation of law was accurate, it's expected that it would follow suit .
 The Soviet Union objected to its establishment in terms of international law and assumed the role of the prosecution . When the U.S. announced it would impose a quarantine around Cuba, the Soviet Union took up the case .
 Its efforts were directed toward indicting the U S. in the presence of the U.N. , hence, castigating this country before the world . The U.S. should not have tried to indict the U .S. before the . world, he said .
 This chapter will illustrate and analyze the legal objections of the Soviet Union to the imposition of the U.S. quarantine of Cuba and the Soviet defense of its installation of its . missiles on that island . The chapter will also discuss the legal objection of the . Soviet Union's objections to the
 Basis of the Soviet Position is a concept developed by Soviet jurists . It is important to understand the concept of Soviet law .
 This is the principle of ""piracy,f"" or as entitled by Soviet international 77 78 lawyers, ""state piracy" State piracy is a form of state piracy .
 The concept of state piracy emerged as a prominent part of Soviet international legal literature . It was not until the latter part of 1954 that the concept emerged . State piracy was not considered until 1954 .
 Shortly after Stalin's death, Grigori I Tunkin, the official spokesman for Soviet jurists, proposed a new interpretation of international law .
 Moscow considered international law as merely an amalgamation of principles and norms binding upon nations . Up to that time, Moscow had considered international . law as simply an amalgamination of principles .
 He emphasized the utilization of international law as an instrument of policy achievement for the state . He emphasized that international law is a key policy achievement .
 If international law were to be a successful tool for the Soviet Union, its ill-equipped and underdeveloped legal doctrines would have to be strengthened, i.e. . modified to be acceptable to the West .
 Soviet jurists emphasized their exceedingly broad definitions of some existing principles, thus indicating a willingness to apply these principles in a greater number of situations . Rather than undertaking a sound, detailed study of legal principles to strengthen their new found tool, they emphasized their . tool .
 Soviet International Law (Cleveland: Reserve Distributors, 1968), 40. 79 demonstrated the weakness of Soviet legal thought and development, but proved at times to be in conflict with definitions acceptable in international law .
 The Soviet concept of piracy was one principle which was exceedingly broad and proved to be in conflict with the generally accepted standard . The concept was extremely broad .
 An infringement was placed on international navigation and trade, the authors wrote . International transactions in general were encroached upon .
 The classical definition was not restricted to unlawful actions perpetrated for private objectives . Furthermore, the classical definition of the definition of unlawful actions is not limited to unlawful acts perpetrated by private purposes .
 Both private and state vessels could be charged with actions of piracy if their actions constituted a violation of the principle of the freedom of the high seas .
 The idea that an act of piracy could be committed by a vessel of the state was inconsistent with Western principles and has yet to be accepted in general international law . The idea of piracy being committed by the state is inconsistent with western principles .
 The case of the Ambrose Light, 1885, also supported this contention . Specifically, he stated, ""acts of piracy can only be committed by private vessels"
 If a vessel were armed without the authority of the state, that is . that is by private authorization, it was regarded as a pirate ship . Whether it committed an act of violence or not, pirate ships were considered a pirate vessel .
 The court carefully indicated that the actions of a vessel, whose authority was derived from the state, could not commit an act of piracy . Throughout its opinion, the court carefully and repeatedly indicated that .
 It provided the Soviet Union with an opportunity to modify its international legal interpretations of some principles in terms that would be acceptable to the West . The Soviet Union was given a chance to modify some of its international interpretations .
 On the concept of piracy, at least, the Soviet Union refused to pursue this opportunity .
 The accepted concept of piracy referred only to private vessels . Here again, one finds that the accepted concept was that of piracy .
 At the Conference, the Soviet Union objected to the above adopted Article and to other Articles relating to piracy . The Soviet Union was in fact opposed to the resolution .
 Tunkin contended that the concept endorsed by the world leaders was undoubtedly obsolete . He said the concept of the concept is undoubtedly obsolete.
 In our modern world, piracy could be committed by vessels other than private ones, he argued . In the 21st century, piracy is committed by private vessels, not private ones .
 Tunkin argued that the greatest danger of piratical acts did not come from private ships; it came from state-owned warships . The greatest danger came from private warships, he said .
 Soviet objections to the Articles relevant to piracy, its chief delegate signed the final product of the Convention . Despite Soviet objections, the Convention was signed by Soviet delegates .
 April 22, 1958, 152. IV , ""Text of the Articles and Draft Resolutions Adopted by the Second Committee,'"" April 22 , 1958 . IV . ""Text . of the articles and draft . Resolutions adopted by the . Second Committee," April 22 . 1958 .
 The principle of state piracy could be applied to many situations, albeit, these applications might not necessarily be recognized in accepted international law . The principle could be used in many cases, but not necessarily in accepted law .
 The Soviet Legal Position Immediately Prior to and After The Crisis Settlement . The Soviet legal position immediately prior to and after the crisis settlement . The U.S. imposed a quarantine on the transporting of all offensive weapons to Cuba .
 The U.S. had discovered and varified the clandestine installation of Soviet offensive weapons, the Soviet Union deemed it necessary to defend its actions . Now that the U. S. had . discovered and . varified, the . Soviet Union felt it . needed to defend itself .
 Moscow objected to the U S. quarantine and charged that the U.S. had violated international law . Moscow also said the quarantine was illegal and violated international laws .
 The Soviet Union was not convincing in its presentation of legal arguments in either area . It was not convinced in either case .
 The desire to include legal criteria in their arguments demonstrated the influence and the importance of legal considerations in an international crisis situation .
 In defending its actions, however, the Soviet Union offered little sound reasoning . In defense of its actions in the 1980s, the Soviets offered little reasoning .
 Moscow's contention that only U.S. action necessitated the 83 defensive arming of Cuba was necessary . Moscow claimed only U S. action was necessary to arm Cuba and that Soviet assistance to Cuba was for defensive purposes .
 From the inception of the Castro regime, Cuban independence had been threatened by the North American giant . Positive proof of this threat had been best exemplified in the April, 1961, invasion at the Bay of Pigs .
 Kremlin: No nation could refuse to accept military equipment necessary for self-defense . Russia says it valued its independence, not to accept the equipment necessary to defend itself . Kremlin: "No nation, according to the Kremlin, could refuse the equipment"
 Under the Charter of the United Nations, all countries, large or small have the right to organize their lives in their own way, to take such measures as they consider necessary to protect their own security, the UN says .
 As the U.S. found substance in international law to legitimate its quarantine, the Soviet Union resorted to legal principles to support its contention that a quarantine and the manner in which it was legitimated were in violation of international law .
 Moscow's legal case was very general prior to the resolution of the conflict . Moscow initially presented a very general case, but it has now been resolved .
 One has to look very closely at the Soviet presentation to extract the specific grounds on which these general charges were based, for the record is inundated with statements simply claiming U.S. violation of international law .
 The Soviets.held the U.S. quarantine to be an act of state piracy, a position that had been rejected at the last international conference on the law of the sea prior to the Missile Crisis .
 The Soviet delegate to the Security Council argued that the U.S. action was in violation of the principle of state piracy . Nevertheless, the Soviet delegations argued that American action was illegal .
 According to this argument, the U.S. usurped the right to attack ships of other states on the high seas--i.e. to engage in piracy . The United States usurped . the right . to attack . ships of . other states . on the . high seas
 Chairman Khrushchev reiterated the claim to President Kennedy in private letters dated October 23, 24, and 26 . This same claim was reiterated to President . President Kennedy .
 These letters stipulated that blockade was a piratical act and that the Soviet Union would not recognize such an act as legitimate . The letters stipulate that such a blockade was not legitimate .
 This also illustrates that the Soviet Union was determined to establish its own brand of international legal principles, though there had been some internal Soviet disagreement .
 In 1961, Lisovskii, a Soviet jurist, expressed his opinion about blockade in the absence of war . In 1961 he expressed his views on blockade in absent war .
 It was his contention that when such a blockade was in effect the rights of a third state were lawfully curtailed . It was argued that the rights were not curtailed by the blockade .
 No vessel of a third state had the right to pass through the blockade and proceed to a port of the blockaded state, regardless of the content of its cargo . The blockade was imposed on a third-party blockade of Syria in June .
 Kolodkin, a Soviet legal scholar, supported the rights of a third state in the event of a pacific blockade . He supported the right to be a member of a state in a country that was subject to a blockade .
 Dominant Soviet law rejected Kolodkin's claim of the rights of third states . Kolodkins' claim was rejected by Soviet law .
 He had to rely exclusively on Western international law to sustain his arguments . The case was brought up by the British government .
 S. A. S. is openly usurping the prerogatives of the Security Council . The Security Council is the only body empowered to take coercive measures . A S.A S.S. is 'openly usurping its prerogative prerogations'
 The Soviet Union attempted to make it clear that it vigorously supported the U.N. and its programs, and that it would not permit the destruction of the authority of the world body . Soviet Union tried to make a point that the Soviet Union would not allow the destruction .
 The U.S. has sought legal authority through the 0.3 billion dollar bill . The bill was approved by the U.K. on July 1, 2013 .
 Onlygeneral arguments were offered as the Soviets endeavored to exascerbate the emotions of the members of the Security Council and those of world public opinion . Only general arguments were made during the debate .
 It was not until after after the crisis was over that any substantive legal arguments were proffered by Soviet international lawyers .
 Article 2, Paragraph 4, was violated because quarantine was an illegal threat or use of force, he said . Article 2 was violated by quarantine because it was illegal threat, he contended . The quarantine was a violation of Article 2 of Article 4 .
 The substance of the articles in the U.S. Charter to support the view that U. S. actions violated international law is extremely general . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "I am not satisfied with the fact that the actions were illegal"
 No firm legal case could be based on the alleged violation of such general concepts as to ""live together in peace with one another as good neighbors" as good neighbor .
 Like Korovin's, his legal interpretation came after the crisis was over . The legal interpretation of the crisis came after it was over, he says .
 Kolodkin 'attacked the concept of pacific blockade' Butler, 196.88, 196, said he attacked the idea of a blockade . Butler: 'Kolodkin attacked the concept as a form of blockade'
 There were specific instances in which a blockade would be consistent with the Charter, self-defense by an individual state during wartime . Self-defense in wartime would be a violation of the Charter .
 The establishment of a blockade would also be in accord with the Charter if it were invoked by the U N. pursuant to Articles 39, 41, and 42, or if the stipulation of Article 51 were met . Establishing a blockade could also be agreed with the U.N
 The Security Council has the authority to determine whether an act of aggression or breach of peace has occurred . Article 39 specifies that in the absence of a state of war the Security Council can determine if the breach of the peace had occurred .
 Articles 41 and 42 list measures which the Security Council can call upon the Members of the U.N. to apply . The measures are listed in Articles 41, 42 and 41 .
 The criterion that must be met, according to Article 51, is that an armed attack must have taken place . The criterion is that the attack must be carried out in order to reach the country .
 The quarantine was not within the context of any of these situations, U.S. officials say .
 The U S. had disregarded the peaceful settlement obligation of Article 2, Paragraph 3, and had exercised unlawful force in violation of Paragraph 4 of the same Article . The U.S. had also violated the peace settlement obligation, according to the article .
 Article 51 had been breached by the U.S. in the absence of an armed attack, he said . Because a forceful response was undertaken by the . U. S. was undertaken in the . absence of armed attack .
 Regional organization could authorize quarantine only if Security Council had previously approved it . Security Council can only authorize quarantine if it is approved by regional organization .
 Article 53 had not been violated and the quarantine was illegal . As this had not occurred, Article 53 was violated and it was illegal to quarantine . Article 53 has been violated by Article 53 and it is now illegal .
 In addition, legal arguments were not voiced altogether in an international meeting . In addition to legal arguments, the international meeting was also discussed in the background .
 The personal letters from Khrushchev to President Kennedy were another means . Khrushchchev's personal letters were another way to communicate with President Kennedy .
 It has been demonstrated that Soviet legal doctrine with regard to areas concerning the high seas,blockade in this particular case, had not been strengthened, i.e. , modified in order to be acceptable to the West . Moscow had designated international law as a policy achievement .
 In this crisis, the U.S. was most often accused of an act of state piracy, a concept that conflicted with the generally accepted international legal definition of piracy .
 Due to its lack of a convincing legal view of blockade, the Soviet Union had little else to offer in its behalf .
 The existence of a firm Soviet view opposing the legality of pacific blockade prior to 1962 could have stiffened Soviet resistence to the Cuban quarantine .
 The lack of a well defined position may have made it easier to accede to American pressures during the crisis . A lack of well-defined position could have made the crisis easier to deal with .
 Butler: Had the Soviet Union acquired a well defined legal position regarding blockade, the results might have been different . Butler appeared to indicate that the blockade might have resulted in a different outcome .
 If the results had not been different, the manner in which they were reached might have been . Or if the results were not different, they might've been different .
 On December 2, 1823, President James Monroe proclaimed to a joint session of Congress what was to become an instrumental foreign policy principle . President Monroe proclaimed the idea to Congress in December 1823 . President George W. Bush declared the idea in 1823.
 We owe it to candor and to the amicable relations existing between the U.S. and those European powers . We should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere .
 With the existing colonies or dependencies of any European power we have not interfered and shall not interfere. With the . existing colonies . any European . power . We have not . interfered and will not interfere with any European powers, says the UK .
 The developments of the 1960's could not have been even been imaginable to Monroe at the time of his pronouncement of the Monroe Doctrine .
 Some maintained in 1962 that the action of President Kennedy, or rather his inaction, was an unmitigated and unjustifiable disregard for the principle put forth by President Monroe . Yet, there were some who maintained that .
 Those critical of the President's position, including members of Congress and certain noted journalists, contended that the Soviet Union had violated the Monroe Doctrine .
 This study makes no effort to determine through a legalistic analysis whether or not the Monroe Doctrine was legally applicable to the situation under consideration . This study does not attempt to determine if or not it was legal .
 This chapter seeks to explore the views of Congressmen, journalists, and the President toward the Doctrine . This chapter includes views of journalists, Congressmen and journalists .
 President Kennedy publicly announced his official position concerning the developing situation in Cuba on September 4, 1962 . Congress's view Toward the Monroe Doctrine is reflected in the U.S. policy on Cuba .
 When offensive weapons are installed in Cuba, the U.S. would act to remove them . That policy was that when offensive weapons were installed, they would remove them from Cuba . The policy was to remove offensive weapons from the country .
 In his statement, the President. indicated a toleration for defensive weapons but not for offensive ones .
 Having espoused this ""wait and see"" policy, the President came under heavy criticism . The President was criticised for his actions .
 One of the primary areas of criticism was pertinent to the Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine was a key part of the Monroe doctrine .
 I think it is for the Congress of the United States to say whether the Monroe Doctrine is dead or not . I think inasmuch as Khrushchev has undertaken to say that it is dead, it would be well for us to make-very clear in a ringing proclamation that it
 Senator Miller urged Congress to exercise its authority to determine Doctrine's life or death . Other Congressmen took it upon themselves to determine the applicability of the Doctrine to existing situation .
 Senator Kenneth Keating praised the ""profound wisdom"" of President Monroe . Keating specified that Monroe's words applied directly to the present situation .
 The arbitrary distinction between offensive and defensive weapons was felt to be irrelevant . It was felt that the distinction between the two weapons was irrelevant .
 The mere fact that an excessive amount of weapons, weapons of any kind, was being shipped to Cuba was the pertinent question . "The mere fact of the weapons ... was the question," said the author .
 Senator Miller: Weapons may not have been intended for use against the U.S., but their presence in Cuba represented a possible supply of machinery for revolution and guerrilla activities in other nations of the Western Hemisphere .
 The Senator concluded that these weapons presented a threat of armed attack to the Western Hemisphere and, thus, vio5 lated unequivocally the principles of the Monroe Doctrine . Vio5 also concluded that the weapons presented an armed attack .
 Senator Miller held that there was a precedent for his contention . To add credence and strength to his argument, Senator Miller argued that there were a precedent .
 The circumstances in Greece in 1947 and those in the Cuban situation in 1962 were the same, Senator says . According to the Senator, the circumstances in the Greek situation in 1947 was the same . Senator: "The circumstances in Greek in 1947 are the same"
 As the concept of ""armed attack"" applied to the Grecian conflict, the U.S. should apply the same judgment to the Cuban Crisis . The concept of "armed attack" should be applied to any conflict in the Gremain .
 If President Kennedy did not understand the Monroe Doctrine, as claimed by some members of Congress, it is difficult to determine who misunderstood it more, the President or the President .
 President Kennedy did not understand the Doctrine. One is simply instructed that President Kennedy didn't understand the doctrine. Another is instructed that .
 Critics claimed that the Soviet Union had interfered with the affairs of the Western Hemisphere . In support of their accusations, critics contended that the U.S. had violated the Monroe Doctrine .
 They refused to discuss why the Doctrine was applicable to the Cuban Crisis, even though one-hundred and thirty-nine years had passed . The Doctrine was applied to one of the Cuban crises in the 1950s .
 Alterations in the world situation since 1823 apparently were of little concern to the critics . Alterations to the situation in 1823 were apparently not a concern .
 The primary argument regarding its applicability was simply that it was applicable . "The primary argument for the application of the law is simply that the law was applicable," said the author .
 Given the degenerate and illconsidered arguments accusing the President of lack of knowledge about the Monroe Doctrine, it is questionable who misunderstood the Doctrine . 71bid.,, September 26, 1962, 20871.
 As phrased, the Resolution made little reference to the words of President Monroe . The Resolution was passed by the Senate .
 Only if the Resolution relied primarily on the words of the Monroe Doctrine, 8 according to some members of Congress, would it be strong enough . Only if it relied on words of Monroe Doctrine would it have been strong enough, some members say .
 He argued that the Resolution contained no direct statement of opposition to the Communist extension into the Western Hemisphere . He said that the resolution contained no statement of opposing to Communist extension .
 In fact, he contended, the Resolution signified the acceptance for Communist takeover of 9 Cuba . The resolution signified acceptance for the takeover of Cuba .
 Representative Bruce Alger urged that the measure be recommitted to committee and strengthened . Representative Ostertag expressed the inadequacies of Resolution 230 . Representative Alger urged the measure to be reconmitted to committee .
 His major concern was to indicate that the Soviet movement had violated the Doctrine. His concern was that Soviet movement violated the doctrine.
 He also advocated that the second section of the Resolution be amended to read, "We stand behind our President in urging the enforcement of the Monroe Doctrine which has been violated"
 Senator Miller's resolution was liberally sprinkled with references to the Monroe Doctrine and its relevance to the Cuban Crisis . The Monroe Doctrine was used in reference to the crisis in Cuba .
 Reaffirming the principles of the Monroe Doctrine and authorizing and directing the President of the United States to take such action as is necessary to prevent any violation of the doctrine . Reaffirms and directs President of U.S. to take necessary action .
 The President of the United States is hereby authorized and directed to take such action as is necessary to prevent any violation of the Monroe Doctrine . Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the U.S. of America .
 Senator Miller had made it evident that in urging President Kennedy to act, the was President should be conscious of the fact that the Monroe Doctrine was alive and that it had been violated .
 During the month of September, 1962, several journals and noted columnists expressed opposition to Soviet activities in Cuba .
 Many of their own answers to these questions represented inimical attitudes toward the President and the policy position he had asserted . Many of the answers to the questions represent inimistic attitudes to the President .
 Some columnists and journals pointed out the importance of the Monroe Doctrine and the failure on the part of the President to invoke it . President Obama failed to invoke the doctrine .
 An editorial comment from a popular magazine labeled the Monroe Doctrine as ""a foundation stone of U.S. foreign policy" The Monroe Doctrine is a "foundation stone" of American foreign policy .
 If one's neighbor was arming itself for possible offensive purposes, this conclusion was highly probable . Indeed, if one's neighbors were arming themselves, it would be highly likely .
 Given the importance placed on the Monroe Doctrine and the unwillingness of President Kennedy to implement it, some journalists vigorously attacked the President . President Kennedy was not willing to implement the Monroe doctrine .
 The Wall Street Journal expressed much the same opinion in several editorials . He will not intervene to save the people of Cuba from domination by a European power.,""14 .
 On September 5, 1962, that journal opined that "a strong nation has hoped that its weak neighbors will somehow rise and shield it from a danger on its own doorstep" The nation hoped that "weak neighbors would somehow rise"
 The reflection reads, ""If the U.S. continues to appear weak and lets the Soviets move about the Western Hemisphere with impunity, there is no telling how far they will go.,""16 .
 This observation was not always intended as a critical response, though at times it was . It was meant to be a point of reference, though sometimes it was not intended to be critical, though .
 Monroe's words were a simple comparison between the words of Monroe and those of Kennedy . It often was a mere statement of fact, as understood by the journalists .
 David Lawrence suggests that the Doctrine had been interpreted with extensive omissions . David Lawrence suggested that the President's policy had been misinterpreted . Lawrence: 'The Doctrine has been interpreted extensively'
 These omissions, in turn, contributed to the surrender of American initiative, thereby giving the Soviet Union the upper hand . The Soviet Union was defeated by the U.S. in World War II .
 Other writers were more sympathetic toward the President and analyzed his position in relation to the world situation .
 Arthur Krock attributed no fault to the President for narrowing the original scope of the Doctrine . Arthur Krock said no fault was given to President for narrowening the scope .
 He stated that the modification of the Doctrine can be supported as sound policy in an age of nuclear weapons with the facility of almost instantaneous delivery to targets thousands of miles away .
 Not as an official administration spokesman, only as a supporter of the President, Humphrey illustrated his point . Humphrey was not an official official spokesman, but a supporter .
 He argued that the principles of the Doctrine pertinent to European expansion into the Western Hemisphere were as valid in 1962 as they were the day Monroe announced them . The Doctrine of the Monroe Doctrine was still relevant in 1962 .
 He stressed that they could not be applied automatically to all situations . But, he said, they could be applied to help people in all circumstances .
 It was not possible for President Monroe and John Quincy Adams to have been thinking in terms of the Soviet system as it existed in 1962 .
 S had shirked its duty by not having responded to the alleged violation of the Monroe Doctrine with the use of force . The U.S. should have responded to this alleged violation by using force, the government said .
 He instructed critics that the Doctrine did not specifically prescribe how to respond to a violation against it . He instructed them that the doctrine did not specify how to deal with it .
 Being only an implication, however, the response of force was neither binding nor obligatory . Being only implication, it was neither an implication nor a response to the situation .
 Senator Humphrey commented that it was not desirable that a response of force should be binding in all situations in which the Doctrine had been violated . Humphrey said that it would not be necessary to enforce the Doctrine of Force in all cases .
 The Doctrine must apply to many unforeseen and unpredictable circumstances, he said . He explained that the Doctrine must also apply to unpredictable circumstances .
 Humphrey spelled out in unequivocal terms what he called the Kennedy doctrine . Humphrey: "To demonstrate the Doctrine's modernity, to demonstrate its modernity. Humphrey."
 Second, he argued, the portion of the Monroe Doctrine relating to the Western Hemisphere had been strengthened . He argued, "Second, he said, a portion of that's been strengthened"
 President Kennedy had stated in greater detail than the Monroe Doctrine does itself . The Monroe Doctrine was intended to deal with the threat of Communist penetration in this hemisphere .
 This statement by Senator Humphrey is not directly supported by anything that President Kennedy said, says President Kennedy . President Kennedy was not directly involved in this statement, says CNN.com .
 At no time did the President delineate how the U.S. intended to implement the Monroe Doctrine, President Monroe said .
 Monroe Doctrine not shrouded in cloak of Monroe Doctrine . He did emphatically specify the point at which the U.S. would take action .
 The President never did state that his intentions and efforts were conceived in conjunction with the Doctrine . Furthermore, the President did not state that he intended to use the Doctrine of God in his efforts .
 President Kennedy created an analogy between the Monroe Doctrine and the Kennedy doctrine . In so doing, he created a analogy between Monroe Doctrine .
 President Kennedy avoided mentioning the Doctrine, by name, in his public statements . Some observers concerned themselves with the ""necessity"" for invoking the Monroe Doctrine .
 The Monroe Doctrine was the primary justification for the U.S. action against the installation of missiles in Cuba . What he was rejecting was the emphasis of the Monroe Doctrine .
 This section explores President Kennedy's feelings toward the Monroe Doctrine as expressed in both his public and private statements . This section includes his views on the Monroe doctrine as expressed by both his personal and public statements .
 At his press conference on August 29, reporters questioned the President about his interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine .
 The Monroe Doctrine means what it meant since President Monroe and John Quincy Adams enunciated it, and that is that we would oppose a foreign power extending its power to the Western Hemisphere . We would oppose the foreign power .
 Cuba is under attack from the U.S. State Department . Cuba is a major source of opposition to the Cuban government . President Obama has been critical of the Castro regime .
 The U.S. worked in the Organization of American States and other ways to isolate the Communist menace in Cuba . That's why we worked with OAS to isolate Cuba, President Obama says .
 This definition coincides with a promise he made in his inaugural address to all nations of this hemisphere . The definition of the definition of this term coincides with his promise of all nations in the hemisphere .
 President Kennedy seemed to be intimating that the U.S. should act in conjunction with other Latin American Countries, if possible, and not unilaterally . President Kennedy seems to have intimated that the . U. S. should . act in . conjunction with . other Latin . American countries
 It will be recalled that what President Kennedy believed the Monroe Doctrine meant was enunciated by him on August 29, 1962 . The method of carrying it out has been altered .
 This clarification was prior to his official policy statement which distinguished between offensive and defensive weapons . This distinction was made prior to an official statement .
 Department of Justice had been asked to prepare a study on the international legalities regarding the possible prevention of the installation of long-range missiles .
 Heretofore, the discussion of one major section of this article has been deliberately withheld . The discussion of this section of the book was deliberately withheld.
 The Monroe Doctrine exemplifies its value and implementation since its creation . That section gave detailed attention to the Monroe Doctrine, exemplifying its value .
 It concluded that there existed a special legal regime for the Western Hemisphere . Above all, it concluded that . there . was a special . legal regime .
 Initial draft included a direct reference to the Monroe Doctrine, as suggested by Norbert Schlei . The initial draft of this article was published in the U.S. National Security Council .
 Schlei did not agree with Chayes' observation that no other country recognized a special regime of law based on the Monroe Doctrine . He said no other Western Hemisphere publicist has embraced the idea .
 To Schlei, the Doctrine was, and had been, the basis for a special hemispheric regime of law, he says . The Doctrine was the basis of the Doctrine .
 He added that this basis had been acknowledged not only by the U.S. and the Western Hemisphere .
 He felt the world had maintained little resemblance after World War II to any previous forms of security arrangements . He felt that the world's security arrangements had little resemblance to previous ones after the war .
 Bilateral and multilateral treaties had emerged to govern hemispheric relations and security . The treaties were formed in the 1930s and '60s .
 In light of the existing security arrangement in 1962, Chayes concluded that ""it is difficult to believe in 1962 unilateral action by the United States premissed on the Monroe Doctrine, would have been greeted with enthusiasm by other nations in the hemisphere."
 As noted earlier, the President preferred to rely on multilateral agreements . President Barack Obama has said he prefers multilateral deals .
 The President took particular interest in the 0.0. comment that the blockade could be worked out in the . 0.2 billion dollar deal . President Obama said the deal could be reached in the near future .
 The President declined to mention the Doctrine, but there is an for the cation that hedid not disavow the existence of the special legal regime this Americas .
 Dean Rusk, as an official spokesman for the administration, put thought in positive terms . Rusk: "Dean Rusk's job is to put thought into positive terms" Rusk was a spokesman for Obama administration .
 President Obama made reference to offensive weapons found in Cuba in October . President again made such a reference to the discovery of offensive weapons in Cuba .
 The intrusion, he stated, was ""in an area well known to have a special and historical relationship to the United States and the nations of the Western Hemisphere"
 The Monroe Doctrine was never mentioned by name in any public statements of the Chief Executive, nor was ever referred to in the Quarantine Proclamation or the 0.0. Proclamation . Yet, the Monroe Doctrine never mentioned in public statements by the President .
 The specific treaties defied by the Soviets, as stipulated by the President, included primarily the Rio Pact of 1947 and the Charter of the United Nations . The President also stipulated that the Soviets defied the Rio pact of 1947 .
 A legal regime for the Americas did exist in 1962, according to the President . The U.S. President says it was a legal regime in 1962 .
 The instrumental foreign policy principle expressed by President Monroe, subject to various amendments and interpretations, was illustrated in 1962 . Conclusions conclude that Monroe's actions in 1962 were consistent with Monroe's principles .
 Some members of Congress should not have wasted their time trying to bring something back to life that was already alive . Some of Congress members of the public should not be wasting their time .
 President Kennedy understood the Monroe Doctrine within the concepts of the 0.0.0 concept . The Monroe Doctrine was defined within the concept of the Monroe doctrine .
 It was those organizations to which he resorted to help resolve the Cuban Crisis . The Cuban Crisis was resolved by the organizations he was involved in .
 The Monroe Doctrine would have been difficult for other nations to understand and accept . And, with their existence, uniforor laterial action based on the Monroe Doctrine, it was difficult to understand other nations .
 President avoided direct reference to the Monroe Doctrine, but he intimated the validity of principle of self-defense . So, the President .
 Doctrine Dean Rusk's evaluation that the methods of carrying out the Monroe had changed has changed .
 The U.S. S. had no choice but to respond forcefully to the threat of terrorism . The United States. would act to protect its national interest, but the manner of response was less certain .
 Legal considerations played a vital role throughout the advisery stages, the decision-making process, and in the ultimate implementation of the policy agreed upon . However, as has been clearly demonstrated in this study, legal considerations are still a vital factor .
 Legal ramifications became a principal issue for some high level officials long before the President made his decision in late October . It is important to note the initial time at which legal considerations began to play a role in the American assessment of the Cuban U.S. offi .
 The Department of Justice was directed to evaluate whether U.S. could take action to prevent the installation of long-range missiles in Cuba . In this the connection, the Department of . Justice was . directed to . evaluate whether . as a matter of international law, as a . matter
 President Kennedy had not issued a warning to the Soviet leaders . At this time it could not be absolutely determined what the Soviet activity in Cuba was leading'to . President Kennedy did not issue a warning .
 The Kennedy administration understood the need to incorporate the resolution of the crisis . This early influx of legal considerations, and their continual interdemonstrate clearly play in many stages of the developing Cuban situation, the Kennedy administration .
 Had the U.S. become concerned with legal criteria only after the President made the decision to impose a quarantine, this country would have demonstrated to its allies and the Soviet them seridid not give credence to legal considerations, that it did not take ously. nations,
 Limitation may be a factor international which is not undesirable to nations in their attempt to resolve crises . Limitation is a factor that may not be desirable to countries in their attempts to solve crises, according to the UN .
 Both concepts influenced some of the members of the ExCom and President Kennedy . Both concepts were influential in Kennedy's administration .
 Robert Kennedy favored a blockade of surprise Cuba because a blockade would not kill thousands of civilians as a bombing raid most likely would . Robert Kennedy: A blockade would have killed thousands of Cuban civilians as bombing raid would most likely kill .
 He argued his position with deep emotional and personal concern for the moral actions he preferred his nation to take . And so, he argued his argument with deep personal concern .
 The fore-knowledge of means of justification for action influenced those members of the ExCom who ultimately supported blockade . Further, it must not be disregarded that . Foreknowledge of . means of . justification for . action influenced some members of ExCom, writes .
 To know that sound legal justification was available for alternative that a given action would appear to have significantly affected the each member advocated, the author says . The author of the book says that the decision was made by a member of the House of Representatives to take the Senate to a hearing .
 If moral-legal concepts limited, in the minds of some would have men, the type of action which could be supported, could not be supported . The same men would be reluctant to support a policy which could . not be justified within a framework of well developed legal principles .
 A respect for international legal considerations also imposed a major limitation on the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was not allowed to use its own territory .
 The limitation on the Soviet Union, unlike the ones placed on the U S. S. , seemed to be disadvantageous . However, the limitation on Soviet Union was not as bad as the U.S.
 When the Soviet Union began to utilize international law as an instrument for policy achievement, its jurists emphasized exceedingly broad definitions of existing principles . The Soviet Union in the latter part of 1954 began using international law to achieve policy achievement .
 By broadening the concept of piracy beyond that which was acceptable to the U.S., the Soviet Union, in actuality, limited the grounds on which it could effectively present its legal case . The Soviet Union also broadened the concept by broadening it out of the concept .
 Respect for legal principles was by no means limited to the thirteen most crucial days of October 1962 . It was the 13th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision to uphold the Constitution .
 "Only a very few people or only the thinking of one nation. Nor did such considerations influence the thoughts of only a few people," he said . "Such considerations influence only a little of the world," he added .
 The positions taken by both superpowers and their approaches to the resolution of the crisis ememplify the fact that nations are not impervious to legal considerations in international crisis situations .
 Graham Allison, Graham T., Essence of Decision, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1971 . Allison: "Essence of Decision" by Graham T. Allison. Allison .
 William Butler, William E., The Soviet Union and the Law of the Sea, Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1971. Butler, . William E. Butler .
 "The Suez Crisis of 1956,"" Intern ational Law and Political Crisis, edited by Lawrence Scheinman and David Wilkinson, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1968 .
 James Hildebrand, James L., Soviet International Law, Cleveland, Western Reserve Distributors, 1968. Hildebrands, James, wrote a book on Soviet law .
 David Larson, David L., editor, The ""Cuban Crisis"" of 1962, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1963 . Larson, L. Larson, author of "The Cuban Crisis" of 1962 .
 Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., Arthur M., Jr., A Thousand Days; John F Kennedy in the White House, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1965 . Arthur M.'S. Jr. wrote the book, "A Thousand Days," and "John F
 The Naval Interdiction of Offensive Weapons and Associated Material in Cuba, 1962, American Journal of International Law, LVII , LVII, 525545 .
 Reports ""Laws of Maritime Jurisdiction in Time of Peace,"" Reports of the Conference Held by the International Law Association, 1926 .
 Pan American Union, Treaty Series, Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, 1947 . 1947 . Treaty was signed by Pan American Unite States .
 The United Nations, Security Council, 1022nd Meeting, October 23, 1962, S/PV 1022. U.N. Security Council .
 Report: Investigation of the Preparedness Program, Interim Report, prepared by a subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, Senate, on the Cuban Military Buildup, 88th Cong., 1st sess. , May 9, 1963 . Report: Interim report prepared by subcommittee
 U.S., Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations and Committee on Armed Services, Hearings, 87th Cong., 2nd sess., September 17, 1962. Situation in Cuba in Cuba was a major hearing before Congress .