 There was also an increase in the number of Soviet ships arriving in Cuba . The U.S. government feared they were carrying new supplies of weapons .
 President Kennedy complained to the Soviet Union about these developments and warned them that the U.S. would not accept offensive weapons in Cuba .
 As the Cubans now had SAM installations they were in a position to shoot down U-2 spy-planes . The U.2 spy plane was shot down by the U.S. during the Cold War .
 Elections are to take place for the United States Congress in two month’s time . Elections were to be held in two months time .
 The public opinion polls showed that his own ratings had fallen to their lowest point since he became president . The president's approval ratings have fallen to his lowest point in his presidency .
 In his first two years of office a combination of Republicans and conservative southern Democrats in Congress had blocked much of Kennedy’s proposed legislation .
 The polls suggest that after the elections he would have even less support in Congress . The polls suggested that . after the election he . would have . even less . support in . Congress .
 Poll showed that over 62 per cent of the population were unhappy with his policies on Cuba . One poll showed that the Cuban population was unhappy with Obama's policies .
 Republicans attempted to make Cuba the main issue in the campaign. Understandably, the Republicans tried to make it a priority .
 Kennedy hoped this would ensure that a U-2 plane would not be shot down, and would prevent Cuba becoming a major issue during the election campaign . Kennedy hopes this would prevent a U.2 plane being shot down .
 On September 27, a CIA agent in Cuba overheard Castro’s personal pilot tell another man in a bar that Cuba now has nuclear weapons . Castro's personal pilot told the man that Cuba had nuclear weapons, the CIA agent says .
 U-2 spy-plane photographs also showed that unusual activity was taking place at San Cristobal . U.2 spy plane photos also showed unusual activity taking place .
 It was not until October 15 that photographs were taken that revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in Cuba .
 President Kennedy’s first reaction to the information about the missiles in Cuba was to call a meeting to discuss what should be done . President Kennedy's first reaction was to calling for a meeting .
 Fourteen men attended the meeting and included military leaders, experts on Latin America, representatives of the CIA, cabinet ministers and personal friends whose advice Kennedy valued . The meeting was held in Washington, D.C.
 This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . This group is now known as The Executive Committee . The committee is the Executive Council .
 The CIA and other military advisers explained the situation at the first meeting of the National Security Council . The CIA, the CIA and military advisers explain the situation .
 After hearing what they had to say, the general feeling was for an air-attack on the missile sites . The general feeling of the meeting was for air-attacks on missile sites, he says .
 Kennedy decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening . Remembering the poor advice the CIA had provided before the Bay of Pigs invasion, John F Kennedy decided not to wait .
 By this time several of the men were having doubts about the wisdom of a bombing raid, fearing that it would lead to a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made . The committee now has to decide whether to make a decision .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days . The committee argued among themselves for two days before deciding what to do .
 The CIA and the military were still in favour of a bombing raid and/or an invasion . The CIA still believed that an invasion would take place .
 The majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba . However, the majority of committee gradually favoured a naval blockage .
 Kennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen, a member of the committee, to write a speech in which he would explain to the world why it was necessary to impose a naval blockade .
 Kennedy also told the air-force to prepare for attacks on Cuba and the Soviet Union . Kennedy imposed a naval blockade of Cuba and ordered the air force to prepare .
 The army positioned 125,000 men in Florida and was told to wait for orders to invade Cuba . The army was positioned in Florida to wait until orders arrived .
 If the Soviet ships carrying weapons for Cuba did not turn back or refused to be searched, a war was likely to begin . The Soviet ships were carrying weapons . If the ships refused to turn back, the war would begin .
 Kennedy promised his military advisers that if one of the U-2 spy planes was fired upon he would give orders for an attack on the Cuban SAM missile sites . Kennedy also promised to attack the Cuban missile sites if the plane was fired at .
 A public opinion poll in the United States revealed that three out of five people expected fighting to break out between the two sides . The poll also revealed that 3 out of 5 people in the U.S. expected fighting between the sides of the border .
 There were angry demonstrations outside the American Embassy in London as people protested about the possibility of nuclear war . Demonstrations were held outside the embassy in London .
 In the United States, polls suggested that the vast majority supported Kennedy’s action . Polls suggested that in the U.S., polls suggested the majority supported the action .
 On October 24, President John F Kennedy was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the U.S. ships blockading Cuba . President Kennedy was told of the stop by Soviet ships .
 In this he proposed that the Soviet Union would be willing to remove missiles in Cuba in exchange for a promise by the U.S. that they would not invade Cuba . In this proposal, the United States would remove missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote a letter demanding that the U.S. remove their nuclear bases in Turkey . The next day a second letter demanded that the United States remove the bases . The letter was sent to the White House .
 The president and his advisers were analyzing Khrushchev’s two letters . News came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba . The U.2 plane was shot down .
 The leaders of the military, reminding Kennedy of the promise he had made, argued that he should now give orders for the bombing of Cuba . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter . Kennedy refused to accept the terms, instead sending a letter accepting them . The first letter was accepted by Kennedy, but the first was accepted .
 The Democrats increased their majority and it was estimated that Kennedy would now have an extra twelve supporters in Congress for his policies . Kennedy was estimated to have twelve more members of Congress .
 The event appeared to frighten both sides and it marked a change in the development of the Cold War .
 Nikita Khrushchev was ousted from power on 15th October, 1964 . His successors, including Leonid Brezhnev, Yuri Andropov, Konstantin Chernenko and Mikhail Gorbachev provided aid .
 After the fall of communism in the Soviet Union in 1989 this economic help came to an end . However, after the fall, the economic help was ended in favour of the West .
 This entry was posted in Military by admin.uk/Cuba’sCrisis/YouTube/InternetPhotos .