 Kennedy stated that if the USSR removed its missiles from Cuba, the U.S. would end its “quarantine measures” and publicly pledge that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy stated the United States would end the ‘quarantine’ measures and end the threat to
 Map of Soviet ships and quarantine line by author Michael Dobbs, author of One Minute to Midnight .
 Kennedy's judgment that Khrushchev would run the quarantine was incorrect . Kennedy’s judgment was incorrect, but he was correct, he says .
 The Soviet leader had ordered his ships to turn back even before he had sent Kennedy the letter . The letter was sent to Kennedy in October 1962 .
 Secretary of State Rusk’s oft repeated description of a naval standoff with the U.S. never actually happened . Secretary Rusk said “we were eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked”
 Despite detecting some nuclear weapons in Cuba, U.S. intelligence was dangerously incorrect in other facets . Despite detecting nuclear weapons, the United States intelligence was dangerous for the country .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara mistakenly reported to the President that there were 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet “technicians” on the island rather than the actual 43,000 armed combat troops . McNamara reported the presence of Chinese troops on Cuba .
 Some troops, we now know, were within fifteen miles of Guantanamo Bay and were armed with nuclear cruise missiles which could have obliterated the United States base within minutes . Some of these troops were within 15 miles of the U.S. base .
 Fidel Castro was ready to sacrifice his country to nuclear war to promote the socialist cause . Castro was willing to go to war in order to promote his country's socialist cause. Castro was prepared to go all out for his country .
 Khrushchev removed the nuclear weapons from Cuba . Castro’s zeal likely contributed to the decision to remove the weapons from the country . Castro's zeal helped contribute to the removal .
 Cuban and Soviet troops shot down an American U2 over Cuban airspace in October 1962 . They feared it could uncover the position of the Soviet nuclear cruise missiles near Guantanamo Bay . The U2 was shot down because it was believed to have been flying over Cuba .
 That same day, a U2 piloted by Captain Charles Maultsby flew into Soviet airspace, ran out of fuel, and glided home to Alaska . The U2 glided back to Alaska that same day .
 Hours after the U2 plane was shot down over Cuba, the U.S. Navy used grenade-sized depth charges to force a Soviet submarine armed with a nuclear torpedo to surface in the Caribbean .
 McNamara informed the President that depth charges had been used on Soviet submarines . “Those few minutes were the time of greatest worry to the President," says Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev letters are an even more exciting read . The letters were written in the 1960s and '60s .
 The leaders’ ten letters also show the shortcoming of relying solely upon documents to understand history . But the leaders' ten letters show that history is not a matter of history . The leaders' 10 letters show the failure to rely on documents as the best way of understanding history .
 The letters make no mention of the secret deal brokered between RFK and the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . RFK was assassinated in November 1968 .
 The specter of nuclear war still hangs above our world . Alas, despite progress and proclamations, the specter still hangs .
 Of course, he had tactical nukes there but these would and could only be used to defend against an invasion force . He also had tactical nuclear nukes .
 "Everyone was ready to err on the side of caution. Keep in mind from this person who lived in that era, everyone was prepared to err . Keep in the mind .
 We see that there is a military tendency to always go beyond the operational to the strategic realm that is only civilian prerogative, hence we have numerous idiotic strategic analyses that really make you wonder how complex these guys can really think and how many balls they can juggle at one time
 JFK's close-ups to JFK are extremely mendacious, insisting that we must all accept their lies as truth for the sake of national security . To their end, debating several of the close ups to JFK, I found them to be very mendacious . Even 20 years after JFK was
 The incompetence of decisions made was due to the fact that the ideas of men deemed loyal to a fault was taken over by men deemed able to get into Soviets’ shoes . The ideas of those deemed loyal were taken over from those of those who could get into Soviet shoes .
 Khrushchev was determined to make a global symphony that would cause JFK to trip and remain off balance . JFK was not playing Cuba but a piano of crisis keys across the board . Bottom line, Khrushche was not . playing Cuba .
 With no nuclear warheads in Cuba, Khrushchev had nothing to bargain with . No nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 JFK could have brought on, together with Khrushchev, the 1963 end of the Cold war that so many academics on the left erroneously thought to the case . Had JFK not been assassinated by a U.S. ally fearing that we would force it to abandon its developing nuclear weapons
 Rand Paul was right to call Carly Fiorina an isolationist . Carly Fiorina is a Republican presidential candidate . Rand Paul says Carly Fiorina would be an "isolatedist" candidate for the GOP .