 The number of marks is given in brackets at the end of each question or part question . The candidate's marks will be shown in brackets .
 This paper consists of 6 printed pages including the cover page . For Examiner’s Use Section A Section B Total This paper is printed on 6 pages .
 You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, including those you were told to use . Use these questions to help with your own answers .
 In October 1962, the world was on the brink of nuclear war as the USA and the USSR jostled over the issue of missile weapons in Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were jostling over Cuba's missile weapons .
 Earlier on from 1959 to 1961, Fidel Castro had turned to the Soviet camp for support as his policies took an increasingly anti-U.S. tone .
 The US, has always been the aggressor in the conflict between Cuba and the USA, repeatedly tried to invade and assassinate Fidel Castro . The US has also enforced an economic embargo and committing acts of terrorism against Castro .
 A British cartoon published in ‘Punch’, a weekly British magazine of humour and satire .
 3) Explain how the weaknesses of the League of Nations and Hitler’s nationalistic goals for Germany contributed to the outbreak of World War II in Europe . OR 3) Tell how Hitler's nationalistic goal for Germany was to win the war in Germany .
 Award 4 m for one inference with reason with reason, 5 m for two inferences with reason 1 . L4 L3 + giving reasons from Source A 4-5m Award for one inferential with reason 2-3m Award .
 Khrushchev had no respect for Kennedy ‘s ability / Kh had a condescending attitude towards Kennedy’s ability . Kennedy was not impressed with his ability as a politician .
 The evidence is the source said K was ‘inexperienced and weak…’ This was based on the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . The source said that K was 'inexpert experienced and weak’
 Khrushchev did not think that Kennedy would be able to sustain his resistance against the Soviet Union with regard to Cuba . Kennedy would eventually give in / would eventually giving in / Kennedy would not be able .
 L4 Answers No, cross-referenced, explained provenance with close 6m analysis of the date of the source and Cross-reference to Contextual Knowledge . L4 Answer No, explainedprovenance with 6m Analysis of the Date of the Source .
 Source B is reliable in telling me that the Soviets had no intentions of aggression . Source B also said that the Soviet Union had no intention of aggression. Source B told CNN.com that .
 Source B can be supported by Source C which shows that it was the USA that intruded into Soviet sphere . The USA surrounded the Soviet Union with missiles and bases in Japan, West Germany and Turkey .
 Khrushchev already thought that Kennedy was a weak and inexperienced President, so it is unbelievable that Kennedy would take an aggressive stand with regard to Cuba . Source B can be challenged by Source A .
 The conversation Khrushchev had with his son as quoted in the evidence suggests he intends to escalate the crisis by bringing the challenge directly to Kennedy . Khrushchev planned to do so as he thought Kennedy would acquiesce when confronted with the missiles in Cuba .
 The author of the source was a Soviet historian and it would not be surprising that he would take an anti-American stand .
 This source was in 1971, when the Soviet Communists were still in power and had tight control over expressions of opinions . Furthermore, this source was released in 1971 when the Soviets were in power .
 It was only from 1986 with glasnost, and later in 1991, the collapse of the Soviet Union, that Soviet historians began to express opinions different from the government . The collapse of Soviet Union in 1991 was only when historians began expressing opinions .
 Cartoon pointed out that the U.S. seemed to be the aggressor or had overreacted . At the height of the tension, the world seemed to remember only the missiles in Cuba .
 The tree planted in Kennedy's garden intruded more into Khrushchev's garden, which symbolized the Soviet sphere of influence . Kennedy's tree was bigger than the one planted in his garden, and was bigger and intruded .
 The Americans had already established their influence in Turkey, Japan and West Germany .
 The American missiles in Turkey were aimed at the southern part of the Soviet Union . Japan and West Germany were close allies of the USA, flanking the eastern and western side of the USSR .
 The British had always been close allies of the Americans, and it is surprising that they had published a critical view of the U.S. It was surprising that the British had published such an opinion of America .
 Source E shows the Americans depicted in a negative light, as a pirate carrying an atomic weapon and throwing the lasso, ‘blockade’ around Cuba .
 Source D agrees in terms of how USA was the aggressor in the CMC as it states ‘The United States was ready to use nuclear weapons to defend Berlin’ which indicates that the USA was prepared to use force against USSR .
 The source describes how Fidel Castro allied Cuba with USSR after the Bay of Pigs incident . The incident was a botched assassination attempt conducted by the USA on Castro’s life .
 Source D does not support E in the dismissive / disrespectful way it referred to Cuba, as a ‘small useless piece of land’, just like Berlin was to the Americans . Source D says it is not the same way it refers to Cuba as a 'small useless land'
 E portrayed Cuba in a heroic light, showing Castro standing tall and proud and ready to fight against the Americans . In contrast, E portrayed the Cuban leader as a heroic figure .
 L2 Identifies sources that show yes and No 2m Yes – B, E No – A ; C (about K over-reacting to Cuba being a Soviet base – the branch ‘Cub’ intruding into America’s yard) D (where Sergei said
 Stalin’s use of terror and propaganda helped him to consolidate his control over the Soviet Union . Explain Stalin used terror, propaganda to consolidate control of the country .
 The use of propaganda is one of the methods Stalin employed to control Soviet society . Award 7-8 marks for two 8 explained factors .
 His method of control was over culture, mainly in the areas of education and arts, he says . His method was to control education and the arts .
 This was done with the aim of controlling the perception of the people would have towards Stalin and his government . Stalin's government was trying to control the perception that the public would have about him .
 The existence of Stalin's opponents were either down played or totally erased . Stalin’s enemies were either played down or erased. The existence was either downplayed or erased .
 Both students and teachers were closely monitored in order to ensure total compliance in the teaching and learning of such contents . Students were monitored closely to ensure they were taught the correct contents .
 As for the arts, only a positive image of Stalin and his programmes could be portrayed by the artists and writers . Stalin's 'positive image' should be portrayed in the arts as well as his programmes .
 This was done by placing pictures and erecting statues of Stalin all over the country . Stalin's statue was erected in Stalin's honour in the Soviet Union . This was the first time Stalin had been photographed in Russia .
 The image of him was always portrayed positively such as being fatherly, cheerful, popular and intellectual . He was portrayed positively as being popular and popular .
 Young Russians were brainwashed into worshipping and supporting him . As a result, young Russians have been brainwashed to idolise him .
 His use of terror involved the use of purges, detention and labour camps . The secret police were used to spy on his people, he said .
 Stalin purged the communist party of potential threats, and consolidated his grip with Trotsky to overthrow Stalin and the party . Following the Kirov affair, Stalin was purged from the Communist Party .
 Positions vacated by those purged were filled up with those loyal only to Stalin . Through this, he assured himself of their loyalty since they owed their advancement to him .
 Some 39 million were executed and another 3 million imprisoned in labour camps . Majority of which were largely innocent . In total, 39 million people were executed .
 Stalin’s Five-Year Plans were a disaster for the Soviet Union in some ways . I agree that Stalin's Five-year Plans were an embarrassment for the country .
 The plans focused on heavy industries, as a result of which any Russians were denied basic consumer goods that their Western counterparts enjoyed . The plans were aimed at heavy industries . Russia's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures .
 Revenue generated from sales never made it to the USSR Treasury, incurring billions of roubles in losses . The Black Market would make things worse because revenue generated from . sales never went to the Treasury, causing billions of Russian losses .
 Workers were pushed to their limit in order to make work targets . Furthermore, the workers were . pushed to . their limit .
 Parts of the economy faced underproduction because factories were held up by shortages of materials . Some parts of the country's economy was held up because of underproduction .
 This resulted in a great deal of wastage when some parts were overproduced . This led to some parts being overproduced and some of the parts were not produced properly .
 In the haste to meet production figures, the quality of products was often sub-standard and potentially hazardous . The quality of the products was also often sub standard and dangerous .
 The programme is geared towards the production of weapons and resources for war . The programme was aimed at producing weapons for war purposes .
 The promise they gave to families about improving their lives and increasing consumer goods was not kept . The promise to improve consumer goods and increase consumer goods were not kept, they say .
 The five –year plans did help to speed up the industrialisation of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Union had three Five-Year Plans from the 1920s to the end of the 1930s . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most successful countries .
 Under the first Five Year Plan, output was to be doubled in five years for steel, iron and electricity . The first five years of the plan was to double output of steel and iron .
 As a result, hundreds of new factories were built, and the industrial workforce expanded . Hundreds of factories have been built in China's history .
 The Second Five-Year Plan from 1933 to 1937 set new targets for heavy industries . It also gave more attention to industries that produced goods such as clothing .
 Soviet Union thought another war might occur and produced more military products . However, from 1934 onwards onwards, Soviet Union produced more products . Soviet Union believed another war would occur .
 Transport and communication networks improved greatly during this period . The Soviet Army was able to move quickly in the event of a war .
 The increased production of oil, coal, and steel production enabled the Soviet Union to rise greatly and helped to propel the Soviet Soviet Union forward .
 By 1941, his role was pivotal in the success of Soviet resistance against the Nazi invasion . He proved pivotal in helping Soviet resistance to Nazi invasion of Russia .
 The Soviet people would probably have suffered even more under Nazi occupation . The Soviets suffered even worse under the Nazi occupation of Nazi Germany .
 Stalin’s industrialization programme were a success even though they resulted in widespread short term suffering, etc . Explain how the weaknesses of the League of Nations and Hitler's nationalistic goals for Germany contributed to the outbreak of World War II .
 Although the LON could ban the export of oil to Italy, they did not do so . The LON did not ban the oil export to Italy .
 Britain and France tried to shirk their responsibility as they were caught in an embarrassing bind by Italy . France and Britain were caught up in a bind by the Italian government .
 The LON did not have the political clout or military might to force countries to give up their weapons . Then, the LON had the power to force nations to hand over their weapons. Then, it was not as strong as today's military might .
 When Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931, the League of Nations merely condemned Japan for doing so, resulting in the Japanese representative walking out of the meeting . The Japanese representative left the meeting after the Japanese invasion .
 Germany was emboldened to increase the size of its armed forces, starting an arms and naval race . Germany was then emboldened by the success of the war, starting a arms race .
 Britain, the most powerful member of the LON broke the treaty and caused other members to following its example . Britain broke its own treaty and led other countries to follow suit . The treaty was signed by the British government in 1973 .
 The failure of the LON was a factor because it showed clearly that it was in no position to stop Hitler from further aggression . Therefore, the failure was a major factor in Hitler's aggression, the author says .
 Hitler 's nationalistic goals were to restore the territorial greatness and military tradition of Germany . Hitler ‘s . nationalistic . goals were . restoring the . territorial greatness of Germany and restoring the military tradition .
 He resented the Treaty of Versailles for imposing harsh military and economic terms on Germany, and was determined to defy and undo these terms . For this reason, he resented this for imposing military, economic terms .
 He also resented the Treaty for breaking up the Austria-Hungarian Empire, and creating the independent states of Poland and Czechoslovakia . He considered parts of these countries as rightfully belonging to Germany .
 Germany's nationalistic goals led Hitler to remilitarize Germany step by step, beginning with conscription to beef up the army to 550,000 strong, followed by the navy and the air force . All violations of the Treaty of Versailles led to the war's end in
 His threat to use military force enabled him to force through Aunschluss, seize Sudetenland and Czechoslovakia . His threat of use of military force was used to seize Czechsoslovakia and Czechs .
 The appeasement policy was not a mistake as there were many 3problems at that time that did not allow Britain and France to afford a 6 war with Germany . There were many problems at the time that would not allow the two countries to go to war . L2
 The casualties and losses during World War One were still huge . Britain and France did not want another war that will cost more young soldiers lives .
 World War One and the Great Depression left Britain and France with no surplus money left to fight with Hitler . They could not afford to fight the war with Hitler, as they had no surplus funds left .
 The United States did not join the League of Nations, and without the support of the US, no country can go against Hitler . Moreover, the most powerful country at that time, the U.S. was not joined .
 Without a strong army, navy and support from the US, the appeasement policy was justifiable as it allows Britain and France to grow their army and navy, so that they can compete with Germany . Without the US support, the UK and France were able to grow its army and
 Germany will definitely lose to Costa Rica in the World Cup final . It was a wise idea not to go against Germany without fully prepared, as they will lose . It bought time for them, and it was a smart idea to be fully prepared .
 The appeasement policy did help France and Britain in some way, but it was a mistake as it had made Hitler bolder and more ambitious . Hitler had made him bold and ambitious, says historian David Frum .
 The appeasement had made Hitler think that France and Britain were weak in dealing with him, and each time Britain and France gave in, he asked for more . Hitler thought that each time he was given more, he wanted more .
 Britain and France agreed to give part of Sudetenland to Hitler when he wanted to conquer it . The two countries agreed to hand over part of the region to Hitler .
 This eventually emboldened him to conquer Poland which led to World War Two . This led to the defeat of Poland and the start of World War II .
 I think appeasement only made the situation worse, it only delayed the war . Thus, I think Appeasement . only made it worse . Appeasment only made a war worse .
 Appeasement was a mistake also because it had built the suspicion in Stalin . Appeasment was also a mistake because it was also built in Stalin's suspicion of Stalin .
 Hitler hated the communists and wanted to control the USSR and the League of Nations was not preventing Hitler from doing so . Stalin was worried that he might be threatened as Hitler hated communists . Hitler was not prevented from taking over the USSR .
 Stalin asked for help from the league but Britain and France were not interested from Hitler . Hitler asked the league for help but the league was not interested .
 It deliberately led to the sign of Nazi-Soviet pact by Stalin, when Hitler offered this to him . Hitler offered it to him, and it led to a pact being signed by Stalin . Stalin offered Hitler this to Stalin .
 Poland agreed to divide Poland among themselves; without the worry that he had to fight two fronts . They also agreed to split Poland among them; without worrying that he would have to fight both fronts .
 The appeasement was a mistake as it helped Hitler to have more chance to invade other the countries that had never belonged to Germany and Nazi-Soviet pact definitely . Thus, Hitler was able to invade those countries that never belonged .