 Arkhangelsk quietly left Cuban port of Mariel on December 1, 1962 and headed east across the Atlantic to its home port of Severomorsk near Murmansk .
 This inconspicuous departure in fact signified the end of the most dangerous crisis of the Cold War . The U.S. ended its most dangerous Cold War crisis in the 1950s .
 What was called ""the Beloborodov cargo"" in the Soviet top secret cables — the nuclear warheads that Soviet armed forces had deployed in Cuba in October 1962 — was shipped back to the Soviet Union on Arkhangelsk .
 Documents: Soviet nuclear warheads stayed on Cuban territory for 59 days . According to the documents, the warheads arrived on the Cuban territory on October 4 . The arrival of the ship Indigirka in October 4 was accompanied by Arkhangelsk .
 U.S. intelligence at the time had no idea about the nature of the Arkhangelsk cargo . United States intelligence had no knowledge of the cargo .
 Arkhangelsk carried 80 warheads for the land-based cruise missile FKR-1, 12 warheads for dual-use Luna launcher, 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28 bombers . In total, 98 tactical nuclear warheads were carried out .
 Four other nuclear warheads, for torpedoes on the Foxtrot submarines, had already returned to the Soviet Union . 24 warheads for the R-14 missiles arrived in Cuba on October 25 on the ship Aleksandrovsk, but were never unloaded .
 The 36 warheads for the R-12 missiles that came to Cuba on the Indigirka also left on Aleksandrovsk, being loaded at Mariel between October 30 and November 3 .
 In the last twenty years, numerous scholars have published on the issue, each introducing additional evidence and moving the debate forward step by step .
 Today's posting brings together the most important pieces of evidence documenting the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba during the Missile Crisis . This is the most authoritative story so far based on documents so far .
 This posting includes three newly translated documents, never available before in English, which provide detailed accounts of the Soviet deployment of missile forces and nuclear warheads . Many of the documents included here were previously published in English by the Archive and Cold War International History Project .
 Former CIA photointerpreter Dino Brugioni takes pictures of FKR and Luna missiles in Cuba, 2002 . Both reports read as understated but pointed condemnation of Soviet General Staff's planning of the Cuban operation .
 Statsenko's report describes shortcomings in initial reconnaissance and camouflage and ignorance of local conditions on the part of Operation Anadyr planners . Statsenko: "It is not the first time I have seen this type of situation"
 Beloborodov's report points to difficulties with storing nuclear warheads in tropical conditions, unanticipated transportation problems, and the camouflage issues . The report also points to unanticipated transport problems and camouflage problems .
 Soviet support troops in Cuba were given orders to unload the tactical warheads from Aleksandrovsk, and did that during the nights of October 26, 27 and 28 . At that moment, the Soviets were planning to leave tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 On the basis of these two reports and all other Soviet documents available today, the following chronology outlines the Soviet decisions relating to the tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Original plan for Operation Anadyr included deployment of 80 FKR cruise missiles with nuclear warheads . May 24, 1962 -original plan for operation was to deploy 80 missiles . May 25, 1962 .
 Khrushchev augmented the original plan by adding 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28 bombers and 12 short-range nuclear missiles for the dual-use system Luna/Frog . The original plan was added to the original original plan .
 October 4-Indigirka arrived in Mariel with 36 warheads for R-12, 36 warheads  for FKR, 12 warheads for Lunas, and 6 nuclear bombs for Il-28s . October 4: Indigirko arrived in . Mariel . with 36
 Presidium discussed the possibility of using tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion of Cuba .
 Aleksandrovsk arrived in La Isabella with 24 warheads for R-14 and 44 warheads for FKRs . October 23-Aleksandrovssk arrived with a total of 44 FKR warheads .
 Aleksandrovsk ordered back to Severomorsk still carrying the 24 warheads for R-14s . The 36 R-12 warheads were probably loaded at Mariel harbor and departing November 3 .
 November 2-Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Cuba as Khrushchev's special envoy . November 2 . November 3-Mikoyan's visit to Cuba was a visit to the island .
 November 8-Mikoyan suggested transferring ""all remaining weapons"" to the Cubans after special training . November 8: Mikoyan suggests transferring remaining weapons to Cubans . November 9: "All remaining weapons" to be transferred after special military training .
 Mikoyan informed the Cuban leadership that all nuclear weapons would be removed from Cuba . November 22-Mikoyan told Cuba's leaders that the removal of nuclear weapons was temporary .
 The strategic missiles, R-12 and R-14, could only be used by direct orders from Moscow . The missiles could be used only by orders from Russia .
 To the best of our knowledge, Soviet commanders in Cuba did not have the physical capability to use them without the codes sent from the Center . The codes were sent to the Center by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 General Gribkov stated in 1992 that such authorization was given by the central command in the event of a U.S. airborne landing in Cuba . Initially, at the Havana conference in 1992, General Gibkov stated that such . authorization was . given by . the central . command
 Defense Minister Malinovsky presented a draft order providing for such pre-authorization, but that order was not signed by Malinovski . He presented the draft order to the defense minister, but he did not sign it .
 According to Gribkov and other Soviet participants of the crisis, such authorization was given by Malinovsky orally to commanders before their departure for Cuba . According to the Soviet participants, such a decision was made orally to commander .
 This provides indirect support to the argument that it was the understanding of the field commanders that tactical nuclear weapons would be used to repel a U.S. attack on Cuba . This provides . .
 Even if the official pre-authorization order was not signed by the Defense Minister, we can conclude that in all likelihood, tactical nuclear weapons would most definitely be used in a first salvo if United States forces had landed in Cuba .
 Presidium discussion of October 22 shows that the Soviet top leadership envisioned this scenario as well . The Presidium discussed this topic on October 22 . Presidium members of the Soviet Union are expected to live in a similar scenario .
 Khrushchev promised to withdraw ""the weapons you call offensive"" from Cuba . The world rejoiced after Khrushchems agreed to withdraw the weapons .
 Almost 43,000 troops and all the nuclear warheads were still in Cuba . However, the Soviet leadership knew better- almost 43,00 troops and nuclear warheads still in the country .
 Khrushchev sent his right-hand man, Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, to Cuba to oversee the removal of the missiles, salvage the Soviet-Cuban friendship, and negotiate the future Soviet-Cuba military agreement .
 Documents suggest that the Soviet intention was to withdraw offensive weapons but keep a massive military base in Cuba and make no more concessions to the U.S. The documents suggest that as of early November 1962, the Soviet intentions were to withdraw the offensive weapons .
 All tactical nuclear weapons, IL-28s and combat troops except missile support personnel would remain on the island . The deployment would be limited to a small group of troops .
 This position, however, evolved significantly in the dynamic days of the November crisis . This position has evolved significantly since the crisis began, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In talks with the Cubans, Mikoyan gradually realized that this would not be an easy relationship . In his talks with Cubans he gradually realized he would not have an easy time with them .
 He thought perhaps the best solution could be to strengthen the Cuban defenses but not to keep a large Soviet base . He suggested strengthening the Cuban defense but not keeping the base .
 None of the tactical weapons were mentioned in the Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence . At the time it seemed to him that it would have been the most natural and logical way to resolve the crisis .
 Cuban personnel with the assistance of our specialists will gradually start to operate all Soviet weapons remaining in Cuba . He requested permission from the Central Committee to tell Castro regarding the future military agreement that rather than maintaining a Soviet military base, the Cuban personnel will begin to operate the weapons .
 As these personnel become prepared, gradually the Soviet people will be replaced with the Cubans . The Soviet people are expected to be replaced by Cubans in the coming years .
 Presidium member Gromyko in a cable approved Mikoyan's new line for negotiations with the Cubans . On November 9, Presidium members approved the move . The new line was approved by Presidium's Presidium .
 Khrushchev agreed to the U.S. demand to withdraw IL-28 bombers, creating a new crisis with the Cubans . The Cubans now had good grounds to expect further Soviet concessions .
 We will be able to transfer them to you when the Cuban military officials become familiar with them. The Cuban military will be familiarized with them .
 Cuba's military equipment is incomparably more powerful than any equipment that Cuba currently has . Cuba has no current military equipment currently has, it is not known if Cuba will be able to use the equipment .
 Issa Pliyev, commander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba] currently has the Cuban forces in Cuba . He has been in Cuba for more than two decades .
 "Over the next several days, the Cubans, from the Soviet point of view, started behaving even more erratically, making the situation more dangerous and unpredictable," the Soviet leader says . The situation became more dangerous, unpredictable, he says .
 The Soviets could not really control their Cuban ally, Mikoyan says . If they were going to maintain Cuba as an ally, they would need to accept the fact that the Cubans would not always follow the Soviet script .
 In these circumstances, transferring nuclear weapons to such an ally would be too risky . Transfer of nuclear arms to such a ally is too risky, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Mikoyan understood that it would be his task to reconcile his hosts to the loss of all the nuclear weapons which they had been promised . He understood that he would be tasked with reconciling his hosts .
 He suggested this course of action to the Presidium in a cable written right after midnight on November 22 . The cable was written after midnight that night .
 Mikoyan met with the top Cuban leadership to explain this decision . The decision was made during a late night conversation on November 22 .
 Castro tried to persuade Mikoyan to leave the tactical weapons in Cuba . Castro said he wanted the weapons removed from Cuba .
 The Cuban leader pointed out that the Americans were not aware of the presence of these weapons on the island . Cuban leader said the Soviets did not have to keep a military base in Cuba but could train the Cuban military .
 He begged the Soviet representative to leave him the weapons that meant so much to the Cubans . He begged him to leave the weapons, which he said were worth so much .
 On November 25, Soviet support troops started pulling the warheads from the storage facilities to the port of Mariel and loading them on the Arkhangelsk . The warheads were pulled from storage facilities and loaded into the ship .
 The loading was completed and the ship departed Cuba on December 1, 1962 . The ship was the last ship to leave Cuba .
 Previously declassified U.S. documents published by the National Security Archive show that United States intelligence did not detect any of the nuclear warheads in Cuba .
 U.S. planners assumed the missile warheads were present in Cuba, but discounted the possibility even after seeing the dual-capable Luna/Frog in reconnaissance photographs as early as October 25 .
 U.S. analysts mistook the FKR cruise missiles for the conventionally-armed Sopka coastal defense missiles . The FKR missiles would be smoking radiating ruin from an FKR nuclear warhead if the United States invaded . The United States never understood the likelihood that the U
 Report of Major-General Igor Demyanovich Statsenko, Commander of the 51st Missile Division, about the Actions of the Division from 07.12.62 through 12.01.1962 .
 The 51st missile division was deployed in Cuba as part of the Soviet Group of Forces in Cuba . It was deployed by the Soviet Union in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Report points to shortcomings of the General Staff planning for the deployment . Report describes difficulties of the deployment as a result of the difficulties .
 Memoir of Lieutenant General Nikolai Beloborodov, head of the Soviet nuclear arsenal in Cuba . He was head of Soviet Union's Cuban nuclear arsenal .
 This memoir-report was written by Nikolai Beloborodov in the 1990s, most likely on the basis of his own contemporaneous after-action report .
 It provides details of transportation, deployment and removal of nuclear warheads from Cuba . It also details the transport, deployment, removal of the warheads .
 Soviet support troops were given orders to unload the tactical warheads from Aleksandrovsk, and did so during the nights of October 26, 27 and 28 . The Soviets were planning to leave tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba at that moment .
 It is not clear whether the warheads for R-12 missiles were loaded back on Aleksandrovsk before it sailed back to Moscow on November 3 . Other evidence suggests that was the case . It's not clear from this report whether it was true .
 The original General Staff plan of Operation Anadyr was presented to the Soviet Presidium on May 24 . It was finally approved by the Soviet leadership on June 10, 1962 . The Soviet leadership approved the operation in June 1962 .
 Defense Minister Malinovsky presented these proposals on expediting the shipments of weapons to Cuba and augmenting the deployment with additional tactical nuclear weapons . The proposals were presented by the Russian defense minister .
 Malinovsky and Zakharov sent a revised deployment plan to the Commander of the Soviet Group of Forces . Khrushchev's decision on September 7, 1962, prompted a revised plan for deployment .
 The addition of Lunas and bombs for Il-28s was approved by the top leadership, but Khrushchev canceled the deployment of R-11s .
 Orders to the 12th Main Directorate-the unit of the Defense Ministry responsible for nuclear warheads-confirm the addition of 12 Luna warheads and 6 bombs for Il-28s .
 General Anatoly Gribkov, one of the principal planners of Operation Anadyr stated in 1992 that the memo reflected the oral instructions that commanders received in Moscow before their deployment to Cuba .
 The existence of this draft suggests that it was Malinovsky's preferred option but Khrushchev probably had not approved it-therefore the memo was never signed . The existence suggests that the draft memo was not signed .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba had the capability to launch tactical nuclear weapons . Commanders in Cuba said they had received pre-delegation instructions orally .
 Malinovsky Report on Special Ammunition for Operation Anadyr, 5 October 1962 . Report on special ammunition for the operation was published on October 5 .
 The Defense Minister's report to Khrushchev about the progress of shipping of Soviet armaments to Cuba specifically states that Aleksandrovsk was fully loaded and ready to sail . The report also states that the Defense Minister of the Soviet Union had already been fully loaded .
 Moscow issues strict orders prohibiting local commanders from using tactical nuclear weapons . Moscow orders local commanders not to use tactical weapons .
 Gribkov: "Local commanders were instructed in the spirit of the September 8 memo- that in case of an American attack, they had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons. This concern on the part of the . central leadership gives indirect support to . the central leadership .
 Khrushchev wanted to make it very clear that under no condition were tactical nuclear weapons to be used . Under no condition would be used, he said . The Soviet Union wanted to use tactical nukes in the Cold War .
 The telegram instructs Pliyev that tactical nuclear warheads would most likely be left in Cuba under his control . It also instructs him that tactical warheads would be most likely to be kept in Cuba .
 Anastas Mikoyan came to the conclusion that it would be inexpedient to keep a full-scale Soviet military base in Cuba . The Soviet-Cuban Missile crisis ended with the Cuban leadership refusing to keep the base .
 He requested Presidium approval for him to present this idea to the Cubans . The Presidium has approved the proposal .
 The proposal was approved in the telegram signed by Gromyko on the next day . It was approved by the next morning .
 Mikoyan was trying to assure Fidel Castro that the Soviet Union was not abandoning its Latin American ally . Khrushchev decided to remove Il-28s from Cuba . The Soviet Union would make no further concessions to the U.S.
 He informed Castro that the CC CPSU passed a resolution to leave all the remaining weapons in Cuba and to transfer them to the Cuban Army over time .
 This telegram orders Pliyev to load all tactical warheads on steamship Atkarsk and send them back to the Soviet Union . The telegram was signed by Soviet Union President Vladimir Putin in June 1944 .
 This might have been a draft cable, anticipating an imminent policy change, or there might be a mistake in the date . The cable was transcribed from an original that was not available .
 On November 22 all tactical nuclear weapons were still in Cuba . They only started to be pulled to the Mariel pier on November 25 and that loading lasted till November 30 . We know from Beloborodov that on November 22 .
 They were loaded and shipped back to the Soviet Union on Arkhangelsk, not Atkarsk . Also, they were loaded back to Ark hangarsk, instead of the USSR, and shipped there on the same ship .
 General Gribkov's oft-cited assertion that all Soviet tactical weapons left Cuba on November 20, 1962 . This telegram was probably the basis of his oft quoted assertion .
 This telegram was sent by Mikoyan either right after midnight on November 22, or late in the evening on November 21 but put into his logbook as of November 22 . The telegram is believed to have been sent to the Kremlin on November 23 .
 Mikoyan was scheduled to have a meeting with the entire top Cuban leadership . The meeting will discuss the future of the Soviet-Cuban military agreement .
 Mikoyan came to the conclusion that leaving tactical nuclear weapons in the hands of the Cubans was dangerous . The Soviet Union had an ""unpublished law" prohibiting transfer of nuclear weapons to third parties .
 Most likely, Mikoyan made up this ""law"" for the occasion, but it seems to have stuck as a precedent for future Soviet policy . The law was likely made up for the purpose of the occasion .
 This cable signed by Gromyko approves Mikoyan's suggestion from the previous night . It categorically states that he was to tell Castro and top Cuban leadership that all tactical nuclear weapons would be removed from Cuba .
 Mikoyan admitted that they were still in Cuba and that the Americans had no idea they were deployed, but that the Soviet Union decided to pull them back due to the ""unpublished law"" prohibiting the transfer .
 This memcon provides an extraordinary glimpse into the microcosm of the Soviet-Cuban relations . It helps one understand the depth of Castro's humiliation at the Soviet hands .
 The resolution of the crisis meant that he was abandoned by his Soviet ally and left to the mercy of the American imperialists . The Cuban security now depended on the United States non-invasion assurances, which the Cubans were not inclined to trust .
 CIA retrospective in January 1963 of overhead photography of the Aleksandrovsk's movements placed the ship at Mariel on November 3, at sea on November 10, and back at Severomorsk on November 23 with missiles on deck .
 Beloborodov's account has Aleksandrovsk leaving Havana on October 30, but it is likely that he is referring to the order from Malinovsky . Belobarodov: "I'm not going to Cuba. I'm going to Havana. It's
 R-12 warheads may have remained for the Arkhangelsk to carry . Less likely is the possibility that the warheads may still be in the arsenal . The warheads may not have been left behind .
 Defense Ministry cables transcribed by Russian veterans for publication in 1998 . One dated November 20 orders the commander of the Group of Soviet Forces to load tactical warheads on ""steamship Atkarsk" But Beloborodov's account specifically cites the Arkangelsk, not the
 The Defense Ministry transcription may be misdated, or if the date is correct, perhaps the Ministry was already anticipating the political decision .
 In this document, the number of the missile division is given as the 43rd missile division, but in the fall of 1962, it is consistently the 51st missile division . The number of missile divisions in the Soviet Union has been consistently consistent since 1962 .
 Most likely, the number was changed when the division was reorganized in the summer, according to the General Staff directive of June 13 .