 Almost all of the work has focused on the geopolitics of the crisis, including what went on in the Kremlin and the White House . Each side's diplomatic and military moves and countermoves have been seen as key to solving the crisis .
 This article examines how the U.S. people experienced the Cuban missile crisis . It examines how public opinion changed because of the events, and how the crisis changed .
 The research was supported by the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Association . The research has been published by the Kennedy Library .
 From after Fidel Castro's overthrow o 1959 until 1961, typically less than 5 percent of the pub mentioned Cuba as the ""most important problem"" facing the country . In the immediate aftermath of the Bay of Pigs invasion o 9 percent mentioned Cuba .
 After that small peak concern steadily subside 1962, less than 2 percent of mentions dealt with Cuba . After that peak, concern slowly subside .
 In late August there were a series by exile groups and increasing news reports on the Sovi in Cuba . The Sovi is a group of exiled Cuban dissidents .
 President Kennedy revealed to-air antiaircraft missiles in Cuba on September 4, 1962 . President Kennedy also warned the Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba .
 The president again spoke Cuba situation on September 13, and on September 20 th resolution authorizing the use of force to counter a Sovie Cuba. Cuba .
 In response to these developments, Cuba became a people . Cuba has become a people in response to the situation . Cuba is now a nation .
 On October 22, Pres. Presi the nation announced that the Soviet Union had inst missiles in Cuba and demanded their withdrawal . Then, Presi, the nation, demanded that the missiles be withdrawn from Cuba .
 U.S. would enforce a blockade of offensive missiles if missiles were removed, he said .
 A Gallup poll in the field f showed that concern over Cuba remained high at 25 p than in late September . Concerns over Cuba remain high in a Gallup poll .
 Of the 1,126 people in these two com viewed between October 27 and November 4, the most viewed were people in the U.S. of those viewed .
 A Kennedy ended the blockade on Nove of the settlement, but before the cri over Cuba stood at 31 percent . The blockade ended in 1959 .
 By September 1963, only 3 portant problems had been reported in the U.S. by September 1963 . Only once in the mention of the problem was mentioned in the book .
 The most important problem figures for Cuba alone understate the extent of the public's concern over the confrontation . Moreover, the most important issue figures for the Cuban public are understated, says CNN's John Sutter .
 All mentions of foreign affairs more than doubled from a relatively low level of 35 percent in August 1962 to a near-record high of 72 percent in November 1962 .
 Even during the peak of the Vietnam War, mentions of foreign problems only reached 58 percent of Americans mentioning foreign issues .
 Many of the non-Cuban foreign-affairs issues mentioned were tied to the missile crisis . Many of these issues were related to the crisis .
 Only 7 percent mentioned unrelated foreign policy matters such as Berlin and China . Only 7 per cent mentioned unrelated matters such a matter of interest in Berlin .
 The Cold War rivalry between the Soviet Union and the United States inated international relations . From the end of World War II until the fall of communism in the late 1950s, the Cold War was dominated by the U.S.
 Two of the main issues during this long c were whether the Cold War would turn hot and erupt into a nuclear War III and who was winning it . The Cold War was never hot enough and ended in a nuclear war .
 In general, it was high during the Ko percent fearing another world war within 5 years . The Berlin crises of the early 1960s, and oth back up to 53 percent in September 1961 .
 The chances of war between the U.S. and Russia had decreased because of the Cuba situation, with only 28 percent saying that it had increased . In minds of 28 percen crisis 65 percent ha said that the chances of a war increased .
 Only 24 percent thought that a world war would occur within 5 years . Only 24 per cent thought that the war would be within five years .
 The 5 percent who thought war would not happen was the highest during this period . This was also one of the lowest levels in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The outcome of the missile crisis was a lower fear of nuclear war . Thus, the outcome of this crisis was lower fear .
 While the public was concerned about nuclear war, it was not overwhelmed by this fear . Moreover, the public did not fear nuclear war and did not feel overwhelmed by it .
 War was in early 1963 the public's number two concern among items on the list . Less than a quarter of people saw it as the top problem, and almost no one saw fallout shelters as the most pressing issue .
 Of all post-World War II presidents, Kennedy rank had a higher average than any other president . Kennedy had the highest average of all presidents during his term in office . People sa victory and as an advantage that they ex-President Kennedy used as a victory .
 Publi approval of past presidents is higher than their av were in office for presidents deemed successes and lo failures . Publi Approval of presidents deemed failures and successes is higher in the polls than their predecessors .
 President Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile tributed to his strong overall job approval scores . President Kennedy received strong approval scores for handling the missile launch .
 Just 9 percent mentioned foreign policy as only 8 percent had heard negative comments on his 3.5 percent .
 State polls by Harris in late September and early October ind opposition to going to war with Cuba . Only 10 percent endorsed invasion, bombing, or other belligerent action, in September 1962 .
 In the spring of 1963, 6-7 percent wanted military action, 6 percent wanted to "get Russian troops, missiles, etc. o Cuba,"" and 1-2 percent favored getting rid of Castro .
 Sentiment did shift as U.S. policy in response to the disclosure of offe missiles changed . Sentiment shifted as United States policy changed .
 In September 1962, 22 percent wanted the United St. to ""keep out, hands off,"" and 25 percent did not know what action shou taken toward Cuba .
 Only 3 percent still endorsed a hands-off policy, and uncerta dropped to 17 percent . Only 17 percent of Americans still endorse a hands off policy .
 The questions asked in the four surveys from September 1962 to May 1963 were identical, but different open-ended codings used hamper comparisons . The questions were asked in four surveys .
 A special Gallup poll ta the nation found that 84 percent approved disapproved, and 12 percent ""withheld 1962). Overall, during Kennedy's presidency, the public consistently rejected invading Cuba .
 Immediately after the Bay of Pigs invasion, 70 percent supported working with Latin American countries and the United Nations . 63 percent backed a trade embargo and 44 percent supported aiding anti-Castro groups with money and military supplies . Just 24 percent endorsed the United States military overthrowing Castro .
 Many Americans opposed the U.S. sending troops to overthrow Castro because they feared the consequences . Many Americans were opposed to the overthrow of Castro in Cuba .
 Two-fifths thought that within 3 years the people of Cuba would topple Castro . Two-fifty-folds thought within three years that the people would topple the Cuban leader .
 "I felt that everything I was now doing was unimportant-meaningless-and I felt a fear, for us and the world," she says . She says she felt that "everything I now do is unimportant"
 Remembrances of the crisis emphasize a sense of dread and doom . Similarly, remembrances . of the . crisis emphasize the sense of . dread . of doom .
 "That evening after the President's address, my parents moved my bed into their bedroom and told me they wanted me to 5.5. As one typical recall goes, "My parents moved me into their bed in their bedroom"
 The data were not archived along with standard Gallup polls at the Roper Center . Not even a copy of a questionnaire with exact question wordings has been found . The data was not archived .
 This may be the first example of an ""instant"" poll after a presidential address . The poll is the first of its kind in the world .
 NORC Illin panic than these a disruptions in thei previous week (the less than one-third for the difference any changes becaus not do because of the difference because of i of those having ch third (or 4 percen activities)
 People in Cuba did not worry about nuclear war, but fear of a nuclear war . The Cuban people were worried about the threat of nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Of the 13 percent mentioning Cuba as what people worried about the most, 1 percent referred to possible military service, 10 percent to the general situation, and 1. percent to survival concerns . 1 percent of those mentioning Cuba were worried about military service .
 Thoughts about the "" spread, on 93 percent of people's mind health occupied fewer people's thought during the previous spring than in previous spring .
 Overall, f during the crisis than during more n . Moreover, it is particularly notable t percent in the spring to 29 percent du . Likewise, the Cuban situation was conversation .
 NORC Illinois study finds 25 percent had spent a lot of time with the Cuban missile crisis . Positive affect were down during the crisis . Yet despite this clear drop in positiv piness rose during this same period .
 More focused were items about chan 6. However, this item did the Cuban missile crisis or specificall more nostalgic beliefs that things wer .
 The Cuban Mis Mis In retrospect Ame important events o the event that they . Thirty-eight percent selecting Rights, and 22 perc other events like t treaty. Like and clearly present by worries over th problematic activit did not panic, was logically intact .
 Yes No Don't Know Date N 7/8-7/13/51 26 64 10 1,500 1/6-1/11/52 22 64 14 1,000 . 12/11-12/16/52 20 68 13 . 1/3-3/
 On Which one is the least Most Least Important Important Important Communism in the U.S. 31. percent of Americans say Communism is Communism . On which one of the most important things is Communism?
 A peaceful year, more or less free of in year with much international discord . 2013 was a peaceful year with little international discord.
 Some people say that the U.S. should send our armed forces to Cuba to help overthrow Castro . Others say that Cuba should be armed to overthrow the Castro regime . The Cuban government has been overthrown by Castro .
 Go into Cuba, use troops, invade, go whip them, co aerial observation 7 6 Get Russian troops, missiles, etc., out of Cuba 6 6 Get rid of Castro 1 2 Support Cuban underground, exiles, anti-Castro forces, etc. Support Cubans underground,
 Gallup, 4/28 agree or disagree Agree Disagree No Opinion N Work with United Nations . Some people say that the United S American countries-through the U should follow .
 All-Out War Likely Likely Likely War Unlikely Should 19 36 Should not 69 57 No opinion 12 7 18. More than 70% of Americans say they want war .
 Mentions of Cuba 11.2.2 Non-Cuba mentions 24.8 Not different 63.8 Missing .2 22.2 Not Different 63.2 Missing .
 People Mentions Cuba 41.3 34.3 . Possibly being called to serve in military 5.4 . Possibly getting called to service in the military 5 .
 What kind of things do y People Ment Cuba 22.7 13.3 . Possibly being called to serve in military 2.3 Possibly having a military job 2.7 . Being called to service in the military 2 .
 5.7% less worried, or more worried now . Same 38.9% more worried . Less worried 54.5% more concerned . Missing/don't know . 9% more likely .
 Psychological changes: Now I'm going to read you several things that some people think about. Now I'll read you some things I'm thinking about. Then I'll show you some of the things I think about in a new book .
 I am going to show ways people feel at different times, and you the past week . I am showing how people feel in different times and how they feel .
 Cuban Change Affects Spring 1962: Missile Crisis, Missile Crisis and Fall-Spring 1962 . How often percent of Americans feel Cuban change affects Spring 1962? How often do you know?
 The question interested in the way people are feeling these day ways people feel at different times . The question is: How do you know how people feel these days?
 The score could go from a low of 0 for someone with no positive affect to a high of 12 for some who experienced each affect often . The score of 0 goes from a 0 to a 12 for someone who experiences each affect more often .
 Cuban Change Symptoms Spring 1962a Missile Crisisb Fall-Spring Dizziness 17.3 15.4 -1.9 General aches and pains 49.9 . Tell me how often you [NOT AT ALL/ONE/ONE OR T symptom and change i Cuban Change symptoms Spring
 Some things people do are things people think about, including things they think about . Now let's shift from things you do to things you think about to some things you don't think about.
 The missile crisis in Cuba and the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba are the most important things people remember most about Presi . Presi was the first Catholic elected to the White House and won the 1960 presidential election .
 Harris, 12/6 U.S. has you think it was moment nor a dark moment. Harris: "It's not a moment of darkness nor a moment. It's a moment for the United States"