 American spy planes discovered the Soviets had installed missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba with enough range and power to destroy much of the southeastern U.S. The Soviets installed the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of hitting the southeastern United States .
 President John F Kennedy was advised to send in the military to take out the missiles, but instead demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove them .
 The Soviets publicly removed all the missiles, the U.S. promised never to invade Cuba . The United States removed similar American missiles that had recently been installed in Turkey, near the Soviet border .
 Kennedy's capitulation about Turkey was concealed from the American public at the time . Kennedy was a president of the U.S. during the early 1960s . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy's secret deal was a secret from most Americans . It contributed to the myth of Kennedy being a strong president who stood up for the U.S.
 President Kennedy meeting with Soviet Ambassador Andrei Gromyko at the White House . President Kennedy met with Soviet ambassador Andrei in 1963 .
 Sending nuclear weapons 4 Intelligence failure and response 5 Photography 5 Intelligence failure . Intelligence failure 4 Intelligence failures 5 Photography failure .
 Jupiters 7 American options 8 Soviet Missiles in Cuba . Naval Quarantine 10 Public Alert 10. Jupits 10.
 Jupiters in Turkey 12 Khrushchev blinks . Aftermath 14 Bibliography 14. Jupits in Turkey . Khrushvic blinks 13 Aftermath
 The Communist logic, following Lenin, was that the economic health of capitalism depended on its exploitation of the wealth of the Third World . Lenin said that capitalism's economic health depended on exploiting the wealth in the third world .
 Russia would give military and diplomatic support to anti-colonial, anti-capitalist proCommunist movements . Russia would support pro-Communist pro-colonial pro-communist movements, Russia says .
 The new slogan of the left across the globe was that America, run by and for the benefit of giant corporations, had succeeded fascism as most dangerous agent of imperialism . America succeeded fascism, the new slogan said . America is run by corporations, the slogan was that fascism succeeded fascism .
 Reston: "I had an hour alone with President Kennedy immediately after his last meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna" Reston reported . Reston said he met with Kennedy "immediately after the last meeting" in Vienna, Russia .
 Khrushchev assumed, Kennedy said, that any American President who invaded Cuba without adequate preparation was inexperienced . Kennedy said that any president who then didn't use force to see the invasion through was weak. Khruschev assumed that any U.S. President .
 Khrushchev's first important opportunity to employ the strategy came in 1962, when the U.S. seemed on the verge of rolling back the first pro-Communist regime in the Western Hemisphere, Cuba .
 In the first months after the bearded guerrilla captain came to power in 1959, Washington was willing to overlook reports that he was a Marxist–Leninist, not merely agrarian reformer .
 President John F Kennedy ordered the CIA to destabilize his regime in 1960 . By 1960 Cuba had become a Soviet satellite; and President Kennedy ordered it .
 Kennedy cut off dollar trade with Cuba, while the CIA stepped up its sabotage . Rumors abounded about a new invasion, this time by the Marines .
 The rumors were in fact disinformation designed to frighten and weaken Castro Castro . Castro was the Cuban leader in Cuba . Castro is the Cuban president of Cuba .
 As a loyal Democrat who had learned the ""lesson"" of Korea, Kennedy believed in the containment strategy, and rejected rollback . Kennedy was a staunch Democrat .
 Obviously it was far too little to defeat an American invasion that seemed imminent . The U.S. invasion was imminent .
 Without consulting his strategists, Khrushchev concocted a reckless scheme . Cuban leaders, terrified for their own safety, eagerly accepted it .
 Fidel Castro rejected warnings that acceptance of the missiles would make Cuba a helpless pawn of the Kremlin . Castro ordered his intelligence agencies to stop studying the matter .
 Khrushchev sent in 70 ships loaded with a billion dollars worth of munitions in July, 1962 . 42 IL-28 nuclear bombers, 24 surface-to-air anti-aircraft missile complexes and 42,000 troops .
 Most ominously, he delivered 42 medium-range SS-4 ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads . He also began loading 24 intermediate-range IRBMs .
 They could hurl H-bombs to any target from Washington to the Panama Canal . The U.S. military says it has a long list of possible targets .
 Besides deterring an invasion, they would help redress NATO's lead in strategic weapons . Above all the missiles on America's doorstep would enhance Soviet prestige across the world, writes David Perry .
 Kennedy believed Soviet assurances that there were no missiles were true . Kennedy had warned Moscow there had better be none . Intelligence failure and response to Kennedy's warning was a failure .
 A breakdown in data gathering prevented the CIA from convincingly refuting Moscow's cover story . The CIA was unable to convincingly refute Moscow's claim that the U.S. had infiltrated Crimea .
 The missiles were discovered by a lone U-2 reconnaissance plane on October 14 . The missiles are believed to have been launched by the U.S. Air Force .
 Kennedy was stunned, and immediately assembled a high-level emergency group, called ""ExComm" The group proposed a solution to the crisis . Kennedy was shocked by the proposal, and called it "ExComm"'
 President Kennedy and his brother Robert Kennedy distrusted men in uniform . They brought in close friend General Maxwell Taylor, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs .
 The other chiefs distrusted Taylor's dovish viewpoint and his inability to articulate their urgent advice . Taylor was sacked by the White House after a series of scandals .
 The Pentagon's civilian voice on ExComm was Defense Secretary Robert McNamara . Defense Secretary McNamara was the voice of the ExComm .
 McNamara largely ignored his generals and admirals and generally took a dovish position . McNamara was largely ignored by the military and took a more cautious stance .
 ExComm decided that the SS-4 and SS-5s would not upset the strategic balance of power, but nevertheless represented a challenge to American prestige . They had to be removed, even at the risk of threatening war . ExComm: "They had to remove even at risk of
 Navy Secretary Paul Nitze forcefully argued the services' viewpoint that missiles were highly destabilizing . Nitze was added to ExComm to argue that missiles are destabilizing and dangerous .
 At its critical September 19, 1962, meeting it decided that the intelligence contained no evidence that the Soviets had sent nuclear missiles to Cuba . The meeting unanimously concluded that on balance they would not do so in the future .
 Kennedy trusted USIB and repeatedly denied there were Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy trusted the USIB to deny there were any offensive weapons .
 Intelligence photo showing Soviet IRBM missile site in Guanajay Cuba Oct 23 1962 . High-altitude U-2 aircraft flown by the United States Air Force, took photographs that were analyzed by the National Photointerpretation Center .
 The United States could tolerate a gradual evening out of the strategic balance if it took several years and so permitted political adjustments as it proceeded, if not formal ones, to do so . The U.S. could tolerate the gradual evening of the balance, if it was taken several years .
 Washington could not accept a swift, sudden, and secret shift in the strategic equation by using a new threat of nuclear weapons that would cause massive political and diplomatic upheaval .
 Photography was essential in determining the range, power, and completion of Soviet missiles . However, these reports were potentially of such importance that they required unequivocal verification .
 The challenge was being able to run a photographic mission above range of detection, and Surface-to-Air-Missile range . The challenge is to run the mission above detection and range of missiles .
 Lockheed designer Clarence L ""Kelly"" Johnson led a project to create a light, high altitude aircraft capable of carrying photographic equipment over hostile territory . The project was led by Clarence Johnson, a Lockheed designer .
 New lens designs are needed to function adequately at these altitudes . New lenses needed to be able to take photos of the world's tallest peaks .
 James Baker was one of the contributors of lens designs to function at approximately 65,000-80,000 feet . Baker's lens designs can function at around 80,000 ft.
 After a U-2 Mission was flown, duplicates were made from the film taken . Photographic Interpretation of the film .
 One set remained at the base for safekeeping, the other was flown to Washington to be analyzed . The two sets were sent to the U.S. for analysis .
 The film would then be delivered to an elite team of CIA photo interpreters, who worked primarily in a vacated automotive building, to remain unknown . The film was then delivered to a team of elite team, including a CIA photo interpreter .
 The CIA was able to keep the Government informed on the type, range, and completion of the missile sites . Using different methods, the CIA kept the government informed of the type and range of the sites .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights were run by the United States during the 1950s and '60s .
 The RF-101C ""Voodoo" and the F-8 ""Crusader" were able to update the United States in detail on the status of the Soviet missiles . The new KA-18A Stereo Strip Camera was developed in the 1980s .
 Low-level flights provided critical information, but also presented a higher risk . These low level flights provide critical information but also present a risk . Low level flights are critical information .
 By contrast America had far more weapons capable of reaching the Soviet homeland . By contrast, the U.S. had more weapons that could reach the homeland .
 In early 1962, an Air Force squadron of 15 Jupiter medium range ballistic missiles became operational in Turkey . Two squadrons were deployed in Italy but due for retirement . Jupiters were operational in early 1962 .
 The ExComm heard that Jupiters were ""obsolete" They concluded that they were therefore worthless . Lack of good military advice they concluded they were worthless .
 The Jupiters were set up in the open and burned kerosene and liquid oxygen . They burned liquid oxygen and kerosine in an attempt to escape the atmosphere .
 A Jupiter on alert could be launched on 15 minutes notice; the comparable Soviet missiles probably needed four or five hours to launch . The comparable Soviet-era SS-4 SS-5 missiles were launched on a short period of time .
 Missiles in Cuba could knock out much of the U.S. bomber force . If Kennedy permitted the first 40 to stay, Khrushchev could have shipped hundreds more .
 Third, the ""air"" solution would use tactical air power to shoot them out . The ""air" solution would be used to shoot out the terrorists .
 Op-Plan 3-14 would land one Marine and five Army divisions and seize the entire island within two weeks . Op-Plans would land 1 Marine and 5 Army divisions, seize the island within 2 weeks .
 Joint Chiefs recommended the air solution, but ExComm perhaps misunderstood what a 'surgical strike' would entail . ExComm may have misjudged what a surgical strike would mean .
 Robert Kennedy vetoed the air solution, saying it would be too much like Pearl Harbor in reverse . Robert Kennedy said it would have been 'too much like a Pearl Harbor' in reverse.
 The sea option was chosen; it would not require any casualties, and it would block the arrival of nuclear warheads . It would not need any casualties and block nuclear warheads from entering the sea .
 The SS-4 itself was capable of striking primary targets such as Washington, Houston, and anywhere in the southeastern United States . The SS4 was able to strike anywhere in southeastern U.S.
 U-2 photos installations of the SS-5 ""Skean" - an IRBM capable of delivering a nuclear warhead up to 2,530 miles . The U.2 photos were taken by the U.S. Navy in the 1950s .
 With installations of the SS-5, the Soviet Union had the capability of striking most of the U.S. With installations, the Soviets were able to strike the United States .
 SA-2 missiles, a SAM or Surface-To-Air-Missile, were placed in the Syrian airspace . Further complications were added to the crisis by the placement of the missiles, the SA-1 missiles .
 These missiles had the ability to shoot down any aircraft, even the high flying U-2 . These missiles were able to shoot out any aircraft - even the U.2 .
 When operational, these sites would pose a great danger to the photographic missions, necessary for the U.S. to keep informed on the crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On October 27, 1962, a U-2 photographic mission over Cuba was shot down by a Soviet SA-2 SAM missile . The mission was part of a photographic mission that took place over Cuba .
 Some on the ExComm called for air strikes upon that SAM site, or further military action . Some called on air strikes, or more military action, to be called upon .
 On October 21, 1962, an agreement was reached by the ExComm after much debate, to place a ""Quarantine"" around Cuba, in order to prevent more Soviet Missiles from being delivered .
 The call for a quarantine was a difficult one to make, because a blockade was technically an act of war, and needed caution to avoid a misunderstanding . A quarantine was difficult to make because of a blockade of the Strait of Hamer .
 The next step would either have been a complete blockade, or perhaps the air strike option, would have been either a complete blockage or an air strike .
 The United States made vigorous efforts to gain international support, through organizations such as the Organization of American States and the United Nations . The U.S. made efforts to win international support .
 UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Zorin, and publicly showed the U-2 photography for the first time, gaining international support in the process .
 The United States had stated early in the crisis that if the missiles were not voluntarily removed, the Air Force would remove them through aerial attacks . The U.S. had stated that if . not voluntarily . removed them, the missiles would be removed .
 The U.S. prepared its final offer to Moscow . The United States had been in talks with Russia for more than a decade .
 Robert Kennedy paid a secret visit to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin regarding the Jupiter type NATO missiles stationed in Turkey . Both realized that this may be the deciding factor in deciding the outcome of the crisis . Robert Kennedy visited the Soviet ambassador to discuss the issue .
 Kennedy revealed that he had been authorized to agree to the removal of the missiles, but not under pressure or in any way a publicized quid pro quo manner . Kennedy said he had agreed to remove missiles from the U.S. missile base, not under any pressure or under any way
 This could not be done publicly or unilaterally in order to comply with NATO agreements, as well as world opinion of both parties, says CNN's John Defterios . "This is not the first time the U.S. has done so," he says .
 Dobrynin rushed off to get a message through to Moscow . Kennedy agreed, and Dobrynins rushed to get the message through . Dobrynkinin and Kennedy agreed .
 America had already considered removing Jupiter IRBM stations from Turkey due to their being rendered obsolete from the advent of submarines with nuclear launch capabilities . Even before the deal, the U.S. considered removing them from Turkey .
 On October 28 agreed to dismantle, crate and remove the missiles, and never to station offensive forces on the island . He obeyed the quarantine/blockade .
 Kennedy demonstrated firmness in crisis, and avoided serious losses in midterm elections . Kennedy avoided serious midterm losses in midterms . Kennedy has been criticized for his lack of leadership in the past .
 He established the pattern of command-post micromanagement over military matters . The pattern was expanded during the Vietnam war .
 Conservative Republicans rallied behind Senator Goldwater and editor William F Buckley . Conservative Republicans were dissatisfied that Castro had escaped the noose .
 The rejected invasion option sent the GOP to an aggressive rollback policy of the sort represented by the rejected option . They redirected the GOP from an aggressive policy of rolling back the Iraq invasion .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev became friendlier in public after war . Realizing how close they had come to war, they became friends and became friends .
 The treaty was designed to hobble China and other countries trying to build their first bombs . They signed a test ban treaty that eliminated nuclear testing above ground or in space . It was primarily designed to cripple China .
 Kremlin vowed never again would Communism be humiliated by raw American nuclear superiority . The Kremlin vows never again .
 The U.S. response was to add multiple warheads to each missile . The number of strategic warheads thereby doubled from about 5,000 in the 1960s to about 10,000 after 1976 .
 Che Guevara during the event attempted to have them launch nukes into the United States, and maintained he would have done it had Khrushchev not ordered them to stand down in a special issue of the Socialist newspaper The London Daily Worker . The incident also contributed to the S
 China and the Maoists reacted by viewing the post-Stalinist Moscow leadership of the global Marxist revolution in the nuclear age as reckless . The Maoists viewed the Moscow leadership as reckless, according to China .
 The communist monolith was broken over more than just how to implement Marxist theory . It was broken by the struggle to find a solution to the problem of Marxist theories .
 By 1964, China had developed its own nuclear bomb and began developing its own foreign policy . China also developed a nuclear program to develop its own own nuclear weapons .
 Washington and the CIA were slow to recognize the Sino-Soviet split . They continued to view the worldwide communist movement as being directed from Moscow for another decade .
 Kennedy's removal of the Jupiters in Turkey, and his refusal to consult with any allies during the crisis, raised doubts in Germany about America's commitment to Berlin . France pulled its forces out of NATO, and ruined a proposed multilateral nuclear force .
 The Europeans, increasingly prosperous, felt sufficiently well protected . The Europeans were increasingly prosperous in Europe .
 They were annoyed when Washington wanted them to assume a larger fraction of defense costs, yet never consulted in critical emergencies . They say they were annoyed that they were never consulted on defense costs .
 Castro, was now immune from an American invasion, though the dollar embargo continued . Castro, now a free man, was able to keep his country from being invaded by the US .
 He kept taking Moscow's subsidies until 1992, but independently launched an adventuresome program of subverting pro-capitalist governments throughout Latin America and Africa . In 1992, he kept taking the subsidies, but launched an independent program to subvert governments .
 Tens of thousands of Cuban combat troops and military advisers were sent to shore up left-wing regimes as distant as Angola and Ethiopia, and as close as Nicaragua .
 Hundreds of thousands of people would die in civil wars supported by Castro . It would take the United States three decades and tens of billions of dollars to finally neutralize his efforts .
 The economic blockade was briefly lifted by Barack Obama in 2016 as one of the latter's last attempts at pushing through his radical left-wing agenda on the U.S. The blockade was eventually brought back by Donald Trump in 2018 .
 The Cubans see this as one of many crises; The Soviets view it as a confrontation that took place in the Caribbean . The United States perceives this as a multidimensional time bomb with international consequences including the future of Berlin .
 Frankel, Max. Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War excerpt and text search .
 Fursenko, Aleksandr, and Timothy Naftali. Vietnam . Vietnam. China. Vietnam. Vietnam, Laos, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958-1964 , Russian perspective online edition online edition . Garthoff, Raymond, Raymond. Garth Off, Raymond .
 Munton, Don, and David Welch. Welch. The Struggle over Policy. online edition . online edition of this edition of the book .
 Focus on ExComm meetings excerpt and text search; also online edition . Taubman, William. William. Taubmann .
 ExComm investigated new information, and thought out all possible options, for President Kennedy to consider . The ExComm looked at new information and considered all options for Kennedy .
 The ExComm met at unusual times and in unusual manners in order to keep the situation secret for the time being . The situation is currently being kept secret .
 Third, the missiles would reduce but not end Soviet strategic inferiority . The missiles would also reduce Russia's strategic weakness, but would not end it .
 Moscow had never in the past sent nuclear weapons outside their own borders . Fourth, Moscow never sent weapons outside its borders . Moscow never used nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union .
 McCone, a businessman, had no expertise in intelligence, Cuba or the Kremlin, and undercut his credibility be departing for a month-long honeymoon as the crisis began to escalate . His warnings were ignored .
 Kennedy had decided these missiles were useless and provocative and wanted to remove them . Kennedy decided to remove the missiles and wanted them removed from the U.S.
 He therefore was eager to secretly trade them to get rid of the missiles in Cuba . The deal was made with the Cuban government to get the missiles out .
 Eventually, the Soviets agreed to dismantle the missiles in exchange for American pledges not to invade Cuba and to remove United States missiles from Turkey at a later date .
 This page was last modified on February 18, 2022, at 01:43 . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page . Back to the page you came from .