 A further consequence of the Cuban missile crisis was the removal of Khrushchev in October 1964 . The removal of the Soviet Union was a result of the crisis .
 Before the dismissal of Khrushchev and the death of Kennedy, there was a thaw in international relations . The thaw was due to be made in the wake of the assassination of Kennedy .
 In October 1962, the Kennedy Administration faced its most serious foreign policy crisis . President Kennedy faced a crisis in October 1962 .
 Air Force General Curtis LeMay was less sanguine because the U.S. had already been limiting its above ground tests while the Soviets had been increasing their own . LeMay: "The United States had already limited its . above ground . tests"
 After the event’s conclusion, Cuban relations with the Soviet Union reached an all-time low with the Khrushchev regime . The event was held in Cuba in 1959 .
 The russians removed the missiles from Turkey that were pointed towards the USSR . everyone in the USA had a bomb shelter . The russianians removed . the missiles and we removed . We removed missiles from . Turkey that . were pointed . towards the . USSR that were . pointed towards
 The Cuban missile crisis was arguably the ‘hottest’ point of the Cold War . The crisis is arguably the 'hottest point of Cold War’s history .
 It was the closest the world has come to war between the United States and USSR, nuclear war and annihilation . The U.S. and the USSR were the closest to war .
 He tried to express the principles in his foreign policy through programs to help poorer nations . President Obama has been criticized for his policies on foreign policy .
 Kennedy’s foreign policy program was the Alliance for Progress . Another of Kennedy's foreign-policy programs was the alliance for Progress. Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 Flexible response calls for mutual deterrence at strategic, tactical, and conventional levels . The U.S. should be able to respond to aggression across the spectrum of warfare, not limited only to nuclear arms .
 Mutually Assured Destruction – Both the superpowers knew if a nuclear war was to occur both the countries were bound to be destroyed . Mutually assured destruction – If a war broke out, both superpowers would be destroyed.
 The Cuban missile crisis ended peacefully, but came awfully close to sparking World War III . Kennedy pulled missiles from Turkey in exchange for Soviet Union withdrawal of warheads . The crisis changed Americans’ perceptions of the Cold War .
 Both leaders had seen how their game of brinkmanship had nearly ended in nuclear war . Both leaders were wary of the threat posed posed by North Korea .
 Now they are more prepared to take steps to reduce the risk of nuclear war . Now they were more prepared than ever before .
 Most historians agree that it was precisely because the consequences would have been so terrible, that a nuclear war was avoided . The consequences would be so terrible that the nuclear war in the 1950s was avoided, historians say .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 The main effect of this crisis was to scare both sides into being more cautious . Both sides were more cautious in dealing with the crisis than before .
 In October 1962, the Soviet provision of ballistic missiles to Cuba led to the most dangerous Cold War confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The world was brought to the brink of nuclear war by the Soviet supply of missiles .
 The Cuban missile crisis was a success for containment because America managed to get the nuclear missiles off of Cuba . The U.S. managed to remove the missiles from Cuba in order to contain the Soviet Union .
 This is a success because the USA got the USSR to take the nuclear weapons off of Cuba and secretly took their missiles off of Turkey . This is because the USSR took off of its nuclear weapons from Cuba and took off its missiles from Turkey .
 The Soviet did not remove missiles from Cuba because they were willing to do so . Thus, the Soviet was willing to remove missiles because it was willing . The U.S. didn't remove missiles in Cuba .
 "They had no other option other than escaping from the United States that was provoked by these missiles," says Assad . "Instead, they had to escape from the U.S. that had provoked," he says .
 It began when the Soviet Union began building missile sites in Cuba in 1962 . The missile sites began to be built in Cuba after 1962 .
 Kennedy notified Americans about the presence of the missiles, explained his decision to enact a naval blockade around Cuba . The United States was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat to national security .
 Kennedy’s foreign policy was reflected in the programs he created during his presidency . Kennedy's foreign policy is reflected in his programs, including those he created in the 1960s .
 These programs were meant to encourage peace among nations and help less-fortunate nations . The programs were intended to help the less fortunate nations .
 He want to contain the spread of Communism and if Vietnam fell then neighboring nations would also fall . If Vietnam fell, neighboring nations also would fall, he said .
 JFK was prepared to make major changes to U.S. foreign policy . JFK prepared to change the world's foreign policy in the wake of 9/11 attacks .
 He wanted to abandon the policy of containing communism and instead work with the Soviet Union to create a better, less violent world . He wanted a better world to create, he said .
 An unsuccessful invasion of Cuba in 1961, which was sponsored by the United States, was unsuccessful . The U.S. failed to win control of Cuba .
 Johnson was committed to containment policy that called upon the United States to block Communist expansion of the sort that was taking place in Vietnam . But he lacked Kennedy’s knowledge and enthusiasm for foreign policy, and prioritized domestic reforms over major initiatives .
 The term New Frontier was used by Democratic presidential candidate John F Kennedy in his acceptance speech in the 1960 U.S. presidential election to the Democratic National Convention at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum .