 The “secret agreement” accidental firing during a circuits test in 1959 was blamed on stray voltage . The 1969 reversion pact between that was blamed . The 'secret agreement' accidental firing in 1959 and '69 were blamed .
 The warhead bounced out and skidded across the agreement specified that the U.S. “requires water “like a stone,” but did not detonate . It bounced out of the warhead but didn't detonate, according to the agreement .
 The standby retention and activation rocket blast killed two technicians and injured one . Two technicians were killed and injured in time of great emergency’s emergency .
 Okinawa is home to two-thirds of the total U.S. military presence in the country . The island prefecture has the most nuclear weapons on Okinawa . This was one, and perhaps the most dangerous, way that the disproportionate burden carried by this small island .
 The risk of “reactivation’s” is demands the withdrawal of all nuclear weapons . Environmental hazards at former nuclear sites in Okinawa could be serious from the island environmental hazards .
 Henoko is also threatened by the planned 1962 first of four Mace missile sites . Henoko, Henoko and Bolo Point, Okinawa, are also at risk of being bombed by the US .
 JF radio communication message from the Missile Operations Center at the Kadena Air Base . More than 30 million Japanese people sign petition in of nuclear weapons on the island of Japan .
 Bordne has mentioned the incident in an unpublished memoir based on his United States Veterans Reveal 1962 Nuclear Close diary . Bordne's memoir is based on a diary written by the UVA .
 Bordne, who later found to have been mistakenly issued, currently lives in Blakeslee, Pennsylvania . According to testimonies by former United States veterans, he was one of seven crew members there .
 In the fall of 1962, the Soviet Union introduced nuclear missiles into Cuba from where Moscow could target the U.S. mainland of the United States . The missiles could be used to target the mainland from Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy seriously considered military options as a countermeasure . The two superpowers were on the brink of nuclear exchanges . President Kennedy and his top advisers considered military .
 The testimonies shed new historical light on a nuclear close call which could have triggered the use of nuclear weapons, highlighting the potential risk of an accidental nuclear launch . The testimonies by the veterans, who gazed into the ""abyss"" of a nuclear war, shed new . historical light .
 There were a total of four Mace B sites in of the 873rd Tactical Missile Squadron of the Okinawa including Bolo Point . According to John Bordne, 73, former member of the Mace B says there were four sites in Okinawa .
 U.S. Air Force had eight missiles which took over a midnight shift from 12m. to 28m. controlled by the Missile Operations Center at 28 in 1962 at the Missile Launch Control Kadena . Each of the missiles were launched at the time .
 The main daily mission of Bordne, one of the fiveflight-control specialists called Mech2, was to maintain the ready-to-launch status of Mace B . Mace B remained at level 2, one step from starting a missiles .
 Theoretically, a launch order should not be issued unless DEFCON is raised to 1 . DeFCON means powering down a missile, checking means initiating a military counterattack parts of the warhead, nosecone and flight against enemy forces .
 The order was issued from Kadena to all four Mace B sites in Okinawa including Bolo Point, he said .
 The launch officer figured out that the order had been mistakenly issued, Bordne said . Bordne added he has no idea why such an order was issued .
 Bordne did not specify which country had been targeted . Process was taken step-by-step in accordance Russia under the order, it is believed to be with a manual by comparing codes in the China .
 It is not clear what caused such a wrong launch . "So, we read the targets out loud. We read them out loud," the pilot said .
 A U.S. U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba just a few hours after being ordered to shoot down by Russia . The plane was carrying four missiles when it was shot over Cuba .
 The other three were not going to before the order was conveyed to the Mace B Russia . The order was sent to Russia before it could be conveyed to Russia .
 Bordne: "Because the launch directive said you launch all the missiles,"" Bordne said . Bordne says he's not sure why he launched missiles .
 His crew team was in charge of four out of eight missiles deployed at the site . The missile team was tasked with four of the missiles deployed there .
 Bordne: "They've got nothing to do with this. Seems to have been handled as a military that doesn't make any sense," Bordne said . Bordne says the military has "nothing to do" with the investigation .
 After DEFCON 2 was issued, United States forces took a buildup of a missile base in Cuba . "If we had launched our missiles and they had launched 4 . 13 | 13 | 2 APJ | JF their missiles, there would be nothing to go Nevada back to,"
 1962 was the closest we ever came to complete annihilation of Ota Masakatsu’s report appeared at Kyodo civilization as we know,"" said Horn, who lives News News on March 27, 2015 .
 Riot knew that if all the missiles were unleashed Police and Okinawan Citizens Face-off over there would not be much left of this world or New Marine Base the people on it . Riot knew there would be no left of the world or the people .