 In the fall of 1962, the indispensable role diplomacy and restraint played in safely deescalating this confrontation is commonly forgotten . In the fifty-two years since the fall, it's commonly forgotten. In this case, diplomacy is a vital part of the solution .
 This diplomatic episode is unique in the sense that the leaders of the U.S. and Soviet Union – John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev – were at the center of the decision making process . The two countries were involved in the decision-making process of the Soviet Union .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev were using diplomacy to play a game of high stakes poker with the fate of humanity in the balance . Neither willing to back down until the last minute .
 This map focuses on the U.S. relations with Cuba before 1962, the thirteen-day nuclear crisis, and its resolution . The 13-day crisis was the longest nuclear crisis in the United States .
 In the years after the conclusion of World War II, the United States, led by President Harry S Truman, adopted the policy of containment in an effort to curb Soviet expansion and the spread of communism .
 When Fidel Castro took power in Cuba in 1959, the U.S. adhered to their policy of containment and was committed to deposing Castro . The Cuban revolutionary declared the country communist in 1959 .
 With regards to the Monroe Doctrine, the United States has long upheld keeping foreign influence from the Western hemisphere . The U.S. would not stand for Soviet influence in Cuba . The Monroe Doctrine has been upheld by the U.K.
 This map depicts the military and political operations that took place before, during, and after the Cuban Missile crisis . It depicts the events of the Cuban missile crisis in Cuba .
 Each of these events is denoted by a flag of the respective country associated with the military or political operation .
 Map aims to accentuate the diplomatic correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis . More specifically, this map aims to highlight the correspondence between the two .
 A black building with a flag next to it represents these points on the map . The black building is a black building and a flag is next to the black building .
 The map portrays the role that international institutions played in resolving the crisis by generating global support . The map also highlights the role of international institutions in generating support for the crisis .
 This map is presented in chronological order of when each event occurred . This map was presented in order of each event in order to be shown .
 U.S. and Soviet Union were fighting to gain permanence on the world stage in the post-World War II era .
 This struggle most clearly manifested itself through the nuclear arms race . This struggle was manifested through the struggle of the Cold War era .
 The causes and motivations that led to the delivery of Soviet nuclear weapons to Cuba were multifaceted . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been strained by the Cuban government .
 Khrushchev believed he could sneak missiles into Cuba because he perceived Kennedy as young and ineffective after his failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was perceived to be ineffective after he failed to invade Cuba .
 The Soviet leader was encouraged to do so due to a lagging missile gap with the United States, the need to defend his Cuban ally from invasion, and pressures to force concessions with the occupation of Western Germany . The Soviets were encouraged to act due to the need for defense from invasion and
 Khrushchev’s gamble would soon be exposed by U.S. intelligence agencies . The gamble would spark the infamous thirteen-day nuclear crisis . The crisis would spark a 13-day crisis .
 On October 13, 1962, a U-2 spy plane captured the first images of a Soviet nuclear build-up in San Cristobal, Cuba . The images were captured by a U.2 U.S. spy plane in Cuba .
 The photos were analyzed on October 14 and sent to Washington D.C. on the 15th . They were given to President Kennedy the morning of Tuesday the 16th – officially marking the first day of the crisis .
 The President responded by calling together the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a team of expert advisors called ExComm . ExComm is a team that advises the President on how to respond to the situation .
 If the Soviets could make these weapons operational, they could strike any where in the Western hemisphere with nuclear force . The Soviets concluded that if they could make them operational, the weapons could strike .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy informed the world on television of the presence of nuclear weapons in Cuba . President Kennedy also enforced a naval quarantine on Soviet ships bound for the island .
 Khrushchev responded to the naval quarantine by sending a letter that called the blockade an act of war . The letter explained his decision to order Soviet ships to continue their course towards Cuba .
 The United States gained a unanimous vote from the OAS supporting the quarantine and authorizing action to make sure the missiles would not threaten the Western hemisphere . By this time, the U.S. had already gained the unanimous vote .
 This international support and multilateralism allowed the U.S. to exert more diplomatic pressure on Khrushchev . The United States was able to use the support of the international community to pressure the Soviet leader .
 On October 26, 1962, Khrushchev sent a letter to President Kennedy presenting terms of a peace settlement . The letter was presented to the president by President Kennedy .
 Khrushchev sent another letter on October 27 with a much harsher tone that demanded the removal of U.S. nuclear weapons in Turkey . Before receiving a response, he sent a letter to the Soviet Union asking for a response .
 Kennedy’s Joint Chiefs of Staff now pushed for war, but the President practiced restraint . The President agreed to a peaceful settlement the next day, October 28, after the war began .
 This peace agreement called for the removal of all nuclear weapons in Cuba and the dismantlement of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 The agreement immediately went into effect and the Soviets began deconstructing their missile sites in Cuba . The agreement was signed by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 On December 1, 1962, the last Soviet Missiles and warheads left the island . The last Soviet missiles and warheads were left on the island of Cuba .
 Jupiter missiles were due to come off line, because they were obsolete . This was not viewed as a strategic loss because the Jupiter missiles are due to be off line . The Jupiter missiles have not been replaced as they are obsolete .
 The United States viewed the agreement as a victory, effectively negotiating the removal of nuclear weapons from Cuba without having to sacrifice anything of importance . In terms of leverage and diplomacy, the U.S. viewed the deal as a success .
 The Cuban Missile crisis was an event in which the world’s two most powerful nations at the time held the fate of the world in their hands . The Cuban missile crisis took place in 1962 .
 This conflict could have very easily escalated into a full-out nuclear war . Without the use of shrewd diplomacy and restraint, this conflict could very easily have been a nuclear war.
 One mistake could have caused mutually assured destruction for the United States, the Soviet Union, and their allies . One mistake was a mistake that could have been catastrophic for the U.S. and its allies .