 President Kennedy announced a blockade on Soviet ships approaching Cuba . For a week a nuclear war seemed a terrible possibility . President Kennedy said a blockade would prevent a war .
 Kennedy asked Pope John XXIII to help defuse the tension . Kennedy asked him to use every diplomatic avenue behind the scenes .
 He sent a message to Moscow appealing for negotiations to continue for the sake of peace . He sent the message to the Kremlin appealing for peace .
 President Khrushchev was seen as a dignified peacemaker in Cuba . He withdrew the missiles from Cuba, and portrayed himself as a peacemaker . The Soviet Union withdrew its missiles from the Cuban Islands .
 At St Nicholas Church in Leipzig Pastor Christian Führer started regular ‘Peace Prayers’ in 1982 . The small group persevered despite harassment by police .
 In 1989 widespread election fraud provoked furious demonstrations across the country . The country was hit by widespread fraud in the wake of the 1989 election fraud scandal .
 The East German Church Federation called for a democratic multi-party system, economic reforms, a free press and freedom to travel . The church federation called for economic reforms and freedom of travel .
 Thousands attended Monday peace prayers in Leipzig, where they were urged to use nonviolence . Thousands now attend peace prayers, urging them not to engage in violence .
 Tension was at its height on 9 October 1989, with thousands of extra Stasi police on the streets, and a bloody confrontation expected . Thousands of extra police were deployed in the streets of Berlin .
 Three citizens’ leaders met Communist officials in private and agreed that if the protestors remained peaceful so would the police . They agreed to meet with police if they remained peaceful and peaceful .
 After the prayer service 70,000 unarmed people holding lighted candles marched through Leipzig . Unarmed people held light candles in front of the crowd .
 Each week numbers increased as prayer services followed protest demonstrations erupted all over the country . Demonstrations followed by prayer services and prayer services .
 On 4 November half a million marched in Berlin; on 8 November the entire Communist leadership resigned . The following night the border between East and West was opened and the Berlin Wall came down .
 It took enormous courage for many politicians to sit down together, agree to discard some long-held dogmatic principles and accept compromise and change . It took courage for some politicians to agree to compromise and accept change and compromise .
 It took enormous courage for them to recognise each other's ‘identity’ and agree to each persons’s right to different political aspirations .
 It took enormous courage to admit that violence is not the way forward and pledge themselves to nonviolence and democracy . It took courage for the protesters to pledge nonviolence, democracy .
 Taylor agreed to peace talks with opposition warlords . A delegation of women kept vigil outside the negotiations in Ghana . Taylor agreed peace talks in a bid to avoid further bloodshed .
 After seven weeks and no cease-fire they escalated their nonviolent protest . They formed a human barricade across the doors, so the male negotiators could not leave until agreement was reached .
 When security guards tried to arrest the women, they threatened to undress cultural taboo for the guards to witness . Security guards were threatened with arrest if they tried to remove the women's clothing .
 The women went on to work alongside UN Peacekeeping Forces . They persuaded fighters to hand over their weapons and go back to school . The women worked alongside UN peacekeepers to persuade fighters to go home .
 Liberians elected President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf who, together with Leymah Gbowee, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2011 . Liberia's first female president was elected in 2008 .
 Kenyan Muslims travelling on a bus ambushed by Islamist gunmen protected Christian passengers by refusing to be split into groups, according to eyewitnesses . Eyewitnesses say the Kenyan Muslims did not break into groups .
 They told the militants to kill them together or leave them alone, a local governor told Kenyan media . They told them to kill each other or leave the militants alone, the governor said .
 Some of the Muslim passengers gave non-Muslims headscarves to try and conceal their identities when the bus stopped . The bus stopped and the bus was stopped at the end of the journey .
 One hundred passengers, mostly women, were on the bus at the time of the attack, Kenyan officials say . One hundred people were on board the bus when it was attacked, according to the Kenyan officials .
 Residents of the South Hebron Hills experience continual harassment from nearby settlements . They remain firm in their commitment to nonviolent resistance . December 2015 Nonviolent resistance .
 Each day they graze their sheep in contested areas of contested areas and resist settler attempts to drive them from their lands . The sheep are protected by the law of law enforcement in the United States .
 International volunteers from Operation Dove have maintained a presence there since 2004 . Operation Dove has a presence in the area since 2004, with the help of Operation Dove .
 The shepherds were arrested following a nonviolent action during which villagers repaired the road which links At-Tuwani village to Yatta . The action was part of a nonviolent protest by villagers .
 This is an example of nonviolent resistance and of the importance of the witness of volunteers . This is a demonstration of the strength of volunteers, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The volunteers were quickly released and the shepherds were held for several hours . They were released only after paying a fine . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 People invited to come forward to light a candle and name out loud a person who has been an example of peacemaking for them . We name them now before you .
 Reader 1: "We know that we do not go alone, for the path is brightened by those who have gone before us" Reader 1 says: "The path we take on the world will be brightened if we go alone"
 Thank you for giving us this example and forgive us for the many times we fail . Forgive us for our failures, we will never forget you .