 JFK: "It seems to me . . . me . we o u g h t . t . to be reasonable. That is correct, sir. before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1963 JFK . JFK: It seems to be . that it seems to . me that we o
 After 28 years, the history of the Cuban missile crisis remains unsettled . The U.S. will have to take our weapons out of Turkey .
 New information regarding the events of October 1962 is continually released . Scholars and former officials still debate the crisis . New information has been released .
 The story of the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey is part of a folkloric tale . The missiles were found in Turkey in the 1980s .
 President John F Kennedy ordered the Jupiters to be removed from Turkey, perhaps repeatedly, well before the Cuban missile crisis . President Kennedy had ordered the removal of the missiles .
 His orders, however, were disobeyed or ignored by his subordinates in the bureaucracy . His orders were ignored or disobeyed .
 Soviets offered on 27 October to remove SS-4 missiles they had shipped to Cuba if Kennedy would dismantle the Jupiters in Turkey . Kennedy and his advisers on the National Security Council's Executive Committee refused to discuss a trade .
 They feared a vehement reaction among Turks and other NATO allies, Republicans and the U.S. public . They feared, the traditional story continues, a reaction among Turkey and other allies . They also feared a strong reaction among the Turks and Republicans .
 The United States might face a loss of credibility, charges that it sacrificed an ally's security for its own, or Soviet demands for more concessions . The U.S. might face charges that the U.K. sacrificed a key ally's safety to protect its own interests .
 The analogy between Cuban and Turkish missiles was specious . Besides, the analogy between the Cuban and . Turkish missiles is specious. Besides, it's not clear what happened to the Cuban missiles .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy privately mentioned to the Soviets that the U.S. would ultimately withdraw the Jupiters in any case, but there could be no explicit trade . Kennedy: "The United States will ultimately withdraw them in any . case"
 This version is a composite drawn from first-generation accounts of the missile crisis,2 and it is mostly inaccurate . It is based on first-gen accounts and it's mostly inaccurate.
 Several accounts describe more accurately the Jupiter issue or certain aspects of it . To be sure, several recent accounts .
 None discusses the missiles in detail, with the exception of Barton Bernstein's 1980 article . The 1980 article was written before important new evidence emerged .
 First-generation accounts continue to influence how people look at the crisis, despite the availability of new evidence . First generation accounts continue directly and indirectly to influence people's view of the crisis .
 Robert Kennedy's Thirteen Days and Graham Allison's Essence of Decision are still widely used and provide readers with an often distorted version of events . These books, especially Robert Kennedy’s Th13 Days, are still popular and often used widely .
 incorrect or misleading bits from these accounts have continued to crop up in more recent works . And, especially in the case of the Jupiters, they've continued to be inaccurate or misleading .
 In these ways, the historiographical past maintains a firm grip on the present . In the past, the past has a strong grip on present .
 Cuba is the classic case study of 'crisis management' from which influential lessons are often distilled . The impact of this should not be underestimated . Cuba is an example of how crisis management can be taught from crisis management, says David Cameron .
 Kennedy's order to remove the Jupiters before the crisis . The analogy between Cuba and Turkey; and the Cubafor-Turkey missile trade; . The Cuban-Turkish missile trade .
 It will conclude by tying together the revised versions of these issues into a brief summary, followed by discussion of their implications for defense policy, for analytical applications, and for the historiography of the missile crisis .
 Claims have had the effect of exonerating Kennedy for having left the United States exposed to the Soviets' second letter . Kennedy had ordered the Jupiters out previously, so it is claimed, and it was not his negligence but rather the failure or disobedience of others .
 Kennedy's previous request that the Turks be consulted regarding the Jupiters' removal was not carried out . But there is an important distinction to be drawn between Kennedy's request and an alleged order for their removal that wasn't carried out.
 The U.S. and its NATO allies agreed to deploy intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Europe in December 1957 . Largely as a response to the launch of Sputnik, the United States and NATO allies had agreed to use the missiles . The missiles were deployed in Europe as a
 This was in one sense an extension of Washington's established policy of relying on strategic bombers stationed in Europe to help deter Soviet aggression . The U.S. had a long-standing policy to rely heavily on bombers in Europe .
 The United States canvassed potential host countries through 1959 and at one point considered Greece . The U.S. considered Greece as a potential host country .
 If Mexico or Cuba had been penetrated by the Communists, "it would be imperative for us to take military action," says President Bush .
 He could see the reason for [short-range missiles] in Greece, but not IRBMs, he says . He says he could see a reason for short-range missile strikes in Greece . But he says he doesn't see IRBM missiles as missiles .
 Italy would become home for two 15-missile Jupiter IRBM squadrons, while Turkey agreed in October 1959 to take the third Jupiter squadron . Turkey agreed to take a third squadron in 1959 .
 Actual deployment, however, had still not begun by the time Kennedy entered office . Actual deployment of the troops had not yet begun .
 4 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES listed the Jupiters' drawbacks . The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the Congress presented the new administration with a secret report on 11 February 1961 . The report was presented to the new government by the new president .
 Exposed above ground and immobile, they could be easily sabotaged; they had virtually no value, being the obvious first targets of a Soviet attack; they were inaccurate; and they burned liquid fuel, necessitating hours of preparation before launch . Exposed below ground and unmobile,
 The study recommended that the Jupiters be replaced by solid fuel Polaris submarinelaunched ballistic missiles . At least some in the administration agreed .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Assistant Secretary Paul Nitze, and others had a hand in the Acheson report on NATO . In March, the report also recommended cancellation of NATO .
 It is not known to what extent the JCAE report influenced the Acheson report or Kennedy's decision for a review . Kennedy's review of the report was not known how much of it was influenced by the report .
 'It was the foundation for the action we have been taking since that time' McNamara testified in 1963, when the withdrawal was truly under way .
 In the spring of 1961, the Kennedy administration reviewed the Jupiter deployment and decided to proceed . The Kennedy administration decided not to interrupt the ongoing preparations .
 Suggestions that Eisenhower administration alone decided to deploy the Jupiters or actually completed their deployment16 are thus incorrect .
 When Kennedy came into office, neither deployment of the JCAE sites nor construction of their sites had yet begun . Kennedy bears responsibility for the decision to continue the Jupiter deployment .
 Administration appears to have been predisposed toward cancellation despite review . Administration sought to sound out Turkish government regarding cancellation, administration says .
 In March or April 1961, Kennedy asked McGhee if the Turks would allow cancellation . Secretary of State Dean Rusk raised the issue with Turkish Foreign Minister Selim Sarper .
 McGhee's interagency group presented its findings on 22 June . This and probably other contacts were made in spring 1961, well before McGhee .
 The Kennedy administration's interest in cancelling the Jupiter MISSILES and the Cuban missile crisis was easily overcome by Turkish opposition and the administration's own concerns about credibility . As would be the case repeatedly until after the Cuban crisis, however, the Kennedy administration would not cancel the
 Foreign Minister Sarper objected strongly to Rusk's overtures, citing domestic opposition and morale . Foreign minister Sarper said he was concerned about domestic opposition .
 Rusk recalled that he then returned to go 'over these Turkish points with President Kennedy, and he accepted the idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters' In this instance, Rusk must be taken at his retrospective word, but there is no reason to doubt that the
 Sources conflict over when the Jupiters became operational either November 1961 or April 1962 . President McGhee probably agreed with McGhee's assessment that cancellation of the deployment might be interpreted as 'a sign of weakness'
 Washington did not raise the cancellation issue with the Turks again until May 1962, when Rusk attended a NATO ministerial meeting in Athens accompanied by Paul Nitze . The warheads remained in US custody until October 1962 .
 Late that summer, Kennedy instructed Undersecretary of State George Ball, filling in for Rusk, to contact the Turks once more . Kennedy instructed Ball to contact Turks again . Ball was the last official to make contact with the Turks .
 Kennedy 'insisted' on removal even at some political cost, Abel and Hilsman say . Ball felt it unwise to persist at this point, but Kennedy felt it was unwise .
 Ball and Nitze then met with the Turkish Ambassador in Washington and encountered equally strong opposition . Ball, Nitze and the Turkish ambassador met with each other at the request of Turkish officials .
 It is unlikely that Kennedy 'insisted' on removal he probably just insisted the matter be brought up again . There is no better information on these 1962 attempts to remove him from the White House .
 On 23 August 1962, McGeorge Bundy issued NSAM 181, in which the Jupiters were linked to the disturbing but as of yet merely conventional Soviet military build-up in Cuba . The Jupits are linked to a disturbing but not merely merely conventional military build up in
 Bundy noted, The President has directed that the following actions and studies be undertaken in light of new bloc activity in Cuba . Bundy noted that the President has ordered that the . actions and . studies be conducted in a light of the new . of new activities in Cuba. Bundy noted .
 If Kennedy had issued an order before 23 August, one would expect it to have been referred to in this document . Kennedy issued the order on 23 August .
 Kennedy had been interested in negotiating cancellation of Jupiter deployment . Kennedy was interested in the removal of the missiles after deployment .
 There is no evidence that Kennedy issued explicit orders to remove the Jupiters before the crisis . No evidence that such orders were disobeyed, and thus no evidence of disobedience .
 Minutes read 'he President recalled that over a year ago we wanted to get the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey . . 27 too much significance should not be assigned to the wording of minutes or spoken phrases .
 Kennedy's 'order' for the withdrawal of the Jupiters' withdrawal is not the case . Nevertheless these references are interesting in light of the other evidence, which alone more strongly refutes the misconception of Kennedy's order .
 The missiles were still in place, as vulnerable and provocative as before, in October . The missiles still remain as vulnerable as before .
 Kennedy administration accepted and rejected the analogy between Soviet SS-4s in Cuba and U.S. Jupiters in Turkey . Sometimes in the same breath .
 Acceptance of any parallel between U.S. missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba would expose the United States to charges of unprovoked aggression, of using a double standard, and of bringing the world to the brink of nuclear war over the same situation .
 The administration privately acknowledged the Cuba-Turkey analogy, in the broadest sense, in three distinct ways . The administration acknowledged the analogy in three separate ways .
 Transcript reveals two of these variations emerged at the beginning of the crisis deliberations . As the audio transcript for 16 October reveals, two of the variations emerged . The transcript is published by CNN iReport .
 The analogy was drawn in terms of military strategy, in which the Jupiters were seen as logical targets for Soviet retaliation after a U.S. attack on Cuba .
 Second and more importantly, the analogy was drawn at the general, politico-military level . The analogy was also drawn at a political and military level .
 In this sense, the analogy was between U.S. clients next to the Soviet Union and Soviet clients in the United States . Each superpower might perceive weapons in the other's satellite as a threat, the author says .
 U.S. lawmakers drew this general analogy well before the crisis, early 1961 . United States lawmakers drew the general analogy .
 Albert Gore privately described the Jupiter deployment to Dean Rusk as 'the kind of provocation which needs to be considered very carefully' Senator Albert Gore called it 'provocative'
 NSC staff member devoted a memo on 10 October to 'Attempts to Equate' NATO installations with 'Soviet missile bases . . being established in Cuba . The two documents were drafted before such missiles were actually discovered .
 The administration may already have been anticipating the possibility of Soviet strikes against the Jupiters . The strikes could be in retaliation for a pre-crisis United States move against Cuba .
 Moscow might justify non-nuclear military build-up in Cuba by comparing it to the Jupiters . Or, perhaps officials worried that Moscow might compare it to a non-military build up in Cuba to compare it .
 The administration was probably confronting the general analogy regarding similar weapons and geography .
 President himself inadvertently but flatly validated the analogy by commenting on Khrushchev's policy . 't's just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBM's in Turkey,' he said .
 The obvious nature of the general analogy explains why Kennedy chose Turkey out of the blue, the first reference to that country at the second 16 October meeting .
 Officials would periodically confirm the general analogy throughout the crisis . CIA at one point concluded that the Soviets might respond to the U.S. blockade with one of their own 'perhaps against a nation such as Turkey'
 On 16 October, after being reminded that the Jupiter deployment was not hypothetical but factual, the President backed away and denied the analogy . The President later backed away from the analogy and said he would not use it again .
 This brief recorded exchange is far too little to go on; it was spontaneous, perhaps a simple error on the President's part from which one can only suppose that Kennedy denied the analogy early on in the crisis .
 Kennedy's 16 October response must fall in the first category of denial, that of simple contradiction . Kennedy's response falls in the same category as simple contradiction, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A second way to deny the analogy was to point out how the Jupiter deployment was undertaken by an open alliance , whereas the SS-4 deployment was not . A second . way to . deny the . analogy was pointed out that the Jupiter . deployment was . undertaken by a . open alliance
 On 18 October JUPITER MISSILES AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 9 ExComm, according to an official top secret post mortem, agreed that sensitive areas such as Berlin, Iran, or Laos, should not be turned into missile bases .
 ExComm conveniently defined Turkey away as not being a 'sensitive area' and seemed to imply that the Cuban deployment would have been legitimate and acceptable had the Soviet Union only joined Cuba in an 'open military alliance' before shipping its MRBMs .
 The SS-4 delivery was a Soviet initiative, and was welcomed by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro welcomed the delivery of the Soviet-made weapons .
 Fourth and finally, the administration distinguished between openness and secrecy . The administration distinguished itself from openness to secrecy .
 The Jupiter deployment had certainly been public in this sense because the Soviets had known of it before and during its execution . The Soviets knew of the Jupiter deployment before and after it was made public .
 Following Kennedy's logic, the Jupiters were more acceptable because they had not sparked a crisis as the SS-4s did . Thus, following Kennedy's . logic, they were more . acceptable because . they hadn't sparked a . crisis as they did .
 A cursory review of popular literature suggests that the Jupiter deployment was 'public' only in the sense that the public could know about it after some investigation . The public could only know about the deployment of the Jupiter spacecraft .
 October 1959 bilateral agreement was certainly publicized, but, for the subsequent three years, there appears to have been next to no public discussion of its fulfillment . The October 1959 agreement was publicized but there was little public discussion .
 The references, ironically enough, appeared in reports of Soviet warnings or demands on nuclear weapons in Turkey .
 Turkish policy on the Turkish end seems not to be particularly overt . Nor does the policy in the Middle East seem to have been particularly overt.
 The Times reported immediately after the crisis that 'the Turkish Government had never officially said for domestic publication that Turkey possessed missiles'53 Thus, anyone interested could have learned about the deployment with little effort .
 The policy was little known and even less discussed, but the claim that it was public should be qualified . But the policy was not widely discussed, and the policy should have been public .
 The arguments the administration offered in denial of the Cuba-Turkey analogy, in short, all have serious weaknesses, but this does not settle the issue . The debate over the analogy continues even today.
 ExComm's public denials of the analogy were also betrayed by its recurring consideration of a trade, SS-4s for Jupiters . ExComm was also considering a trade of SS-3s for SS4s and Jupits . The ExComm also considered SS
 For the first few years after the crisis, Kennedy's confidants categorically denied that such an exchange had occurred or even been considered . Kennedy confidants have since denied that any of Kennedy's ideas were considered .
 RFK met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin on the evening of 27 October . RFK's account was first transformed by RFK in his memoir "Thirteen Days" RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Cuba-Turkey trade was repeatedly considered necessary or desirable by several members of ExComm . ExComm members of the U.N. Security Council said the trade was necessary or desired .
 At the end of the crisis, President Kennedy was by far the most ardent proponent of such a trade . Kennedy suggested it to the Soviets (through his brother) on 26 October and repeatedly returned the discussion to that subject .
 Kennedy put in place a contingency plan, for possible use in case the Soviets rejected the U.S. offer of 27 October . He would have the United Nations propose a public trade that the United States would then accept . The plan was used in the case of a possible rejection of the
 The 27 October offer that Moscow did accept included an explicit but private trade under which the Jupiters were withdrawn some five months after the crisis . The offer was made to Moscow in October, but Moscow did not accept .
 Charting ExComm's discussions of missile trade reveals their impressive extent . ExComm discusses missile trade in a charting of the missile trade . The chart shows the extent of the trade in missile technology .
 Participants wondered if Khrushchev's goal was to force a withdrawal of the Jupiters . In an ExComm meeting on 18 October, participants wondered if the goal was for a withdrawal .
 Secretary McNamara convinced that only by NATO giving up the Jupiters in both Italy and Turkey would Khrushchev pull his MRBMs out of Cuba .
 Ambassador Stevenson urges giving up the Turkish IRBMs . Ambassador Stevenson reiterated this opinion the next day during an ExComm meeting .
 The evidence on the President's attitude at this point conflicts slightly, but it seems clear that he rejected a trade for the moment while leaving it open for future consideration . The evidence seems to show that the President rejected the deal .
 A State Department group working on UN matters, chaired by Stevenson and attended by Rusk, continued to consider a trade deal on Sunday .
 RFK polled the others for their responses, and 'there was no disagreement with McNamara's evaluation' The Attorney General was concerned that Stevenson would offer a trade at the UN prematurely .
 U.S. interest in a trade may have waned temporarily that afternoon, however, at a formal NSC meeting . United States interest in the trade may also waned at the meeting, however .
 The United States naval blockade had succeeded in preventing further Soviet shipments from reaching Cuba, but work on the existing missile sites continued . ExComm now had to anticipate or try to decide what would happen next .
 The President and his advisers were struck by 'the fact that the letter did not condition withdrawal of the missiles on a quid pro quo fulfillment of Soviet demands in other parts of the world such as Berlin'
 If Dobrynin's account can be believed, he met with Robert Kennedy alone late on the 26th, most likely after the 10.00m. meeting . He met with Kennedy alone on the night of the assassination . The meeting is believed to have taken place after 10:00
 Dobrynin remarked to RFK that the strong U.S. reaction to the Cuban deployment was curious considering the presence of Jupiters in Turkey; this comment was meant rhetorically, not as a substantive proposal, he claims . The comment, he says, was meant to
 Khrushchev apparently took RFK's comment as a cue and thus upped the crisis ante . Whatever the Kennedys' precise intent, it was not clear what was intended to escalate the crisis .
 If true, Dobrynin's remarkable revelation helps explain the rapid Soviet issuance of the second letter, which traditionally has been seen as a matter of internal Kremlin politics . If true it helps explain why the rapid issue of the letter was issued .
 Kennedy was willing to accept a trade late on 26 October; what kind of trade, public or private, is not known . More important, it apparently shows that Kennedy was prepared to accept trade .
 Khrushchev put the Jupiters on the table, and Khrrushchev called him on it . But it was he who put it up for the table . Khrushchev called it 'a mistake'
 The problem was that the Soviet Premier dropped his second letter as a public bombshell, placing the White House in an awkward position . The White House was put in a public spotlight by the Soviet premier .
 Stevenson had correctly predicted correctly, and the Soviet first letter had indeed proven too good to be true . Stevenson had thus predicted correctly. Stevenson had predicted correctly .
 The President remained steadfast in his support of a trade trade despite the dissent .
 He repeatedly expressed his conviction that a trade would be necessary and acceptable . He saw the military action he saw as unavoidable otherwise .
 Bundy, Ball, and General Maxwell Taylor all worried about NATO rejecting a trade deal or being seriously damaged by it . Bundy and Ball were concerned NATO would reject the trade or be seriously damaged .
 Ball said he did not think NATO would be 'wrecked' if it were to fall apart over such an issue . Ball said that perhaps it was no longer worth US participation in NATO if it was to fall out .
 This would remove them as a target for Soviet military retaliation in case the U.S. attacked Cuba . This would have removed them from the target of Soviet retaliation .
 JFK approved the Trollope ploy in the form of a letter to Khrushchev at that same 4.00m. meeting . It lay at the core of Robert Kennedy's proposal to Ambassador Dobrynin that night .
 Kennedy still held a Jupiter swap in reserve at the last ExComm meeting . Kennedy held the Jupiter swap at 9.00am .
 On virtually every day of the confrontation, during its beginning, middle, and end, several top officials repeatedly returned to the possibility of a trade . It is inaccurate to say that in early sessions the notion of a swap had been dismissed as unthinkable .
 President Kennedy's interest in a missile deal triggered the Soviet second letter . Dobrynin: Kennedy interest in missile deal late on 26 October triggered the letter . President Kennedy was interested in the missile deal .
 Kennedy and his advisers hoped the Soviets would not raise the Jupiter issue publicly, and studiously avoided broaching it themselves in public . Kennedy and advisers undoubtedly hoped the issue would not be raised publicly .
 Before the first Soviet proposal arrived they considered a Soviet Jupiter demand a real possibility . But they were relieved by its absence from that first letter .
 The Kennedys added the Jupiters to the equation, triggering Khrushchev's public demand for the removal . The Kennedy-Dobrynin affair was a private matter, not Dobrynin, it seems .
 The number of officials who initiated or received discussion of a trade is impressive . ExComm and other high-ranking officials initiated or discussed a trade .
 Clearly the administration was not unified; there were several shades of thought . Clearly the White House is not unified, and there are several shades, thought .
 Some favored a trade, and some rejected it . Some rejected it while anticipating it, or were certain of its approach and sought more palatable .
 The notion of a trade, broadly speaking, was neither restricted to a few 'doves' like Adlai Stevenson, nor a taboo subject in memoranda or ExComm sessions . What is indisputable is that the notion of trade was not restricted to the few 'doctors'
 Fourth, policymakers' stances on the Jupiter issue could be flexible or uncharacteristic . Policymaker's stances on Jupiter issue may be flexible, uncharacteristically .
 Kennedy changed his view of a trade between 20 October and 26 October, and George Ball his within one day, 27 October . Kennedy and Ball changed their views on a trade . Ball changed his views of a deal within a day of each other .
 Ambassador Stevenson flip-flopped and JUPITER MISSILES AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 15 opposed a Jupiter trade . That same day, most ironically, Ambassador Stevenson flipped-flopping and .
 CIA Director John McCone, one of ExComm's staunchest hawks, recommended forcing Khrushchev to accept a trade . CIA Director McCone supported a trade at one point, but recommended forcing a deal .
 Others, such as Ball, McNamara, and Johnson, either supported or reluctantly accepted a swap . Others, including Ball, had to accept the swap .
 The claim of Nitze90 and others, that a majority opposed it, is almost certainly untrue and definitely unsupported by the evidence . The claim is almost definitely untrue and certainly unsupported by evidence. The claim was almost certainly unfounded and definitely unsupportable by evidence .
 No one found a trade more acceptable than the President did on the 27th, says President Obama . President Obama made a trade deal with the Russians .
 Debate continues to surround Robert Kennedy's meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on the evening of the 27th . Robert Kennedy met with Dobrynins in Moscow, Russia, on the night of the meeting .
 RFK-Dobrynin backchannel talks on how to follow up on the letter to Khrushchev . Kennedy met in the Oval Office with a smaller group of advisers to discuss the letter .
 Rusk suggested telling Dobrynin that while there could be no missile deal, the U.S. would remove the Jupiters after the crisis was settled . Rusk: The United States would remove them after it was resolved .
 The President and everyone else quickly approved and agreed to keep knowledge of this aspect in the room, being especially sensitive to repercussions in Turkey should it be revealed .
 If some time elapsed and per your instructions, I mentioned four to five months I said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily, I said . I said this time elapsed, and I said it was possible, but that time elapsed . I told the BBC that these
 Khrushchev accepted the U.S. offer early on the 28th, effectively ending the crisis . The crisis was the first time the Soviet Union had accepted the United States offer .
 Dobrynin sought to nail down a written agreement which he presented to the Attorney General on the 29th, but RFK responded, according to his notes . RFK said, "Read letter Studied it over night"
 Sorensen admits to excising RFK's reference to an 'explicit' deal from the notes that became Thirteen Days . Dobrynin confirms that the trade was explicit, despite being private, has been confirmed .
 In this form, the trade featured two important differences from what the Soviets wanted in their second letter . Of course, this form of the trade was not the same as the first letter .
 First, the exchange was private, not public, denying Khrushchev the chance to save face beyond the no-invasion pledge . The exchange was not public; it was private and not public .
 The missiles in Cuba and Turkey were not removed simultaneously . And second, the missiles in Turkey and Cuba did not have to be removed simultaneously.
 The U.S. would not withdraw the Jupiters until months later, providing a 'decent interval' with which Washington could additionally avoid the appearance of a trade .
 The Kremlin says there is theoretically nothing preventing Washington from reneging on the deal . The deal was reached by the United States and Russia in 2008 .
 Khrushchev had to pull his missiles out, and then hope without recourse that Kennedy would uphold his side of the trade . Kennedy would have to pull missiles out and hope that he would uphold the deal .
 Robert Kennedy's private, explicit assurance did, as Schlesinger puts it, 'sweeten' Khrushchev's retreat . The Jupiters were as painful a thorn in the Soviets' side as they seem to have been .
 If there could be no deal, why did Kennedy not simply have his brother tell Dobrynin, 'Absolutely no deal,' he says . Kennedy's brother says, "absolutely no deal. No deal"
 As in other cases, there is a gap between what officials said and wrote at the time, privately, and what they have said and written since, publicly . There is also a gap in what officials have written and written about the case .
 RFK wrote privately in his notes that notification of the Jupiter removal was a United States concession, part of an explicit deal . RFK said notification was a U.S. concession to the removal of Jupiter .
 It's understandable for ExComm participants to minimize any concessions they made, but this only strengthens the case for caution in relying on their recollections . It is understandable that ExComm . participants minimize . any concessions .
 In 1987, Dean Rusk revealed other striking new details about the President and the Jupiters at the end of the crisis .
 Rusk gains little from this revelation if it is false, it is consistent with other evidence in three ways . But apart from the fact that Rusk gained little from it if it was false, Rusk's claims are consistent with evidence in the U.S. case .
 The Cordier ploy is compatible with Kennedy's role, confirmed by the 27 October ExComm transcripts, as leading advocate of a trade . Kennedy is a leading advocate for a trade deal, confirmed in the transcripts .
 The ploy's form, in which the United Nations would propose a trade, reflects Kennedy's preference . Second, the form of the ploy, is that the U.N. would propose the trade .
 The Cordier ploy, in which the UN would propose the exchange, thus has Kennedy's mark on it . Kennedy's signature on the proposal is that it would be proposed by the UN .
 Third, the Cordier ploy accords with Kennedy's doubts about Trollope ploy . Kennedy doubts about the Trollope scheme . Kennedy also doubts about Cordier's ploy .
 RFK wrote that it was 'a hope, not an expectation' that Moscow would give in without getting a public trade . RFK was reluctant to accept the deal, and RFK said it was a 'hope, not expectation'
 Kennedy wanted to have in advance the machinery in place in advance to trade publicly, should that become necessary . In this light it is logical that Kennedy wanted in advance that he wanted to be able to trade .
 Kennedy installed an apparatus with which he could trade, however, does not necessarily mean he would have traded . Just because Kennedy installed a system with an apparatus that could trade doesn't necessarily mean that he would trade .
 There were alternatives to an air strike or invasion of Cuba if the Soviets stuck to their demand for a public missile trade . The Soviets wanted a public trade of missiles in Cuba .
 On 27 October, ExComm discussed non-attack measures to apply more pressure to the Soviets . ExComm: "Non-attack" measures were discussed to apply pressure to Soviet Russia .
 These included tightening the blockade to include petroleum, oil, and lubricants . mobilizing NATO forces, deploying more warships, and calling up additional air reserve squadrons, the last of which was done that night .
 This suggests that Kennedy would have reached for alternatives before resorting to military action . This suggests he would have sought alternatives to the military action, such as alternative options .
 Kennedy was sufficiently willing to trade missiles openly that he readied the Cordier ploy, but not so willing that he would not give the Trollope ploy, and perhaps other actions, a chance first . What is known is that on 27 October Kennedy readied Cordier .
 The success of the Trollope ploy on 28 October allowed Kennedy to avoid a decision on a public deal and prevents a more informed judgment by historians .
 Interdepartmental task force met immediately after the crisis, on 29 October, to begin their removal from the U.S. Consistent with the notion that the United States agreed to a delayed, explicit trade for the Jupiters is the fact that an interdepartment task
 The IRBMs were withdrawn, with Turkish consent, slightly behind schedule . The IRBs were withdrawn with Turkey's permission to use them .
 At about the same time, the missiles were replaced by Polaris submarines . Polaris submarines are a less vulnerable and less provocative nuclear deterrent . The missiles are replaced by less vulnerable submarines .
 Kennedy administration wanted to cancel the deployment of, and then to remove, the Turkish Jupiters during 1961-62 . One of them, the USS Sam Houston, visited the Turkish port of Izmir to reassure the Turks .
 Fears of appearing weak and faced with stiff Turkish opposition, it allowed the deployment to be completed . But fearful of appearing weakened, the Turkish government allowed it to go ahead .
 Kennedy remained interested in their removal and continued talks with the Turks . He never, prior to the crisis, ordered their removal . However, he never ordered them removed .
 When the crisis began, Kennedy and his advisers faced the analogy between the Jupiters and Khrushchev's SS-4s in Cuba . Kennedy and advisers quickly faced the . analogy .
 In private, they tacitly acknowledged the analogy while at times denying it . "In private, the president and vice president of the U.S. House of Representatives acknowledged the comparison"
 The tacit acceptance probably explains why officials, with equal speed, began discussing a missile trade as a solution to the crisis . Officials continued to do so through 27 October .
 On 26 October, Kennedy probably informed the Soviets that the Jupiters were negotiable . This apparently led Khrushchev on the 27th publicly to demand their removal as part of a trade deal .
 Kennedy repeatedly argued, more strongly than any of his advisers, in favor of a trade . That day, Kennedy said, "More strongly than anyone else in the White House" Kennedy: "That day, that day, was the day"
 Had Khrushchev not backed down, the President might have traded publicly, via the Cordier ploy, rather than invade Cuba . Had he backed down from the brink of war, he might have chosen other actions .
 The point is moot, because on the 27th he agreed to try the Trollope ploy first . The point of mooting is moot .
 This move, coupled with an explicit but private missile trade, succeeded . This move led to an explicit and private trade, it succeeded .
 From this summary emerge emerge four substantive, intertwined conclusions . The PRIMACY of politics is the subject of this article . The author concludes that politics is a matter of principle .
 In surveying the deployment and removal of the Jupiters, one cannot help but be struck by how at almost every step defense policy decisions, were heavily influenced by political considerations . The decision was heavily influenced if not guided by political factors .
 1957 NATO decision to station IRBMs in Europe was largely taken to satisfy political needs created by Sputnik . The 1957 decision was largely made largely to satisfy the political needs of the Soviet Union . NATO's decision was made to satisfy a political need for political purposes .
 The advent of a Soviet ICBM capability called into question the US nuclear commitment to Europe . The resulting fears in NATO demanded political reassurance from Washington, something U.S. needed .
 Political factors were even more salient in the Kennedy administration's decision to proceed with the Jupiter deployment in 1961 despite the compelling reasons for cancellation .
 To maintain U.S. credibility vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and to avoid antagonizing the Turks, Kennedy decided to install weapons that were obsolete, even detrimental to NATO security .
 Recognition of this military reality drove the administration to approach the Turks regarding cancellation anyway, but not so far as to overcome its more pressing political needs .
 A missile trade presented itself as an obvious possible solution to the missile crisis in October 1962 . The Jupiters were militarily useless, partly because of the lack of a military presence .
 Fifteen Jupiters in return for forty-two SS-4s would have been a bargain . It would have comprised two-thirds of the Soviet strategic missile force .
 Political factors explain ExComm's distaste for a public trade . ExComm says it will not trade in public .
 The risk of a Turkish, NATO, Republican, and popular backlash rendered a public deal politically unacceptable . Such a trade would not really have affected U.S. military superiority, but risk of backlash rendered it politically unacceptable, at least so long as alternatives existed .
 Politics shrouded the Jupiters even after their bases were closed in 1963 . Finally, politics shrouded the planes even after they were closed .
 Fear of shaking the alliance led officials to drape their own 'cloak of secrecy' over the RFK-Dobrynin deal . The first hint not appearing until Thirteen Days was published in 1969 .
 The scent of a superpower bargain struck behind Turkey's back promised to be too potent to let seep out . Long after the crisis, even the scent of the deal will be too powerful to let out .
 In sum, politics played an influential or dominant role in the decisions to send Jupiters to Turkey, to keep them there, and to pull them out .
 This would mean little had the Jupiters not ostensibly been for the enhancement of Western defense . This would have meant little had it not been for them .
 Two administrations used them to soothe allied apprehensions, bolster U.S. credibility, appease Turks, appease the Turks, and help get Soviet missiles out of Cuba . Instead, they were used to ease allied concerns, bolster United States credibility .
 The banal yet important point is that political considerations often outweigh military considerations . The U.S. military says it's important to avoid a repeat of the Vietnam War .
 NATO repeated this complex ritual, deploying and withdrawing the Intermediate Nuclear Forces beginning in 1979 . Such was the case when NATO deployed and withdrew the INF in the 1980s .
 The Jupiter experience, in short, only buttresses the notion that . military explanations should never be accepted at face value .
 More important political motives almost certainly lurk beneath the surface of the White House . The White House has been accused of being under pressure from President Obama .
 A second conclusion involves how the Jupiter story was applied analytically . The Jupiter story is applied to the study of Jupiter's origin .
 Graham Allison's Essence of Decision is 'the most widely read scholarly account of the crisis in English'106 .
 The book features the 'bureaucratic politics model', in which leaders have difficulty executing policy because they rely on unwieldy, parochial bureaucracies .
 Allison's model is still useful, but its application to a particular historical issue, the Turkish Jupiters, breaks down in light of the evidence . Allison's model still useful but his application to the issue, Turkey's invasion of the country, is still relevant .
 Kennedy's 'disobeyed' pre-crisis removal order, Allison says . To illustrate how the bureaucracy stymied Kennedy and left him exposed during the crisis, Allison depends on non-events .
 Allison had none of the documents now available which might have led him to alter his Jupiter account . He used 'dubious evidence' to justify his account .
 Essence of Decision has not been and apparently will not be revised . What perhaps should not be excused is that Essence Of Decision hasn't been updated . The decision was made by President Barack Obama in 2008 .
 Allison did not aspire 'to write a definitive history . .110' But he did presume to 'explain' the missile crisis based on historical evidence .
 The vast amount of evidence made available since 1971 has fundamentally changed the subject of Allison's case study . Allison's revised case demands a revised study, for three reasons .
 New evidence undermines the applicability of the bureaucratic politics model to the missile crisis . The new evidence, and not merely concerning the Jupiters,111 now undermines the idea .
 If the 'bureaucracy' did not foil a removal order, then the Jupiters no longer fit or support the model . The 'Bureaucracacy' does not foil an order to remove the model from the car .
 Allison: Presidents simply do not exercise tight control over their political and military resources . Allison: Much of it appears to sustain Allison's broader point, that presidents simply exercise close control of their resources .
 Allison's inaccurate Jupiter story is continually disseminated and serves as history despite his disclaimer . There is no definitive history of the crisis, and because there is such popularity, Allison's book enjoys such popularity . And third, because there are no definitive .
 A revised Essence of Decision would help correct some historical misconceptions and determine whether the bureaucratic politics model is still valid in the case of the missile crisis . This is not his fault, but it would help to correct some misconceptions .
 Third, the way the Jupiter episode has unfolded reflects a fundamental problem of contemporary history . The way it unfolded reflects the problem of modern history, he says .
 The missile crisis is too recent an event for its documentation to have been fully declassified . The document was declassified after the missile crisis .
 Those who took part in the crisis fill this evidentiary vacuum even more so than usual . However, the considerable accessibility of those involved fills this . This is not the usual case, but it fills the evidentiary void .
 Perhaps the release of the remaining documents will render the question irrelevant . The release of remaining documents may render the answer irrelevant .
 Until that happens, the question only underscores our dependence on information technology . Until that's changed, it's not clear how much of our information is available .
 For now, those who made the history will continue to be those who help shape it . For now it will be the people who helped shape it.
 The image that persisted for 25 years was in part that of a leader tough enough to stand up to the Soviets and refuse a missile trade, even at the risk of nuclear war . The image of a tough leader persisted for decades .
 There is now a danger that this old image is being replaced by one of a Kennedy tough enough to stand up to his hawkish advisers, and sustain the political costs .
 Kennedy may have been willing to trade the Jupiters publicly, some claim . Some claim he was willing to do so .
 Kennedy may have been prepared to trade openly, but it cannot be determined with certainly . Kennedy was prepared to talk openly about the possibility of a trade deal .
 It is conceivable, however unlikely, that Kennedy would have later ordered an air strike or invasion instead of trading publicly . It is possible, however, that he would have ordered an attack or invasion .
 Kennedy may appear as a lone 'dove' surrounded by a 'hawk' consensus . An additional pitfall is that he may appear to be surrounded by 'hawk-consistency'
 Some ExComm members opposed a trade, but they neither formed a consensus nor dominated the discussions . Some members of the ExComm did not form a consensus on a trade .
 The 27 October deliberations are much harder to characterize, and even if Kennedy had confronted a hostile, anti-trade consensus, this still might have had no impact on his policy . Kennedy's decision on trade policy is much more difficult to describe .
 Neither the traditional image nor the emerging image is accurate, though the new one is certainly more so than the old one . Thus neither the traditional or emerging image of the young generation is accurate .
 At a different level, both of Kennedy's images, though contradictory, are favorable . Kennedy's image of Kennedy is favorable, but contradictory .
 After 25 years, Kennedy partisans can praise restraint where they once praised toughness, thus remaining loyal to the same figure . Kennedy partisans now praise restraint while praising toughness, but not restraint .
 This phenomenon captures the United States' lingering ambivalence toward nuclear weapons . It captures the U.S. lingering ambivalent towards nuclear weapons, CNN's John Sutter says .
 U.S. debates whether nuclear weapons are for military and political use or only for the prevention of their use . Neither can it reconcile its desire for a forceful foreign policy with its persistent fear of nuclear war .
 Kennedy who would not trade the Jupiters is transformed into the courageous JFK who would . Views of his 1962 actions more clearly reflect that nuclear ambivalence . Views of Kennedy's 1962 actions reflect his nuclear ambivalent feelings .
 Images of Kennedy and larger views of the crisis clash as surrogates in current nuclear debates . The seemingly endless search for lessons of the Cuban missile crisis will no doubt continue .
 United States Congress, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 'The Study of United States and NATO Nuclear Weapons Arrangements', 11 Feb.61, quoted in United States House of Representatives, Committee on Armed Services .
 Dean Acheson interview by Lucius Battle, 27 April 1964, Oral History Program , JFKL,11; George McGhee, interview by Martin Hillenbrand, 13 Aug. 1964 . George McKeough interview with Martin Hillinbrand, 9 Aug. 1965 .
 McGhee, OHP, JFKL,ll; Hearings on Military Posture,277, also 281; Dean Rusk to James Blight, 25 Feb.87, quoted in Welch and Blight . McGhee: 'Eleventh Hour', 1736.87 .
 O'Donnell, 'Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye',337; Hilsman, To Move A Nation,203; Abel, The Missile Crisis,193 . Abel, 'The Missile Crisis',193; 'Johnny' and 'We Hardly knew Ye' .
 CIA Information Report, 'Soviet Threats of Retaliation', 23 Oct.62, DDRS 1990, 41.62 . CIA: 'Soviet 'threats of retaliation' against U.S. in response to 'Soviet threats'
 Sieverts was Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs . Sieverts worked for the State Department for more than 20 years .
 See note 1, as well as Sorensen, Kennedy,714; and Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, 827 .
 Schlesinger, journal, 22 Oct.62, quoted in Robert Kennedy,516; see also A Thousand Days,811.62.62 . See also a Thousand Days by Robert Kennedy .
 RFK to Rusk, 30 Oct.62, quoted in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 5.522, ellipsis in original . RFK: "I don't think it's a good thing to say 'I love you, I love you"
 RFK, handwritten notes, d.d. , quoted in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 523, in original . RFK's handwritten notes are published in his memoirs .
 Reconsidering Khrushchev's Gambit Defending the Soviet Union and Cuba', Diplomatic History 14 , 23938.38. Reconsiders the Gambit . Defending Russia and Cuba in the 1960s and 1960s .
 Scholars have been dependent on a participant for the release of documents as well . The transcript is available only because Bundy took a personal interest and transcribed the tape .
 The Defense-of-Cuba Theme and the Missile Crisis', Diplomatic History 14 , 249; and Gaddir., Russia, the Soviet Union and the United States, 251 .