 In 1962, Fidel Castro's revolution was just beginning to reshape Cuba . Soviet troops were building hidden military installations in Cuba . One of those installations was on the farm where his family raised chickens .
 "Our life was getting up every day to take the livestock out to pasture,"" Lopez says . Lopez: "We were going to take livestock out of pasture every day" Lopez: Lopez's life was "a half-century later"
 Lopez said the house had been built for them, no small feat in a country beset by shortages . Seventy-two hours later, Lopez said, a house was built for the family .
 Lopez, his brother and parents left their farm with all their animals and earthly possessions . Lopez and his brother were able to leave the farm with the animals and possessions .
 Thousands of Soviet soldiers and technicians were secreted into Cuba as part of a secret agreement between Castro and Nikita Khrushchev to place nuclear missiles on the island . The operation was part of an agreement between the Castro-Krushchev deal .
 The Russians asked the teenage Cuban farm boy to come back with rum for them . Despite the furious pace of activity on his old farm he didn't pay too much mind to the foreigners .
 Dissident Cuban blogger arrested, colleagues say . "I saw the planes twice. I saw them twice," Cuban blogger says .
 "They flew over that mountain range, came down and then flew out,"" Lopez said . Lopez said. "They came down, came over mountain range"
 President Kennedy ordered Navy ships to quarantine Cuba to prevent more Soviet missiles' and troops' passage to the island . More spy flights revealed Soviet installations across the island and nuclear missiles .
 Lopez: "Back then, we didn't have TV,"" Lopez says of simple life in Cuba's countryside . Lopez says he's proud of his country's rural past .
 Lopez said they never heard of the crisis while it unfolded or that a deal was reached between the Americans and Soviets to remove the missiles if the Americans promised not to invade Cuba . Lopez: "I'm sure there was a deal" between the Soviets and the U.S. to remove
 Lopez said he and his father returned to their old land after the mysterious visitors left . He does remember the loud noise of trucks hauling the Soviet equipment from their farm . Lopez: "I don't know what happened to me, but I don't think it was anything wrong"
 Lopez's family still works the land where Soviet troops once erected nuclear missile sites . Lopez, 65, takes the occasional visitor out to see the traces of the Soviet occupation of his farm .
 A small, faded marble plaque marks the spot where Soviets once pointed nuclear missiles at the U.S. It was also the site where Soviet missiles were pointed at the United States . In the nearby jungle, vines wrapped around fallen buildings that seemed to belong to a much older and forgotten civilization
 Lopez said the marble plaque was a replacement for a bronze one that disappeared years ago . The loudest sound at the remote site was the wind rustling through the adjacent sugar cane fields . Lopez: The marble plaque replaces a bronze that disappeared from the site .