 A vehicle that was manufactured to burn E85 or regular gas had a sticker on the window . You could tell by the VIN and didn't cost any more than a vehicle that just burned regular gas . A sticker on a car that burned E85 had to be removed from the window
 They were all the rage in Europe and many were available only as fleet purchases in 2006 . Many were available for fleet purchases .
 By 2008, they were more abundant and we got June a good used E85 vehicle . June bought a new E85 in 2008 and it was the first time we had a new car .
 It's hard to say if technology was a boon to mankind or had doomed us to an existence we didn't want . It's not clear if technology is a boon or has doomed mankind .
 Didn't happen until about a week ago and by that time we were accustomed to just using radios . "By that time, we were used to just use radios," she says . "We're accustomed to using radios. We're used to use radios"
 We pulled two pickups across the road, their noses coming together to form a V that pointed towards those 20 people . The nose of the two trucks came together to make a V, pointing towards the group .
 It's located at the intersection of highways K-96 and K-25, straight north of us . It is located near K-24 .
 The man, who looked to be maybe 40 and was dressed in clothing I'd associate more with a farmer than a businessman, handed his rifle to the woman beside him who held it at port arms . The woman, who appeared to be a farmer, held the rifle to port arms.
 He stepped forward and visibly relaxed when he saw we had women with us, never mind that they had guns . Never mind that the women with guns had guns, they had a right to stand up .
 A bad bunch came in Wichita County and turned Leoti upside down, killing, raping, all manner of evil . "I don't know who it was, but a bad bunch ... killed, raped and all manner evil," says author .
 "We lit out but had to come on foot; we didn't have any fuel for our vehicles," says survivor . "We didn't even have fuel for their vehicles. We lit out ... we lit out," she says . "It was very difficult for us to get back to
 Maureen O'Hara played opposite John Wayne in McLintock and Big Jake . She played alongside John Wayne for the first time in the movies .
 She was a favorite of Director John Ford, John Ford . They made 5 movies together, mostly because of John Ford's love for her .
 Christian Charity knows no denominations. No we didn't ask if they were Methodist, Christian Charity know no denominations . Christian Charity does not know if they are Methodist .
 Rachel made a big pot of coffee and oatmeal, just to warm their innards . We took them back to Mike's and Rachel made them back there .
 June, Marilyn and she next started a huge pot of beef stew . Mike fished out a pint of White Lightning for the men, that would warm them up .
 "We used up all of our diesel farming and couldn't get gas for our vehicles," farmer says . "We couldn't find gas for their vehicles. We used up ... diesel farming"
 There's a wood furnace in the basement and bottle gas for hot water and the stove . There's also bottle gas and wood furnace .
 They shook heads or otherwise indicated that one sip would last them for a good while . They shook their heads or other indicated they would last for a long time .
 The ethanol absorbs water from the air, which is hard to produce pure ethanol . That's one of the reasons it's hard to make pure ethanol, it absorbs water in the air .
 If you mix coffee and Everclear and later strain out the coffee grounds, you have Kaluha . You can also mix coffee with Everclear to create the drink .
 "I didn't offer the Jones's place because they weren't finished moving out," says Jones . The Jones family is moving out of the Jones' home, but they are still there .
 After Paul mentioned the propane stove and water heater in the new triple wide, I went to Lakin and arranged for my propane tank to be topped off . After Paul had mentioned Paul's new triple-wide, he went to the Lakin store to get his tank topped off
 3 temporary hired hands in addition to Jason. And that's how we came to ending up with 3 temporary hires .
 Jake had been carrying a hunting rifle, but his kids had his AR-15s and his wife was wearing 2 pistols . Jake's wife was also wearing a pistol . Jake and his kids were armed with guns .
 They'd seen us coming and made a few adjustments in case we weren't the bad guys . The game was played in front of the home crowd at 7:30 p.m. ET .
 He said he felt if we saw the AR, we might make the wrong assumption about them . He explained that he felt it might be dangerous to make assumptions about them.
 "The next day, we took some fuel and a little gas and recovered some things they could use from their farms," says the crew . The next day they took fuel and gas from the farms .
 Their kids could drive the tractors, though it would take them 2-3 hours to make the trip . Their kids would also be able to drive the tractor .
 We borrowed a machinery dealer's tilt bed truck and haul most of their implements down to Mike's farm to preserve them and possibly use them . We borrowed the truck and hauled most of the implements to the farm .
 We told him not to get too close and gave him a pair of fairly high powered binoculars . We also gave him some of the world's most powerful telescopes .
 Wichita County was sparsely populated, but had a County Sheriff . Even though the county had a population of less than 100, Wichita County had a Sheriff .
 Sheriff or Deputies may have been carrying Assault Rifles . It wouldn't be likely for them to be carrying assault rifles . Probably were, probably .
 State Defense Forces were few in the Midwest; the states probably couldn't afford them or thought they were duplication of the National Guard . The states probably didn't want to use them; they thought they would be duplicated of the national guard . State Defense forces were few .
 Kansas didn't have one although the Governor had the authority to create one . The Governor of the state had the power to create a state of its own .
 There was some kind of long discourse on the subject, but what it boiled down to was a law existed authorizing the Militias referred to in the 2nd Amendment . The law was passed by Congress in 1996 .
 More of us thought that the 2nd Amendment was all about the right to keep and bear arms, but some authorities claimed that wasn't a right . The purpose of the amendment was to preserve the states' rights to maintain militias, according to authorities .
 Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, South and North Dakota and Colorado were some of the Great Plains states that lacked State Defense Forces . Colorado was one of the first to have a State Defense Force .
 To execute the laws of the Union -e.e., to enforce national laws; National laws include: provisions of United States Constitutions, statutes of Congress, United States treaties, and final decisions of the United States Courts .
 To suppress insurrections -e.e. to put down any armed rebellion against the United States national government or against the duly constituted government of any state . To repel invasions -e., to . defend the Country against foreign attack. To . repel invaders .
 Congress has enacted statutes authorizing the President to employ the state militias as well as the United States Armed Forces against "combinations of persons too powerful to be dealt with" by ordinary judicial processes .
 Normally, the national guards operate under the direction of their respective states, subject to the provisions made by Congress . The national guards are normally directed by their states .
 National guards are part of the United States military forces . They are subject to government by Congress and to the direction of the President .
 When the national guards are not in the national military service, Congress can still exercise a considerable degree of control . Congress still exercises considerable control of national guards .
 Through conditions attached by Congress to federal grants of money to the states for the national guards, national guards are granted to states by the states . The national guards have been deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The Kansas National Guard had been Federalized and wasn't available . Anyway, the Kansas National Guards were Federalized .
 After New Orleans, there was some discussion of whether or not the President had the authority to Federalize National Guards without the Governors' permission . Well, after New Orleans there was a discussion of the President's authority to federalize the National Guard .
 Ted Kennedy claims that depends on whether the President's was a Democrat or a Republican . That assumes that WW III qualifies as a national emergency, Ted Kennedy says . Kennedy: "That assumes that W.III qualifies as an emergency"
 Way back when the H5N1 was on the other side of the ocean, we could have done something . We could have prevented the spread of the virus in the past .
 We had $100 billion to kill Arabs, but only $7 billion to save the population . We had . $100bn to kill Arab people, but $7bn to save them, says President Obama .
 I wonder who dreamed up the idea to add pneumonic plague to the mix, terrorist #1 or terrorist #2 . The plague has been added to the U.S. hospital system .
 Osama, you earned it, but it might be a bit warmer than you planned . Enjoy Paradise Osama . Enjoy it .
 The car was nice, but it needed fuel to go . Except when the equation was incomplete, it was incomplete .
 If it broke, you cobbled it back together or got another car . They also needed parts and if it broke and the dealer didn't have the part, it was cobbled together .
 The cars had stainless steel gas tanks, Teflon lined hoses and different compression ratios, not a simple procedure especially in these times . The cars were made of stainless steel, stainless steel .
 We were grateful to have E85 vehicles and someone planning to produce E85 fuel . We are also grateful that we are able to get the best fuel for our vehicles .
 Technology has put us in a position of destroying the planet as we know it and us along with it . And I think technology has put . us into a position . to destroy the planet . And that's not good for the planet, it's bad for the future, says Dr.
 Someone had to do something about those buttholes that raided Leoti, maybe Lakin would be next . Meanwhile someone had to stop the butthole from raiding Leoti . Maybe Lakin might be next.
 If we let them get away with what they did, others might think they could get away from the same darn thing . We should be careful not to repeat the mistakes we made in the past .
 "We had some trouble getting weapons, so we don't have many automatic weapons," says President Obama . "We're not going to be able to use automatic weapons" says Obama .
 "Big Jake" is working on producing ethanol and biodiesel so they won't have as big a problem with fuel . "I talked to Big Jake and got him squared away," he says .
 "We put off leaving until 2am; we wouldn't have to spend as much time walking," says the author . We put off going out at 2am to avoid spending more time walking .
 The 2 spare hours had been spent getting briefed on the layout of Leoti and determining our avenues of approach . We had two spare hours to prepare for the attack .
 It took a while for everyone to get into position and then we started in on foot . It took us a while to get ready for the battle, but we got back on the track . It was the first time we had a chance to win a major trophy in a row, says
 Police say they were attacked by a group of men armed with assault rifles in the middle of the night . The incident happened in the early hours of September 1 . The suspect says he was trying to protect himself and his family .
 "We found them and took them out, one at a time and always with a knife," says police chief . "They found them, one of them and one at one, one with knife," he says .
 It was organized brutality, what they did, not what we were doing, he says . After a while, I think that may have applied to us too, he adds . 'Organized brutality' may have been the reason for the brutality'
 When we found towns people, we freed them and gave them the guns we took from the bad guys . We freed them, gave them guns, and they took them from bad guys. When they found them, they were freed from the towns people .
 "They are taught to be forgiving, not to let themselves get kicked around like they had been," she says of her friends .
 "A man might forget all about that when his family is abused by a bunch of drunken criminals," he says . Besides, a man might remember all about his family being abused by drunken criminals, he adds .
 It remained to be seen how the bad guys had gotten the drop on Leoti at the outset .
 I told you they were temporary farm hands, and once we had the town cleared just after noon, we climbed in our vehicles and headed home . "Once we had had to clear the town, we headed home. We had to climb in their vehicles and head home.
 You needed a state government functioning to pay wages to state employees and law enforcement . You needed law enforcement and you needed a functioning state government, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A hundred or more years ago, law enforcement officers were allowed to accept rewards, probably because they weren't well paid . Law enforcement officers have been rewarded for their work in the past .
 There wasn't any way to get the tax revenue to Topeka, even 18 months after the war, so they were forced to rely on the local tax base . Topeka is a city of Kansas, Kansas .
 If you want City and County government, you have to be able to pay the employees . The city and county government is in need of money, says the mayor . "If you want to be a city of any kind, you need to be at the top of the pile"
 With no mail service, we didn't worry about state or federal income taxes . We didn't have to worry about taxes, but we still had mail service .
 Paul told me that the thought crossed his mind more than once, but Don insisted that they weren't . Paul told him that he had thought about the possibility of suicide . Don insists that they aren't .
 It was agreed that they'd wait to get married after she graduated from high school in just a little over a year .
 "We weren't that much older than we would have been having children of our own," says mother-of-one . "We were having children that would be having children," she says .
 Any regrets we had had had long since vanished, especially once Jim and Mary moved in . Any regrets they had had vanished long since they moved in, especially after Jim moved in with Mary .
 They'd have 3 more years of school after this year and the older one gets the faster time seems to move . The older one has more school years than the younger one .
 "I was basically cranking out one 55-gallon drum of biodiesel every 3 hours, 4 times a day," says John Defterios . He was "cranking out" one 55 gallon drum every three hours, he says .
 In the end, we'd found that the easiest way to transfer the fuel was in 55-gallon drums because they held one batch . The easiest way of transferring fuel was to use the 55 gallon drums .
 Paul would haul a truckload of drums to town and divide up the money based on a ratio computed from each of our input into the raw oil production . The money was divided up based on the ratio of each of the drums produced .
 "That way we didn't feel like we were getting anything for the time we were putting in. That way we felt like we weren't getting anything," he said .
 That would give us 1,640 acres of beans and depending on the yield anywhere from 79,000 to 118,000 gallons of oil . That would be 1,600 acres of bean land . Depending on yield, the yield could be 79,00 gallons of beans .
 "We were going to need more of the biodiesel processing units just to handle the oil," says the president of the United States .
 I already had two, one here and the one over at the Hansen place that Jason was using. I already have one here, one at home and one at Hansen place . The Hansen place is where Jason used to be using.
 If Mike and Paul each added another processor, it would serve to even things out, by yiminy . The two men would each add another processor to their arsenal .
 If I could get enough help, I might try working those Clydesdale mares a little so I wouldn't have to try and retrain them to harness . I might even try to work those mares with enough help to harness them .
 "I should be able to breed them in the spring and use them for a bit before I had to stop," says owner . He says he hopes to breed the animals again in spring . "I'm not going to have to stop. I should breed them again," he says .
 And should, God forbid, more than one thing happens, how those things relate to each other . And should more happen, how that thing relate to other things?
 It began in 2003 and by 2006, there could not have been a single person in the U.S. who hadn't heard something about it . CNN.com: By 2006, the story had been so widespread that it had become so widespread it was impossible to find someone who hadn
 Tamiflu can be taken within the first 48-hours and most likely survive, experts say . If they didn't know that you could take it, they had to be hiding in a closet, they must have been hiding out .
 We won't have a pandemic unless the H5N1 mutates, experts say . Remember, remember, we won't need to have a flu pandemic if it mutates . Vaccine companies rushed to develop a vaccine .
 Tamiflu is still available for around $50 per card . It's still available in the U.S. for about $50 .
 "People like that crazy guy in California have been telling anyone who would listen to be prepared," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In an article on CNN or one of the other multiple news sources, a doctor said, to start stocking up on food . A doctor said to be stocking up food .
 He was talking about having food to deal with a forced isolation period if the flu strikes . What he said was about is having food for those who want to be isolated .
 A flu pandemic probably won't cause the lights, water and gas to go off, hopefully, so you probably don't have to have a generator . The lights and water will probably not go off when a pandemic hits .
 There are also hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, volcanoes and really nasty storms that sometimes bring down power lines . There is also a lot of power lines in the world .
 It won't do much good to have a standby generator that runs on natural gas if, God forbid, you should have an earthquake . Taken one step further, it won't help you much good if you need a generator running on gas .
 Palmdale, California, residents can have LP tank in their backyard . It must be within a certain distance from any buildings .
 There is even a Santa Claus, in the hearts and minds of everyone, everyone . We eventually learn that Santa Claus is an alias .
 Get something because when 'they say you can't leave your home, 'they' mean it . The point is, get something because it's important for your safety . Get something from the home .
 The grocery stores will be locked up tighter than a drum and Wal-Mart will be in the same boat . The grocery store is locked up tight as a drum, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The key is incremental preparations, if you plan to wait until the last minute, you'll find that the last hour was in the previous hour . The key to success is incremental preparation .
 Rotate them, everything eventually loses its effectiveness . Certain things can kill you or make you very sick if they are too old . Epinephrine and cyclines for example can be used to kill you . Rotate everything, including epinephrine or cyclines .
 Ask your doctor, he charges you plenty for his time, get your money's worth . Ask over time, not all at once, not just once, but ask over time . Get your money for your doctor's time .
 The Three Amigos are always about Vz prepared, but never fully prepared . In case you hadn't noticed, The Three amigos were always prepared .
 In the stories they always end up borrowing this and that and never get shot for looting. In the books they always ended up borrowing things and never getting shot for looted. In this case, the stories never end up being true true stories .
 If they tried to do it, they'd get shot, count on it; the chances are you would too . Its fiction, if they tried, they would get shot .
 In his lifetime there have been several flu epidemics, Hong Kong, Asian and who remembers . Hong Kong has had several epidemics of the past few years, including a flu epidemic .
 Measured resistance to standard antiviral drugs in H3N2 has increased from 1% in 1994 to 12% in 2003 to 91% in 2005 . The resistance to amantadine and rimadine has increased since 1994 .
 Oseltamivir is the most commonly sought drug, since it is available in pill form . The drug is often available in the form of a pill .
 Zanamivir (trade name Relenza) is also considered for use, but it must be inhaled . Zanamivanir is also available for use in the United States .
 The U.S. is basing B-2s on Guam as defense against the Chinese . Or you could have read the article in the Washington Times .
 You get a basic supply that will last you for say, 3 months, and then rotate it, don't use it up because Y2K didn't happen . You get the basic supply of supplies for 3 months . Then rotate it out and don't take it up .
 There are 10 or 20 earthquakes EVERY DAY in California and any one of them could be The Big One . Any one of these earthquakes could be the Big One.
 Oseltamivir is an anti-viral used in the treatment and prophylaxis of Influenza virus A and Influenza Virus B . Like Zanamvir, Oselvir is a neuraminidase inhibitor, acting as a transition-state analogue
 It was developed by Gilead Sciences and is currently marketed by Hoffmann-LaRoche under the trade name Tamiflu . The drug is currently being marketed by the trade-branding company . It is also being marketed in China by the pharmaceutical company behind the drug .
 With increasing fears about the potential for a new influenza pandemic, Oseltamivir has received substantial media attention . The drug has been shown to be effective in some cases .
 Production capacity is limited, and governments are stockpiling the drug . Governments have stockpiled the drug, which is available in limited quantities .
 Oseltamivir is indicated for the treatment of infections due to influenza A and B virus in people at least one year of age, and prevention of influenza in people aged 13 years of age .
 The usual adult dosage for treatment of influenza is 75 mg twice daily for 5 days, beginning within 2 days of the appearance of symptoms and with decreased doses for children and patients with renal impairment .
 Oseltamivir may be given as a preventive measure either during a community outbreak or following close contact with an infected individual . It is given to prevent an outbreak of an infection .
 Standard prophylactic dosage is 75 mg once daily for patients aged 13 and older . This has been shown to be safe and effective for up to six weeks . Standard dose is 75mg once daily, which has been proven to be effective for six weeks.
 Various cases of psychological disorders were associated with Oseltamivir therapy between 2000-2004, including several deaths . Several deaths were linked to the therapy .
 Rashes associated with Oseltamivir therapy should be added to the Product Information regarding rashes . However, it was recommended that a warning was added to product information about rashes associated .
 The bill would provide more money for armored vehicles and nearly $2 billion for the Pentagon to develop technology to detect and destroy makeshift roadside bombs . It would also provide $2.2 billion to the Pentagon with technology that can detect roadside bombs and detect makeshift bombs .
 IEDs are the leading killer of U.S. troops in Iraq . IEDIs are the Iraqi insurgency's weapon of choice and leading killer . $2 billion, hell, I'll tell you how to do that for only $2 million. IEDI is the leading
 Like many Americans, I support the troops, but question the decision to keep them there for very much longer . Like many others, I think the troops should be allowed to leave .
 I can assure you they won't be there after January 20, 2009, assuming they are there on November 4, 2008 . "I'm sure you won't see them again until January 4, 2009," says author .
 They shouldn't believe all the Patriot Fiction they read, they might accidentally do something right . They should be careful not to read Patriot Fiction. They might actually do something wrong .
 Come gather around people wherever you roam And admit that the waters around you have grown . Accept it that soon you'll be drenched to the bone. Accept it .
 If your time to you is worth saving, Then you better start swimming or you'll sink like a stone . If you want to save your time, then start swimming, then you're in trouble .
 Come writers and critics, who prophecies with your pen And keep your eyes wide, the change won't come again . Don't speak too soon for the wheel's still in spin, says the writer .
 Come senators, congress-men, please heed the call . Don't stand in the doorway, don't block up the hall. Don't block the hall, please .
 There's a battle outside and it's raging, and it'll soon shake your windows and rattle your walls . For he that gets hurt will be he who has stalled. There's been a battle in the air, and the battle will soon shake windows and walls .
 Your sons and your daughters are beyond your command . Your old road is riply again . Please get out of the new one, if you can't lend your hand .
 The line it is drawn, the curse it is cast, The slow one now will later be fast . The present now is later be past. As the future is past .
 The order is rapidly fading. The first one now will be later the last. And the first one will be the last . The order will be rapidly fading .
 In the squares of the city, In the shadow of a steeple; By the relief office, I'd seen my people . In the . shadow of the . shade of a . steeple, I've seen my . people. In the shadows of the City, In . the
 As they stood there hungry, I stood there asking, Is this land made for you and me? "As they stood . hungry, he stood . There were people hungry, asking, 'Is this land . made for us and us?'
 He wasn't good with cattle or the hogs, seemingly preferring the horses the kids rode . He was good with horses and cattle, but not with hogs .
 We thought militia when the guy from the extension service told us about the Sheriff's collective resistance, but it was just a plea for more reserve deputies . "We thought militia" was a militia .
 The few perks you got from being a reserve deputy were more than made up for when you got called up . The reserve deputy was called up to the National Guard in 2009 .
 "We had to carry the radios all of the time, especially after Leoti. Hadn't happened since that 4th of July thing in Deerfield, but we had been carrying radios all the time."
 By the time we finished processing the soybean oil, it was time to get the soil ready to plant the coming year's crops . The soil was ready to be ready for the new crop crop .
 "I planted and had him finish up the plowing of the fields on my original 160," he says . "He had to finish up plowing the fields"
 Of course a 6 bottom plow will turn twice as much soil as a 3-bottom plow . But what you save in time, you burn up in fuel, it's fuel .
 At a time when many conventional farmers across the U.S. are in desperate financial straits, Amish farms are still making money and turning a profit . No participation in direct government subsidies, other than those built into market prices, is allowed .
 The Amish have been exempted from paying Social Security tax, not because they don't want to pay taxes, but because they are opposed to accepting the benefits . Amish are not only exempt from paying taxes but also from accepting Social Security benefits, they are against accepting them .
 Maybe the greatest paradox and tragedy of modern society is that so many of us have become disconnected from the land that nourishes and feeds us with its beauty and bounty, and yet we experience no sense of loss . The greatest paradox is that many people are disconnected from their land .
 As any good farmer will tell you, Amish or not, sooner or later one reaps what one sows . "As a good farmer, as a farmer, you can't be Amish, but you can be a farmer," farmer says .
 "We had been hunting for horse drawn equipment since we'd bought the Clydesdales," says owner . "We're going to get the best horse drawn vehicles," she says .
 An old combine had its own motor to power the machine and could be rigged to be towed by a 6 horse/muie hitch . One of the things we found was an old combine that had its . own motor . The combine was rigged with a 6-horse hitch and was rigged
 A type of baler which is less common today produces small rectangular or 'square' bales . The baler is used to make small rectangular bales of hay .
 The bales are wrapped with two, three, or sometimes four strands of twine and knotted . The twine is used to tie the bales to the ground and to tie them together .
 This form of bale is no longer much used in commercial agriculture because of the costs involved in handling many small bales . The cost of handling the bales is too high for commercial agriculture to use .
 It enjoys some popularity in small-scale, low-mechanization agriculture like our situation . However, it is not widely used in agriculture like this situation .
 Those huge round bales were difficult to handle without specialty equipment . The bales are difficult to deal with without specialized equipment, experts say .
 The small square bales weighed about 50 pounds and could be dropped in the field or stacked on a wagon towed behind the baler . Conversely the bales were dropped in a field or could be stacked in a wagon or dropped on a field .
 Virginia farmers' had large families in the state . The state is famous for its large families .
 Those old manual tie wire balers could take your hand off in the blink of an eye . It's a good way to keep your hand on the side of the road .
 They had 2 people riding on the baler feeding the baling wire into the mechanism that wire wrapped the bales . The bales were wrapped in by a mechanism that wrapped the wire around them .
 They weren't the good old days ; they were more like the labor intensive dangerous old days . "They weren't like the good days. They were like the bad old days," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The equipment is hard to wear out and they still made baling wire right up until the war . The equipment was hard worn out and the wire was still made until the end of the war.
 Baling wire, otherwise known as ""farm wire" or ""soft wire,"" is primarily used in an agricultural setting . It is used for everything from mending fences to manually binding square bales of hay, straw or grass .
 Baling wire is commonly used in many non-agricultural applications, usually in an informal, make-do manner . The wire is often used in the most informal way possible .
 Typical uses range from supporting loose mufflers to patching chain-link fences . Typical uses include supporting mufflers, patching fences and patching broken fences .
 Built small rooms and insulated them to keep in some of the heat from running the stills and the biodiesel converters . Built a small room and insulated it to keep the heat of running the engine stills .
 Maybe we jumped the gun by giving those firearms to the kids when we did, it was harder getting presents every year . Maybe we jump the gun, maybe it's harder to get presents each year .
 Jim and Mary gave them each two of the 1/1 Oth ounce gold coins to carry in their BOBs or whatever . The couple also got some clothes and some gold coins .
 The old saw is that if you build a better mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your door . The world is beat by a better trap, the old saw says, "If you build it, it's the world."
 If you get a good idea about how to solve your fuel problem, many will copy you and there goes your market . If you succeed in solving a fuel problem you will be at risk of being copied by others .
 Nothing lasts forever and this would be the last year we planted a big crop of soybeans, says farmer . This would be last year's last year, he says . "Nothing lasts forever," he said .
 "We had to get the crop rotation kicked in because we didn't have all of those agricultural chemicals," says the governor . "We needed crop rotation to get rid of all of the agricultural chemicals" says governor .
 Next year, it would be V 6 oats, V 6 barley, % corn and % grasses, one kind of grasses .
 Those mares were big enough now to fit the harnesss to them that McGilvray sold us . The harnesses were now too big for the mares to fit .
 The old harness maker in Lakin said draft horses could probably use one of two sizes of harness and it would be better to wait . I figured that since most Clydesdales end up about the same size, I might get by with duplicating the harnesses .
 He, or one of his former employees, could fashion quality harnesses out of synthetics that would outlast leather and be less expensive . The harnesses could be made from synthetics and be outlasting leather .
 A mistake many beginning horse farmers make is failing to allow for special conditions under which teams must work . A mistake often makes is not allowing special conditions to be set up for horses to work .
 You can't assume that a certain number of horses will handle a certain implement under any and all conditions . You have to be careful not to assume that horses are capable of handling any of these implements .
 A team of Haflingers may easily pull a 12"" plow in moist, stubble ground, while an 8"" or a 10" plow might give them trouble in dry, alfalfa sod . A 12"" or 10"" plow may struggle in dry
 A grain binder in clean, dry wheat on hard ground will pull easier than the same machine in weedy or lodged wheat on soft ground . The same machine can pull easier in clean and dry wheat than in soft, weedy wheat . The binder should be used to bind clean
 Over hilly land, an implement is harder to pull uphill and tougher to hold back when traveling downgrade . An implement can be used over hilly terrain, especially in hilly areas .
 There are no hard and fast rules about what size equipment can be used with a given amount of horse power . We can put forth some general guidelines about how much equipment you can use .
 The equipment used is smaller, and progress is slower, but it can't be done . It can be done, but progress is still being made, and the equipment is smaller than ever .
 The old John Deere and International Harvester catalogs for horse-drawn equipment recommend a 10"" plow for one horse, 12"" for a light 2-horse team, and 14" for a regular 2- horse team .
 New 12"", 14"" and 16" walking plows are available from Pioneer Equipment . l&J Equipment offers an 8"" walking plow . Pioneer Equipment also offers a new 12", 14" and 16"" walk plows .
 A small team should be able to handle a 12"" sulky plow in ordinary conditions . These are sold new by Pioneer and White Horse Machine .
 Pioneer Equipment can be purchased new from Pioneer Equipment . Spring tooth and spike tooth harrows can be bought from Pioneer equipment .
 Small disc harrows are offered by Groffdale Machine and Kota Manufacturing . 4' or 5' single gang disc harrow harrows might be found at farm auctions .
 A cultivator that straddles a single-row would require a team, while a single horse could pull a hand cultivator . Hand cultivator goes between two rows, such as one sold by I & J Manufacturing .
 A team would be sufficient to operate a mower with a 5' cutter bar, but a single animal would be better off with a 4' machine . A mower would be enough to operate with a team of four people .
 Used and rebuilt mowers usually McCormick-Deering or John Deere can be found . I know of no source for new horse-drawn mowers .
 Side delivery hay rakes and tedders can be bought new from most equipment dealers . l&J's side rake is ground driven, as are Pequea's hay tedder's .
 A two-row corn planter and a small 9or 10-row grain drill are two-horse machines . A small 9/10-row planter or a small 10/10 grain drill can be used to grow corn .
 A one-row corn planter and a five-row grain drill, meant to be pulled by one horse, were once built by most of the major manufacturers . Used ones can still be found in the U.S.
 Corn and grain binders were pulled by mediumand large-sized teams of two horses . Threeand four-horse teams were more efficient and provided enough power to make the ground-driven mechanism work properly .
 Pulling a wagon and a hayloader might be practical on flat land, but would be a big load for a single horse or a team in hilly Country . Pulling wagon and hayloader may be practical in flatland, but it's not practical in the hilly country .
 During the early days of mechanical grain threshing, machines were often driven by one or two animals on a treadmill . The machines were driven by animals .
 Winnowing or separating the grain from the chaff and straw was accomplished by hand or with a fanning mill . Winnow or separating grain from chaff or straw was done by hand .
 In the last half of the 19th century as threshing machines were improved by the addition of cleaning fans, self-feeders, straw walkers, and wind stackers . Power requirements increased until 8, 10, and 12 horses were needed to run the machines .
 If you could find one of the early, early, small, wooden threshers, you could get by with your one or two animals . I suppose that if you could . find one, small wooden thrushers, they could be used for a small family .
 The same areas will usually have a number of implement dealers who specialize in finding, refurbishing, and reselling horse machinery .
 In theory, if the farm is too large, you're better off farming with tractors than horses . If you're too big, you may have to use tractors instead of horses .
 It is based on the theory that you need 6 horses to farm about 75 acres and 1 teamster for every 6 horse team . You need to farm 75 acres of land and one teamster per horse team to farm .
 Stated a different way, you could farm a quarter section just fine with horses . The farm is just a quarter of a horse section .
 There was no un-punching the buttons that destroyed China and the U.S. and later other countries, says President Obama . "There was no . un-ununching . the buttons," he says .
 "We exist within our environment and if that environment doesn't include factories capable of refining fuel or producing parts, then we are forced to basically start over. We exist in our environment," says John Defterios. "If that environment does not include factories that can refine fuel or produce
 With good luck, wind turbines would keep us in electricity for twenty years, each . Wind turbines could keep us out of power for 20 years each, say experts .
 I'm not talking about running out of natural gas, but about the parts they'll need when one of the machines or generators breaks or wears out . I'm talking about parts that will be needed when a machine or generator breaks . The parts they will need will include parts to keep generators
 If that environment includes colder winters and warmer winters, we adjust or go hungry . We adjust or we go hungry or we'll go hungry. We adapt to the environment, or we're going hungry. If that happens, we'll be hungry .
 Some things weren't to be had, no matter how desperately you wanted them, like anhydrous ammonia . Some things were to have, even if you were desperate for them .
 Anhydrous ammonia is made from natural gas, LPG (propane and butane) or naphtha . It is also made from propane, butane and propane .
 Constraints on the weather affect the crops too, and we were pushing it planting soybeans 2 years in a row without the necessary nutrients to add to the soil . The weather is also a factor in the decision to plant soybeans .
 The crops are rotated in a certain order with the consuming plants planted after the fixing plants . That's why the crops must be rotated in certain order .
 Soybeans should follow corn, wheat, barley, barley or other grass crops in a rotation to minimize disease carryover and optimize nutrient utilization .
 Soybeans should not follow alfalfa, dry edible beans, canola, or sunflower where white mold disease has been detected . Soybeans shouldn't be followed by alfalea, other crops such as canola and sunflower .
 We could plant soybeans where corn would be planted this year and lots of alfalfa, timothy, oats, barley, barley and corn . We could also plant lots of other crops, such as soybeans, barley .
 If that guy in Garden City could get enough gasoline, he could produce a lot of the highly stable E85 . E85 is a highly stable form of gasoline .
 "We were just trying to stay one step ahead of the market, not one step behind," she said . "We're not going to be able to compete with the world," she added .
 We could always sacrifice a little corn and increase the garden. Furthermore depending on the available labor supply we could always sacrificed a lot of corn . We could also sacrifice a lot more corn and more corn .
 We made certain to hold back plenty of potatoes because they are one of the largest components in the American diet .
 Deeply excised eyes were more than enough, leaving extra potato to turn into alcohol or even hog feed . Extra potato can be turned into alcohol, alcohol or hog feed, according to experts .
 You use the sour mash method to provide yeast for the subsequent batch of mash . And speaking of alcohol, you use it to provide alcohol for the next batch of beer .
 "If you have cows, you have to milk them in 12-hour intervals, and they don't take weekends off," says farmer . If you have a cow, milk it in 12 hours intervals, milk them 12 hours a day, he says . "You have cows that don
 Wind turbines generally shun electricity but a wind turbine uses natural energy . Some wind turbines use natural energy and some of them have those . Wind turbines can be found in the United States .
 In the US, there are Amish communities in nearly every agricultural state . Amish people live in rural areas of the country .
 Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Indiana and Iowa are just a few of their several communities . The state of Iowa is one of the largest in the country .
 They don't refuse to deal with the English and give probably more respect than they get . The English are more likely to be more respected than the English, according to the BBC .
 As long as we had homemade diesel fuel and the tractors didn't breakdown, we were set . "We were set. We had homemade fuel and we didn't need to worry. We were set," she says .
 "It gave us the time we needed to expand our herds of Clydesdales and riding horses," says the owner of the Clydesdesdale .
 Amish will ride in a car belonging to the English if necessary, they just won't own any . The Amish don't own a car, but they will use it if necessary .
 Our herd now included the 4 Morgan mares, the two Morgan stallions, the colt and 3 fillies, plus 4 4-year old Clydesdale mares . The herd now includes the 2 stallions and the 2 fillies .
 According to that fella's formula, we need 24 draft horses to farm a section of a section, if it ever came to that . The formula is said to be based on the fact that it would be impossible to farm in a section .
 "I didn't doubt that it would, given the rate at which the Country wasn't rebuilding itself," says David Cameron . "It would be a good thing for the country to rebuild itself," he says .
 It was bits and pieces now with the cleanup of the big cities taking longer than anyone thought, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It was bits of pieces now," he says . Sutter: "It's bits and bits now"
 Kansas needed money, badly, and with no one filing tax returns, the till was empty . The state is in desperate need of money, and the state is desperate for it .
 "It occurred to me that they were a bit behind the curve but it was a good way to unload the mostly worthless FRNs," says author . "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say but it's good to sell," he says .
 Don graduated and asked Sandy to marry him after she graduated the following year . Don proposed to Sandy the next year after she had graduated from college .
 Jim and Mary adapted to living on the farm and Mary told June, Jim and she really appreciated our finding a place for them and that we were the best substitute parents they'd ever had . June and Mary say they're the best substitutes parents they've ever had.
 One day they'd own everything, however, they each were allowed to choose a foal as their own horse . One day the children would own everything and own their own horses .
 Shep decided that Mary needed the most companion to her ship or protecting . Shep was clearly understood he was their dog .
 He was getting big; I wouldn't want to be on the other side of those teeth . He was growing big; he was getting bigger . He would be getting bigger, he said .
 "With enough help, our fences were sound and we could pretty well see the entire section from anywhere," says the author . With enough help we could see the area from anywhere .
 The only two areas fenced beside the perimeter were the pasture and the garden . The garden and pasture were fenced around the perimeter of the park .
 The Sheriff seemed to have his own ideas about what constituted a local militia . He'd check a prospective candidate out in his own way and if he was satisfied, give them a badge and swear 'em in .
 It wasn't quite in full compliance with Kansas law, but the Sheriff seemed satisfied . The Sheriff said he was satisfied .
 Word was he'd told the bikers they could party at the lake anytime, provided they let him know and checked their guns, but no dope . Word was that he'd said he'd checked the guns and checked them out .
 The winter wasn't as bad as the previous and we were in the field early, planting according to what we worked out over the winter . The winter was as good as last year, but the weather wasn't too bad for the farmers .
 We weren't using hybrids and although it reduced the yields, we had seed stock for each year that followed . We weren’t using hybrids, but although it . Although it reduced . yields, it . reduced the yield, it also reduced the seed stock each year .
 Several of the young people from the Lakin Public Schools volunteered to work in the 3 large gardens for a share of what we produced .
 The gardens all ran about 10 acres . Considering that the gardens all run 10 acres, we took all of the help that we could get .
 Even if you plow up your backyard, I doubt you can produce enough food for a family for a full year . Even though you can grow your own backyard, you can't produce enough for a year .
 "One of the problems that began to surface was the lack of pharmaceuticals," says the mayor . "We need more pharmaceuticals. We need more," he says. "It's a good time for people to come forward with their own medicine."
 Doc Williams had basically run out of alternatives and the drugs stores couldn't get meds from their suppliers and the suppliers couldn’t get them from the distributors . Doc Williams ran out of alternative meds and the drug stores were unable to get them .
 Dr. Doc and the Board at the hospital had seen it coming and had stocked up the best they could before the flu and the war . The Board of the hospital saw it coming .
 Kearny County had a drug problem and it wasn't meth . It was not meth, it was a prescription drug . It wasn't the meth .
 I meant to tell you, the store was repurchasing the empty quarts and pints and we should have plenty, I said . The store repurchased the empty pints, quarts, pints .
 A guy in Garden City is trying to get an engine to run on pure ethanol, like Henry Ford did . Paul says he's trying to make the engine run on ethanol .
 I think it finally took Chavez getting elected in Venezuela to force the President to take a hard look at our energy problems . I think that it took Chavez to force Venezuela to look at its energy problems.
 It might not happen unless all of the environmentalists were caught in the big cities the Chinese hit . The Chinese government is cracking down on environmental pollution .
 Coal is one of the true measures of the energy strength of the United States. Coal is a true measure of the U.S. energy strength, says CNN.com .
 One quarter of the world's world's coal reserves are found within the U.S. The energy content of the nation's coal resources exceeds that of all known recoverable oil . The nation's energy content is greater than that of any other oil recoverable energy .
 In 2004, net generation of electricity rose slightly to 3,971 billion kilowatt-hours . The U.S. electricity production rose slightly in 2004 .
 For the 2005 through 2009 planning period, respondents reported 94 gigawatts of new generators were scheduled to start commercial operation . Respondents reported 94 billion gigawatts were planned for commercial operations .
 Or, maybe because we have 6 53-gallon barrels of whisky that we can drink one of these days . Maybe because of the fact that we have a whisky barrel in the world . Or, perhaps because of how much whisky we've got .
 This new wood means that the bourbon draws a great deal of color and flavor from the barrel . Vanilla and caramel predominant characteristics are predominant characteristics .
 The climate in Kentucky in the summer gets very hot, and cold in the winter . Kentucky is known for its hot summer and cold winter conditions .
 This means that with the rapid expansion and contraction of the spirit into and out of the wood, maturing happens at a quicker rate than for example in the cool, damp climates of Scotland or Ireland . This is because of the rapid growth and contraction in the wood .
 White oak barrels are filled to capacity with the high wine, ready for several years of aging . The new, white oak barrels will be filled with high wine .
 The barrels are charred on the inside, giving bourbon its amber color and mellow but potent taste . The barrels give bourbon a mellow yet potent taste and amber color .
 As the liquid ages in the barrel, variations in temperature as the seasons change force it to expand and contract through the caramelized layer of charred wood inside the barrel . This layer of wood is "mellowing" it and giving it the distinctive bourbon flavor and appearance .
 The whiskey is composed of a mash of 51 80 per cent corn, and is aged in new, charred oak barrels for a minimum of two years . It is made of 51 per cent of corn, with the majority of the mash being made of corn .
 Tennessee whiskey must undergo the Lincoln County Process . Bourbon and Tennessee whiskey are different types of whiskey . Bourbon whiskey is different from Tennessee whiskey .
 This process requires that the whiskey be filtered through an approximately 10 foot thick layer of sugar maple charcoal . The whiskey is filtered through a 10 foot-thick layer of charcoal .
 Most of the people who had farmed with horses in this area were long gone . We figured it would be a steep learning curve; most of the horses are long gone. We're looking forward to a new life in the area .
 We all agreed that we'd keep one colt each as a backup stallion and geld the rest of the rest . "We're going to keep the rest as backup stallions and we're keeping the rest," she says .
 The Morgan's could be trained to harness and pull buggies and wagons, just to go to Lakin . The Morgan family could be harnessed and pulled buggies, wagons just to get out .
 If you think about it, the war had been environmentally friendly, it was environmentally friendly . The war was 'environmentally friendly' in one sense .
 The day when we'd have to store the tractors was rapidly approaching, although they all burned biodiesel . The day was approaching when we would need to store some of the vehicles . The tractors all burn biodiesel, but all burned the fuel .
 The things that had always been important to mankind, potable water, waste disposal and food, had survived the war . Potable water and waste disposal were among the things that survived .
 "People shouldn't get the idea that we were totally self-sufficient, we weren't," she says . "We weren't. People shouldn't think we were self-sustainable," she adds .
 Rural flight had a new meaning, fleeing to the Country instead of from the Country . Rural flight was a new way of fleeing the country instead of fleeing it .
 Life hadn't changed that much, same food on the table, meat, taters, veggie and homemade bread . Life hasn't changed much, she says, but she says .
 June rolled oats and rolled them to make oatmeal . June rolled them into oatmeal. Maybe I shouldn't say that .
 June used a powered butter churn, also known as an ice cream maker, to make ice cream . She skimmed the cream and June used to use a powered churn .
 In a small sauce pot add sugar and water and simmer until slight caramel color comes to the liquid . Add a small caramel sauce pot of sugar to the mixture . Add water to the sauce pot and simmer for a few minutes .
 As we increased our herds, we had more milk than we knew what to do with . So we chilled it and hauled it to Lakin. We have more milk now .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 "Leoti was never far from our minds. And yes, we carried guns, not because we wanted to carry guns, but because of Leoti's death . Leoti was not far from his mind, but he was always in the frame of mind .
 I know I'm not telling the story in what would appear to be an orderly fashion, more like how it happened . Some days I didn't write anything in my journal, some days I wrote nothing in it . I know it's not all orderly .
 More cows meant finding a good used milking machine setup and installing it . More cows needed to be milked in order to increase the number of cows .
 Sometimes subjects that wouldn't otherwise get discussed are discussed in the few moments before you roll over and go to sleep . Sometimes subjects of conversation can be discussed before bedtime .
 Like Mary having a semi-steady boyfriend; a little young, if you ask me, but these are different times . Like Mary, it's different times. Like Mary had a semisteady .
 June and I weren't mom and dad and given their ages, I doubt it would come to that . June and June's ages would be too young to have a baby together .
 That County lady never came back, if she talked to the kids, it must have been at school . "That County lady didn't come back," she said . "If she came back she would have talked to them, it would be at school"
 From only 2 cows and a bull, you can build a cattle herd; it just takes a few years to build a herd . From only a few cows and an animal herd you can have a herd of your own . From 2 cows to 2 cows you can get a herd out of
 From 4 Clydesdale mares and 4 Morgan mares, you can build it herd of horses . You can build a herd of four horses and it doesn't take nearly as long, especially if most of the foals are fillies .
 When another farmer bit the dust, too old and no kids to take over, we bought his livestock . We bought him from a farmer who was too old to be taken over by his family .
 How they ever handled large dairy herds before the milking machine came along escapes me, must have had large families or lots of hired help, or both .
 "I had an older milking machine, the Surge belly milker, the one with the big pot," she says . "It was a big pot. I had to use it," she recalls .
 It came with 6 pots and some extra utter cups . Not much to wear out on a milking machine .
 You can take the boy off the farm, but you can't take the farm out of the boy, says author . "You can take a farm boy out of a boy. You can't . take a boy off a farm."
 Of course, if he hasn't been on a farm since 1954, some of his information might be a little dated . The farm is still growing in the area .
 In the 1960's, pipeline milking systems replaced bucket milkers as the preferred way to milk cows in North America . Pipeline milkers were the preferred method of milking cows in the 1960s . Pipeline milksers are now used in the United States .
 Pipeline milkers require much less labor and are easier on the humans doing the milking . Pipeline milkingers require less labor than traditional milkers do .
 Thousands of Pipeline milking systems were installed in the 1960's and 1970's as farmer's herds were getting larger . Thousands of pipelines were installed around the world in 1960s and 1970s .
 Many are on small hobby farms or homesteads where they milk a family cow or a few dairy goats for their home use . Many of the dairy goats are milked for their own use .
 Some are still used on smaller commercial dairy farms to milk all their cows . Others are just used to milk fresh cows or treated cows on commercial farms . Some are used on small commercial farms and others on smaller farms .
 Pat Hinch, from Nashua, and his dad were friends and Pat sold Surge milkers . Pat and his father were friends, and Pat was friends with his dad's father .
 Farm Tractor Company, my dad's Ford and New Idea business, sold repair parts for the Surge milker, back in the late '50s and early '60s . The company was sold by his father's father, who died in the '60's .
 The old man sold a lot of Kelly Ryan elevators, too, enough to get a trip to New Orleans, courtesy of Mr Kelly Ryan . Kelly Ryan sold enough elevators to get the trip, too .
 "The rollers don't hit that much and it goes a long time before something breaks," says Tom Cruise . Cruise: "It's a long way before it breaks. It's a good thing that the rollers aren't hitting that much"
 I took a half link out when it broke. Could it be the chain was too loose? I took it out when the link broke. I took the chain out of the frame . I don't know why it broke .
 Jeff: "You don't want to crimp hay you feed to horses because the crimpers crush a beetle into the hay and that will make your horses sick. Jeff" Jeff says he doesn't like crimpers crimping hay because it will crush beetles in the hay . Jeff
 The idea was to crush the stems letting moisture out and let the hay cure faster . The idea of crushing stems was to let the stems let moisture out of the stems .
 We finally had everything in and before long would be harvesting from the garden . The garden was finally ready to be harvested .
 I used the corn planter to put 8 rows of sweet corn and they must have cut and planted a ton of spuds . I used to use a planter in my garden .
 I also changed the seed plates in the planter and put in 4 rows of green beans . The seed plates were also changed to seed plates for the beans .
 Our garden was 200' wide and 2,200' long, actually just a shade over 10 acres . The garden was actually just 10 acres, with a total of 200' long and 200' width .
 Extension man encouraged farmers to plant different crops, many for human consumption . Most of the food available was locally grown, so the extension man encouraged different farmers .
 Mary and June would have been canning green beans until Christmas . Without all of those high school kids helping out, they would have had to wait until Christmas.
 The 3 of us all picked up more hired hands during the summer and most of them want food and a little cash and fuel . Most of the hired hands want food, money and fuel and are hungry .
 They came to the farms in an old school bus that you could still see the graffiti on . The group came to farms in a school bus with graffiti still visible on it .
 It was painted over but not enough to hide the previous markings . It was one of those buses from Leoti, painted over . It's painted over and painted over, but it's still painted over.
 Paul suggested we consider building bunk houses for the day when we were forced to use those horses for farming . Paul suggested that we might build bunk houses when we had to use them for farming. Paul suggested .
 The deal was simple, 10% of the original balance plus 4% interest on the unpaid balance, not compounded and due at the end of the year . It was due to be repaid at end of year, and not compounded .
 "I didn't have much time to make notes in my journal. How we got through that summer, I'll never know," she says . "I'll never be able to write about that summer," she writes .
 We put a 4-horse tongue on one wagon and used the Clydesdale mares to pull a few loads of hay back to the barn . We also used a tongue on a 4 horse tongue on another wagon .
 Jim drove the wagon and was getting right handy handling a fist full of reins . Jim drives the wagon with the help of his friends .
 Mike, Ray, Paul, Don and a couple of hired hands helped out putting my share in the haymow . Because I had the only hay crops, Mike had to help out putting his share . Mike and Ray had to put his share in his share of the hay .
 Mike and Paul's share was towed to their farms using a tractor and stacked . Mike's share of money was towed from their farm to their farmhouse . Paul and Mike say they hope the money will be used to build a farm .
 You get 2.68 gallons of ethanol per bushel, so my best guess would be 80,000 gallons of 95% ethanol .
 I use some of that to process my soybeans, but I'd bet I end up putting most of it into whiskey barrels . "I'd bet most of that will be put in whiskey barrels," he says .
 "I need something on the order of 1,400 barrels, about 10 times as many as was available," he says . "I don't know what I need to do to get the best barrel of oil," he adds .
 There was no way I was going to make that much bourbon, but I did intend to make more than 6 barrels . The bourbon was intended to be made in six barrels .
 Other technologies biodiesel, hybrids, ethanol, plug-ins, fuel-cells can in the near term only nibble at the edges of our 20 million barrels per day of oil consumption .
 June's car ran just fine on that E85 fuel and it would run on about any mix . So I planned to add ethanol to our supply of gasoline . June's vehicle ran on any mix of gasoline and E85 .
 The tank of preserved gasoline held 1,000 gallons, enough to make over 6,667-gallons of E85 . The car had barely been driven and the tank was filled with preserved gasoline .
 Not having a spare tank was the least of my worries, I could always find an empty tank . Not having spare tank in the car was the most of his worries, he said .
 "This will be the day that I die," says the singer . "I drove my Chevy to the levy but the levy was dry an them good ol' boys were drinkin whiskey and rye singin"
 I saw you dancin in the gym you both kicked off your shoes and I dig those rhythm and blues . Well I know that you're in love with him cuz I saw them dancing . Well she knows that she's in love, she says .
 I was a lonely teenage bronkin buck with a pink carnation and a pick-up truck . I knew I was out of luck, the day, the music, died. I was lonely teenage .
 Chorus have been on their own for ten years, but that's not how it used to be, when the jester sang for the king and queen in a coat he borrowed from James Dean .
 Chorus Helter Skelter in a summer swelter the birds flew off with a fallout shelter, eight miles high and fallin fast . It's the land that failed on the grass the players tried for a forward pass with the jester on the sidelines in a cast,
 Miss American Pie drove my Chevy to the levy but the levy was dry an them good ol' boys were drinkin whiskey and rye singin this will be the day that I die . Bye, bye Miss American pie drove her Chevy to a levy .
 The last word on American Pie: "I've been asked many times to discuss and explain my song American Pie"
 I have never discussed the lyrics, but have admitted to the Holly reference in the opening stanzas of the song . I have also admitted to a Holly reference .
 I dedicated the album American Pie to Buddy Holly as well in order to connect the entire statement to Holly in hopes of bringing about an interest in him, which subsequently did occur . The album was American Pie, which was dedicated to Holly .
 Casey Kasem never spoke to me and none of the references he confirms my making, were made by me . Kasem's references to Kasem were not made by him, he says . Casey has never spoken to me .
 You will find many interpretations of my lyrics but none of them by me, says the singer . "Many interpretations of his lyrics are not by me," he says .
 "I realized that songwriters should make their statements and move on, maintaining a dignified silence," she says .
 The Day The Music Died refers to what happened on the night of February 2, 1959 in a plane crash in Iowa during a snowstorm . Don McLean Castine, Maine, was killed in the crash in Castine .
 February 2, 1959 became known as The Day The Music Died . February 2 is the date of the day when all three died .
 What we need from McLean now is a song titled, The Day The Country Died . McLean's song is titled, "The Day the Country Died"
 Post bioterrorist attack population survived the war, more than was expected . Maybe that's extreme, ys of the surviving post pandemic .
 Court ruled that New London could acquire property of Susette Kelo and eight other residents of the Fort Trumbull neighborhood . Court: New London, which had been designated a distressed municipality, could use the land for a Pfizer research facility .
 I really didn't see how anyone could take the food from us; it was destined to feed people in Lakin and Garden City . The food was destined for people in Garden City and Lakin, Lakin .
 Dr. Spock: If I may be so bold, it was a mistake for you to accept promotion . Spock: "I'm sorry for accepting promotion. It's a mistake," he says . Spock says .
 Commanding a starship is your first, best destiny; anything else is a waste of material . Commanding the Starship is your best destiny, says the author .
 The needs of the many outweigh those of the few, but logic dictates that the needs of many outweigh the few . Were I to invoke logic, however, logic . logic clearly dictates that logic . But logic is not logic .
 "I really didn't want to get into it with the feds, they are so many and we are so few," she says . She says she's not afraid to get involved with the federal government .
 "They have tanks and fighting vehicles, we have dynamite grenades and rifles," she said . "They are going to attack us," she added . "We are going against them, but we are not going to fight them," she says .
 "Better not to anticipate what might happen in Lakin or I'd end up like the guy who needed to borrow the jack, telling someone to shove it after he said hello," Lakin says .
 The spare tire was all right, but he found that someone had taken his jack and not returned it . Someone had taken the spare tire from his jack .
 As he walked toward the house, he tried to rehearse his request for the jack . "I'm going to ask for a jack," he said .
 The closer to the house he came, the more nervous he was about the response he might receive, he said . The closer he came to the home, he was nervous about the reaction he received from the public .
 The fellow stopped pounding on the door and yelled up, "You know what you can do with your old jack" The fellow finally stopped pounding up and yelled, "I'm going to get you back."
 A blonde had just gotten a new sports car and was out for a drive when she cut off a truck driver . She accidentally cut off the driver when she was driving .
 He gets a baseball bat out of his truck and breaks every window in her car . He then gets into her car and starts smashing the windows with the bat .
 He went back to his truck and got a can of gas, poured it on her car, and set it on fire . He then got back to the truck and poured it onto her car .
 When he turned around, he saw that she was laughing so hard she was about to fall down . He turned around to see that she had fallen down laughing .
 Among other things learned, there is this clear warning about the practice of Borrowing Trouble .
 "I had better wait until the FEMA guy tried to take away the food, and then shoot him," he says .
 "Some Methodists have read the Bible, I have 3 or 4 versions of it," says Virginia Gov. Rick Perry .
 The Christian Old Testament includes the books of the Hebrew Bible as well as other deuterocanonical books . The Apocrypha is often referred to as the Apocryphal . The Bible's books are often considered to be the most popular Bible .
 These books are part of the Greek Septuagint but not in the main collections of Hebrew texts that became the Hebrew Bible . These books were not included in the collection of the main collection of Hebrews .
 Most Protestant Bibles included the Apocrypha until around around the 1820s . Most of these Bibles were published in the 1800s . However, this practice is fairly recent .
 An e-mail chain letter of Bible facts tries to illustrate the recurrence of the number 1188 in the Bible .
 It's perhaps fitting that the verse in question talks about trusting God over man . It is perhaps fitting to say 'trust' is the most important thing in the Bible .
 Using Microsoft Word 2000, (which resulted in a total verse count of 31,102 for the King James Version), the middle verses are Psalm 103, verses 1 and 2 . The middle verse is Psalm103, verses 2 and 3 .
 Some verse counts in the past have resulted in an incorrect verse count of 31,175, leading to Psalm 118:8 as the middle verse . Some verses count have been incorrect .
 The Second Epistle of John has one fewer verse, but contains more words . John's Epistle is one less than the others . The Bible's second Epistle has one less verse .
 "We didn't want cash; we'd gotten rid of it by paying our state income taxes," says Gov. Rick Perry . "We're getting rid of the cash," says Perry . Perry: "We got rid of cash by getting paid our income taxes"
 "To be totally honest about it, I was back to fumbling with my rifle, checking my magazines and wishing I had a hone to put a little extra edge on the Ka-Bar"
 We looked up and there stood a guy dressed in Blackhawk tactical clothing . "We looked up, there stood up, and there was a guy in tactical clothing," he said .
 FEMA knew FEMA knew we were here, so we might as well stop by Wally World . What the hell, since FEMA knew that FEMA knew about us, we might well stop at Wally World. What's next?
 June's list includes toilet paper and sanitary products, but not much else . "Toilet paper" is the top of the list .
 A Sheriff can deputize anyone in an emergency, but under Kansas law, you have to have training to be a Reserve Deputy . The Reserve Deputy is a reserve deputy in the state .
 Considering the state of emergency, I sort of ignored the letter of the law, he says . "I sort of ignore the law," he says of the state's emergency law .
 Reserves are selected by background checks and interviews coupled with drug screening and psychological testing . Reserves will be deployed to the U.S. military for the first time in a year .
 Paul: "In fact, the only time we did was on the raid up in Leoti to rescue the town's people and that was strictly a private adventure"
 With a high resolution scanner, an inkjet and the proper paper, you can duplicate nearly anything . Just don't try it with money, jails are houses with bars on the windows .
 These were certificates, not money, and you couldn't tell them from the genuine article . You could only tell the certificates from a certificate certificate .
 "It wasn't the same, of course, as going to a law enforcement academy, but we all studied," says officer . "We all studied. We studied. It wasn't as much of a police academy," he says .
 When we weren't milking cows, mucking out stalls, feeding the hogs or the chickens, that is. That is when we were not milking or feeding the chickens .
 When we ran out of canning jars, I knew we would, we started blanching the veggies and freezing them . When we run out of jars, we decided to start blanch and freeze them .
 Thirty acres of garden required more jars then there were in all of southwest Kansas . The garden needed more jars than any other garden in the state .
 We had fried chicken, potato salad, macaroni salad, homemade rolls, lettuce salad and a taste of our homemade bourbon .
 "That needed a couple of more years in the barrel, it wasn't quite ready," says President Obama . "It wasn't ready. That needed a few more years," he says .
 You know I think it's about time I gave some thought to putting in a trailer for one of the kids. You know it's time for me to give some thought about a trailer .
 Premier Homes in Garden City, an Osborne with optional basement entry, 2,280ft 2 called the Roseland Park .
 The dealer would assemble it on-site and I pointed out that it was sitting on a basement . The dealer had to assemble it in a basement, the dealer said it would be assembled on the site .
 He said it wouldn't make much sense to have a basement entrance without a basement . The basement entrance would be the only entrance to a basement, he said .
 He wanted to talk to the contractor putting in the basement to make certain it was up to specs, whatever that means . He said he wanted to make sure the basement is up to the specs .
 I-beams to support the house, or perhaps the size of the basement . Oh, probably I-Beams to supports the house .
 Still, an education was the one thing no one could ever take away from you, says the author . "An education is one thing you can't take away," she says .
 Farming is almost entirely taught through On-the-Job training . Nevertheless, farming is still taught through OAP training .
 "If it came to the kids wanting to quit school, I'd discuss that with June," she said . "I'd discuss it with June"
 He had it installed, the fire bricks replaced as needed as needed and new grates installed . The fire bricks were replaced as necessary .
 One of the 500kw units would be just perfect, but those probably went in first . The 2mw units were the ones being installed when the world ended .
 The average wind speed at 25m was 6.75mps and at 40m was 7.29mps . Wind study had been done in Lakin in 1996-1998 . Wind speed at Lakin was 15.3mph .
 Jake said they would find time to haul the disassembled tower and all of the components down to Mike's farm in an effort to repay all that we had done for them . Jake: "Jake and Mike will find time ... to haul all the parts of the tower and the tower down
 What had we done? Just killed a few people badly in need of killing, nothing more . What had been done? "What had been killed?" asks the author of the book, "What was done?"
 The tall tower is justified if there's a high wind shear, such as NREL believes exists on the American Great Plains . NREL says it is justified to have a tall tower on the U.S. Plains .
 Wind shear greater than the V 7 power law, says Sue Hock . NREL's research has found wind shear is greater than V 7 law .
 NREL's Hock says turbines and towers need to be tailored to individual sites . NREL says tower height is part of the equation in North America .
 Lynette's AWT-26 is a redesign of the ESI-80 wind turbine design . The design is part of NREL's advanced wind turbine program . The AWT26 is designed for tall towers .
 Guyed pole towers are an economical means for reaching the heights NREL envisions . NREL says it is an economical way to reach the heights of NREL's new heights .
 Complex terrain can complicate if not thwart use of lattice towers because of the need to transport lattice tower sections from the assembly yard to the final site . Complex terrain may thwart the use of the towers because it is difficult to transport the sections to the site .
 The transport of huge assembled lattice tower sections is a hair-raising experience and risky task . The transport is a 'hair-raising' and 'risky' task .
 The greater footprint of guyed tubular towers relative to conventional tubular and lattice towers may make them less desirable to farmers and ranchers who will have to dodge them with tractors .
 The problem is not unlike that faced a decade ago by Carter with his slender guyed tower . The problem was similar to that faced by Carter in the 1980s .
 Landowners may demand higher royalties to compensate for the trouble . Landowners could also demand more royalties from the government .
 It's conceivable that higher land leases for guyed tubular towers could offset their lower initial costs . They could boost long-term operating costs .
 The tower was 200' tall when assembled, the blades extended well above that . While the tower was assembled, it was not as tall as it was expected .
 "I didn't vote for that guy in office anyway, so they could kiss my rosy red rump," she said . "They could kiss me rosy rump" she said. "I'm not going to vote for them anyway."
 "We'd have to hook up with the power company once we got the turbine installed and see if they wanted us to connect to the power grid," he says .
 I'm probably wrong, but I deluded myself into believing that we were a holder in due course and the new turbine was our property . The new turbine is expected to be installed in the near future in the UK .
 The former General Foods Corp. headquarters complex was in White Plains, NY; been there, saw it, and never was in the building . The former GM headquarters complex is now a museum .
 Stayed in a motel in Greenwich, CT and it snowed about 15' in the area where we had our car parked . Stayed at a hotel in Greenwich .
 The motel ran out of food and we had to wade through snow to a deli just to get something to eat . The motel had run out food and waded through snow .
 Its lots of fun being an auditor, you get to see the Country and develop a taste for Dutch Master cigars . Yep, its a lot of fun .
 Bush hints that U.S. forces could remain in Iraq after his presidency ends in January 2009 . Bush also hints that United States forces could stay in Iraq . Bush: When all American troops would leave, all American forces would leave .
 "They're going to have one hell of a time moving those sections of the lattice tower down here," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I was very fond of Jim and Mary and hoped that she'd let me walk her down the aisle when she did get married . "I hoped that I'd let her walk the aisle," she said .
 The improved death benefits didn't last long, military families . Even National Guard families have a tough go of it, too .
 Instead of a $10,000 rifle, they ought to give the troops a pay raise . The troops should be given a $20,000 pay raise instead .
 We hadn't pressed either Mary or Jim, and given time, they adjusted to life on the farm . Given time, Jim and Mary had settled into life at the farm, Jim says .
 Getting Shep hadn't hurt and most of the gifts they received were practical . Shep had been a good friend of the family .
 The CD players may have been the biggest departure, finding CDs had proven to be difficult . Finding CDs had proved to be the biggest challenge for the players .
 We found laptop computers in Garden City that used Windows Vista, Service Pack 3 . Windows Vista was installed on the computers . The computers were found to be running Windows Vista .
 If Mary's boyfriend was taller than she, I just hoped he knew how to farm . "I just hope he knows how to farming," she said .
 The contractor put in several loads of concrete and assembled the tower . The tower was assembled on the ground .
 "They brought in the biggest crane I've ever seen and stood the sucker up. Then, they brought in a big crane to stand it up," he says . "Then they brought into the big crane and stood it up"
 Some of the people installed the turbine and others built a control building and installed the equipment . Once it was securely anchored, the turbine was installed .
 A semi-retired couple from Leoti knew how to run the turbine and all of the equipment . "Our newest residents" were a semi-Retired couple .
 After the kids started back to school, the 6 of us, Jason, Ray, Don, Don and Mike, Mike, Paul and I de238 cided to lay in an extra supply of wood .
 We cut firewood until we had 70 cords, and each took 10 to stack beside the house under a tarp . Each took 10 of the cords to stack next to the house .
 Ralph and Johnny Barrows, the couple from Leoti had their own nice 16'x90' singlewide and they didn't burn much wood . Ralph Barrows had his own 16"x90" singlewide . The couple had a 16' x90' home and didn't
 The only reason I fired up the still was to make 12 barrels of bourbon . "The only reason" is to make the still, he says .
 I'm down to one tractor now, the Ford bit the dust, either transmission or rear end, maybe both . The Ford was the last tractor to make it to the road .
 "I'm holding off on the Clydesdales, I want to breed them again, along with the Morgan's," says owner . He wants to breed again, as well as breed the horses again .
 A calf is expected to be dropped about every 13 months every year . The animals are being bred in an effort to optimize the breeding program .
 I sure wished my old Ford tractor had held out another 4-5 years, I didn't have the time to shop around for whatever parts it would take to fix it . "I didn't think it would be easy to fix," says owner of the tractor .
 Four years of steadily breeding the Clydesdale mares would increase the herd to 20 . Then the first year's fillies would be bred and the herd would be ready to breed again next year .
 I was also going to need some sort of horse barn and it looked like, come spring, I better get on it . It was also looking at a horse barn for the first time .
 We really didn't believe that our 30 acres of gardens could feed the entire town and most certainly, we weren't producing enough beef; pork, maybe and chickens, no way . We weren't even producing enough pork or chicken, maybe .
 There weren't many aircraft flying these days and I left the red light on top of the wind turbine off, no sense advertising. I left it off, as it was too busy to advertise.
 Paul set to crush 29,000 bushels of soybeans to extract the oil from the plant .
 The electrical company declined to buy our excess electricity, darn it . The electricity company refused to buy us excess electricity .
 "One of these days, they'd have a boiler or generator go down and they'd come begging. One of them would come begging," she says . "They'd have to come begging"
 While I regret the delay in informing the American public of our progress, until the satellites were replaced, we lacked the capacity to make a nation-wide address . We lack the capacity . We lacked the ability to make the speech, President Obama said .
 Approximately 60% of weapons were targeted on metropolitan areas with the remainder targeted on military installations . The weapons were aimed at metropolitan areas, with 60% targeting military installations, the report says .
 The United States responded, emptying the missile tubes on 4 of our Ohio class ballistic missile submarines . The U.S. responded to the threat of a missile strike .
 After the war, India and Pakistan entered into an exchange of weapons with no clear winner . As you may or may have know, after the war the two countries entered into a weapons exchange .
 Israel elected to attack most of their Arab neighbors when Iran announced they had succeeded in developing a nuclear weapon . In addition, the government of Israel also attacked most of the Arab neighbors .
 Russia has been strangely silent, although there is every indication that they had 3 bad winters in a row . Other than a brief exchange with the PRC, Russia has remained silent .
 The 5mT weapon that the Chinese apparently aimed at Cheyenne Mountain detonated over Peterson AFB, decapitating Northcom.com . Northcom .
 Northcom was responsible for the military response within the United States, handicapping our initial response . Northcom's initial response was handicapped by the initial response, which was hampered by the situation .
 By the third growing season, the effects of the war on the atmosphere were negating . The change in the weather was surprisingly brief and by the third .
 Greenland's icecap in Greenland is nearly gone, raising ocean levels and inundating coastal cities . However, the excessive ozone has continued the global heating and the global warming .
 Seismologists indicate that there is increased volcanic activity, especially in Alaska . Seismologist: Increased volcanic activity is a sign of concern for Alaska .
 A major quake, magnitude 8.8.0. hit California's central valley . Quake further reducing the ability of this nation to feed its remaining population . The quake is the largest earthquake in the world's history .
 President Obama invoked Executive Orders to mitigate distribution problems within our food supply . The executive orders are effective immediately, he said .
 Pursuant to EO 10999, your government will take over all food resources for redistribution pursuant to EOs 10990 . Pursuit of EO: Food resources will be taken over by the government .
 These orders will remain in effect until every man, woman and child has an adequate amount of food . The orders will stay in effect .
 The majority of petroleum products will continue to be used by the government pursuant to EO 10997 which has been in effect since the war . EO10997 is in place since it was in effect .
 The National Guard, acting under FEMA orders, will implement these orders . FEMA has ordered the National Guard to act under FEMA's orders .
 If all Americans work together to restore this great Country, we anticipate that we can rescind the Executive Orders within a year or two . We are confident that we will soon be able to rescind the orders .
 Our hearts go out to the millions of families who lost loved ones during the pandemic and subsequent war .
 Although he supported Civil Rights, he didn't back the 1964 Civil Rights Act . It was probably because he hated Johnson so much. He didn't support the 1964 Act .
 NEW: Order 11000 allows the government to mobilize civilians into work brigades under government supervision . NEW: The order allows civilians to be mobilized into work brigades under supervision .
 The National Security Act of 1947 allows for the strategic relocation of industries, services, government and other essential economic activities . The act was intended to rationalize the requirements for manpower, resources and production facilities .
 Obama was out of his mind if he thought he was getting any of our food, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Obama was on the wrong side of the border .
 We owned the land, or were paying for it; we planted, cultivated and harvested crops grown from seed we produced . We own the land . We owned, cultivated, harvested crops from seed they produced .
 FEMA guy and National Guard troops in Garden City, Garden City . Perhaps that explained the presence of the FEMA guy .
 Section 1385 of title 18, United States Code (commonly known as the ""Posse Comitatus Act") prohibits the use of the Armed Forces as a posse comitatus to execute the laws except in cases expressly authorized by the Constitution or Act of Congress .
 Enacted in 1878, the Posse Comitatus Act was intended to prevent United States Marshals from calling on the Army for assistance in enforcing Federal law . Marshals, on their own initiative, called on Army for help in enforcing law .
 The Posse Comitatus Act has served the Nation well in limiting the use of the Armed Forces to enforce the law . It has served to the nation well since it was passed by Congress in 1996 .
 Posse Comitatus Act is not a complete barrier to the use of the Armed Forces for a range of domestic purposes, including law enforcement functions . Nevertheless, by its express terms, the Posse comitatus act is not complete barrier . The act is required to fulfill the President
 "I can remember one author who didn't want to do research and is a little slow producing stories because of all of the research he's doing now. He's doing more research now, he says. I can remember .
 The United States really does have multiple super-secret bunkers aka bomb shelters for government officials . Yes, Virginia, the U.S. really has multiple bunkers . Virginia's secret bunkers are located in Virginia .
 Unless you know where they are, you can't find them, they aren't visible on the internet . But unless you know the whereabouts of them, you won't be able to find them again .
 Robert Conte has produced a captivating slide presentation that showcases the former top-secret government relocation facility that was built under the West Virginia Wing during the Cold War era . Conte produced the slide presentation .
 The actus reus is a continuing one and parties may join the plot later and incur joint liability . Conspiracy can be charged where the co-conspirators have been acquitted and or cannot be traced .
 repentance by one or more parties does not affect liability but may reduce their sentence . repentance by a party can also reduce liability . repentance may reduce the sentence .
 A conspiracy theory may or may not relate to an actual conspiracy . An actual conspiracy may never be discovered . A conspiracy theorist may not be able to relate to a conspiracy .
 President Bush scraped the ABM Treaty to build a Ballistic Missile Defense System . President Bush scrapped the treaty to build an ABM system .
 Lacking anyone to ask or an internet to look it up on, I reasoned it out. Lacking any knowledge of the topic, I decided to look at it out .
 China had more weapons than were reported by anyone; China must have been able to MIRV several missiles; and, we didn't have enough interceptors . China had to have more weapons, and we had more interceptors, says CNN's John Sutter . China has more weapons
 Mike's plan was to cut the head off the body of feds and attempt to eliminate control of the National Guard, he says . Mike's plans were to cut off the head of the feds and to eliminate National Guard control, he said .
 Mike had been Marine Infantry . He wasn't in the same class as Paul, a Force Recon sniper . Mike had served in the Marines .
 Paul would have the duty if we sniped the guy. If you didn't know by now, he would have been the guy .
 I was beginning to suspect that if one could be found, the feds had already seized it . Moreover, I was starting to think that one of these things could already be seized .
 Obama had to be anti-gun; that was part of the Democratic platform, he says . He says Obama was anti gun control, but that wasn't part of his platform .
 My list of H&K dealers didn't indicate there was anyone close to Lakin who sold the firearms . Lakin was found to be a member of the National Rifle and Pistol Club .
 Our farm production had been good to us, money wasn't a problem and I'd even replaced one of the CDs I'd cashed out earlier . The farm production was good to them, but money was still a problem .
 I had the bourbon and didn't really need to hurry in processing that soy246 bean oil I started in Tulsa . It was close and hadn't been hit. I didn't need to rush to get the oil out of Tulsa .
 He had them, but wanted a premium and said he didn't see how he could sell them . He said he wanted to sell them at a higher price .
 When one considers the alternative, they were in all probability a very good investment . The alternative to the alternative would have been a good investment, says the author .
 The ACOG is the standard sight for the U.S. Marines on their Ml 6A4s . 10 of the A4s are equipped with the ACOG, a standard sight used by Marines .
 He didn't have us fill out any paperwork either, but he had a gleam in his eye when we each laid out 4 one ounce gold coins . He had no need to fill out paperwork .
 Ray goes to Garden City with a shopping list but mostly to check out the FEMA guy . Ray visits Garden City to find out what to do with FEMA .
 The Glock 23 is the standard FBI issue firearm in .40S&W and their SWAT Teams use Springfield Armory . Springfield Armory ,45ACPs . SWAT teams use Springfield .
 This was beginning to get serious; it would be difficult to get close to those guys . It would be a tough time for the U.S. to find out what happened next .
 Ray claimed the second FEMA guy looked more like a bodyguard, always standing off to the side, scanning the scene . Ray said the FEMA guy was more of a body guard than a FEMA official .
 Ray assumed we met was still wearing his old military style flap holster . Ray was wearing the holster when he met the man he thought he was the man . Ray says he was surprised to discover he was still in the holster .
 Ray was a pretty smart young man and prolific, Sue was expecting, again, again . Sue was pregnant with Ray, but she was expecting again, she says . Ray was 'smart and prolific'
 If FEMA guy was given a bodyguard, "it wasn't good news for us," says FEMA official . "If we took the 2 guys out, they'd just send more," he says .
 He checked into the hotel and hung out like he was resting up from a trip . The actor checked into his hotel room after a trip to New York .
 Being only 18, he wasn't a Reserve Deputy and nobody in Garden City knew him . He was only 18-years-old . He wasn't Reserve Deputy .
 The hotel had faith in the government, they were accepting FRNs . The hotel accepted FRNs from the government .
 One of the larger employers in Garden City was Iowa Beef Processors, which had been acquired by Tyson Foods in 2001 . The company had acquired the company in 2001 and is now Tyson .
 FEMA had taken over Tyson Meats and intended to use it to process beef they were going to seize . Don overheard a couple of Guardsmen belly aching about the FEMA man . FEMA man is a FEMA man.
 FEMA was riding rough shod over the National Guard and they had a belly full . FEMA was on a mission to protect the nation from Hurricane Katrina .
 Obama had somehow managed to suspend Posse Comitatus, no doubt with the help of Congress . That answered another question: Obama managed to . Obama had . somehow managed . Obama's .
 Dubya had acted perhaps a bit, Imperial. And all the time we had thought that Dubya . Dubya was Imperial. He was Imperial, Imperial .
 As stalwart Republicans, we had supported John McCain and he was looking better with the passage of time . We had supported him as a stalwart Republican and he looked better with time .
 National Guard when not federalized can act as cops at the direction of the Governor . The National Guard can also be federalized at the request of the governor .
 Once federalized, active duty military coming under Posse Comitatus . Active duty military will be federalized in the U.S. They are active duty members of the military .
 "Kevin Costner was very hard to sneak up on," actor says . "We'd have to take the bodyguard out first," he says .
 Sometimes having dumb luck beats the heck out of whatever comes second . "Dumb luck" is not the only thing to come second, it's luck .
 FEMA was coming to Lakin County to discuss who in the County had what . FEMA will be looking at the county for FEMA funds . Lakin Sheriff's deputies say FEMA is looking into the county's finances .
 FEMA officials had a meeting with FEMA officials in Lakin, Arkansas, on Monday night . FEMA officials say they are still investigating the incident .
 They were lucky the people from Kearny County didn't kill them on the spot . They're lucky they were lucky they weren't killed . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Finney County Deputies later found their Suburban in a ditch . FEMA guys were missing . The Suburban was found about 2 miles inside the Finney county line .
 Deputies said it appeared to them that they'd gone off the road and had gotten out and walked toward Garden City . The vehicle wasn't seriously damaged and deputies said that it appeared they'd gotten out of the vehicle and walked .
 "I think it was dumb for Mike to keep it, it should have gone in the hole with the bodies and their other guns," he says . "I don't think Mike should keep it," he adds .
 They didn't seem to think it was likely, if they came through at dusk, there should have been enough light so they shouldn't have gotten lost . They said they didn't think there would be enough light to make it possible .
 A few days later, two FBI Special Agents showed up and asked questions . The FBI is investigating the case .
 It would have been nice if that was the end of it, but it was just the beginning of it . "It's just the start of it. It's not a good thing to say goodbye to the world," says former President Barack Obama .
 We had unregistered cans for our Ml As, the USP Tactical's and 10 of the M16A4s . Plus, we had . unregistered canisters for our . Ml A4s, USP . Tactical's, Ml. As and Ml
 You can remove the handle from the A3 and A4 and install the Aimpoint sights . Aimpoint can be added to the A4 or A3 or A4 . Aimpoints can also be installed on the A5 and A6 .
 The decision was to wait until after Iraq and they were very busy after that. Don't know; the decision was made after Iraq . Don't say why .
 That XM-8 didn't look like a military weapon, unless your name was Buck Rogers . Buck Rogers was the man behind the wheel wheeler . The weapon was used in World War II .
 Apparently they went inter-service on the subject of a new combat rifle and open the process up to bidding . The process is now open to bidding for the new rifle .
 One of the problems they never solved with the XM-8 was the weight . It gained weight to 7. pounds instead of losing it down to 5. pounds . The X-8 weighs 7.5 pounds .
 H&K completely redesigned the magazine for the HK416, eliminating the dust problem that plagued the Ml 6s and M4s in Iraq . The HK416 is the first version of the HK6s and HK416 .
 The rifle had the same 4 barrel lengths that were supposed to be available for the XM-8 . The rifle was supposed to have the same barrel length that was intended for the rifle .
 Jim feeding corn, soybean meal and dried mash into the hammer mill to produce feed for the livestock . Jim feeds the animals using the mill to make them feed for their livestock .
 I can't believe this President waiting until 3 years after THE CRAP HIT THE FAN and then pulling this stuff out . I can’t believe this . President waited until 3 . years after The CRAP hit the FAN. and then pulled the stuff out of context .
 Each 1,000-head hog finishing barn produces enough pork to feed 8,800 people for one year . An 80-cow dairy produces enough milk in one day to provide 3,000 people three 8-ounce glasses of milk .
 We might not be the ultimate producers, but left alone, we did a pretty good job of supplying Lakin, Kansas, Kansas . We did a good job at the end of the season .
 There was a definite limit to how much food we could can because we didn't have enough jars . If we could get more help, we could always grow bigger gardens, she says .
 The grocery stores said they could take more fresh produce ala green beans and guaranteed to purchase all of our excess production . Green beans can be added to the grocery store's shelves .
 Many of the people in town would be looking for things to can themselves in the coming year . Many of them would like to can their own food and water .
 The war produced more than 970,000 casualties, including 560,000 deaths . The war was fought in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 The vehicle was found in a ditch in Finney County, past a roadblock, past our roadblock . But as you well know, they were found in the ditch, past the roadblock.
 With satellite service restored, the internet was back up as was long distance long distance . Satellite service restored as well as long distance with satellite service .
 The government put up satellites to monitor calls and the internet, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The FBI's computer program hadn't worked, and it took them nearly 3 years to replace those satellites . It took the FBI nearly three years to find out what was wrong .
 Mueller told Congress that the agency is far from relying on carrier pigeons . Mueller: The agency is not relying on carriers pigeons to carry out the investigation .
 "That's what happens when you get busy on the farm, you lose track of time," she says . "You get busy with the farm. That's what you do when you're busy," she adds .
 Jim and Mary had come here back in 2010, just before their 14th birthdays . Jim, Mary and Mary were both 14 years old when they arrived in 2010 .
 "I must be getting older; my mind seems to be going, along with my hairline," she says . "I'm getting older," she adds .
 "The next event I recall was the kids' 17th birthday party on April 16th. The next event was a birthday party for the kids, who were 17 .
 FEMA workers were hoping they wouldn't be back for the next few days . "We hadn't seen hide or hair of those FEMA folks," says one resident . FEMA official: "We're hoping they don't come back"
 Wish in one hand and spit in the other; see which one fills the fastest . See which one of the fastest fills the fastest .
 I remembered seeing them in the garden the previous year, but I hadn't put them together with the kids . "I remembered seeing [the children's] toys the year before," she said. "I hadn't been able to find them until now."
 "I made a point not to call Jim and Mary kids in front of their friends," she says . "Jim and Mary" is a couple who have been married for more than 20 years .
 In a couple of months, they be seniors and will be seniors . "It seemed like only last week that they'd come to live with us," she says .
 "We have more than we can use. Fine, I'll just cut back on the grass," he says . Fine, he says, "I'll just go to cut back"
 The president says the Soviets had been lying about their intentions in that island nation . The president said by their doing so the Soviets demonstrated that they had for many months been lying . The U.S. president said they had demonstrated that .
 Kennedy then stated that the United States was prepared to not only blockade Cuba but to ultimately do whatever might be necessary to remove the missiles . Kennedy then said that the U.S. was prepared not only to blockade Cuba, but also to remove them .
 In the days that followed Kennedy's address, Soviet ships moved toward a line of U.S. naval vessels . The blockade was set up as a "quarantine" Cuba .
 The U.S. government's intention was to force the Soviets to ship their missiles back to the Soviet Union . The United States government was trying to get the missiles shipped back to Russia .
 As Soviet missile sites reached completion, the American pilot of a U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed . The pilot was killed .
 President Kennedy ordered 180,000 combatready troops deployed to the southeastern U.S. to prepare to attack Cuba . Also during that time, President Kennedy had 180,500 combatready forces deployed .
 Nikita Khrushchev announced in a broadcast over Radio Moscow that he would accept Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba in return for a Soviet pledge to remove the missiles from the island . On October 28, however, just before 9:00 EST, just after 9:30 EST,
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro was outraged at what he felt was a Soviet betrayal . Castro reluctantly allowed the missiles to be withdrawn .
 The key sources of the crisis were the mutual misperceptions and misunderstandings between Washington and Moscow, Havana and Havana, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Moscow and Havana were the two countries involved in the crisis .
 The Soviets believed that a massive U.S. assault on Cuba was imminent following the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 . The Soviets, for example, felt that they had to deploy missiles to Cuba because they believed (incorrectly, but understandably) that a U.
 The United States dismissed growing signs of the possibility of a Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba because the Soviets had never before positioned such weapons outside the Soviet Union . Such a move would be totally unacceptable in Washington, Washington says .
 The Soviets felt sure that the missiles could be introduced into Cuba secretly . In addition to a clandestine operation, the U.S. would try to deceive the United States, the Soviets believed .
 The danger of the confrontation in 1962 was more severe than U.S. leaders, from Kennedy on down, believed at the time . Thus, the danger of a confrontation in the 1960s was greater than leaders believed, he says .
 At the time, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency estimated that fewer than 10,000 Soviets had arrived on the island . At the same time, it was estimated that only 10,200 Soviet troops had arrived in Cuba .
 By the last weekend of October 1962, Castro had concluded that a U.S. air strike and invasion of Cuba was all but inevitable . Castro concluded that the United States air strike was inevitable .
 In the event of an invasion, Khrushchev requested an all-out nuclear strike against the U.S. This led to a cable request from the Soviet leader . The cable was sent on October 27, 1962 .
 If Cuba was to be destroyed, Castro urged the Soviets to take the U.S. down with it . Castro: "If Cuba was destroyed, it would take the United States down"
 CIA believed at the time that there were no warheads on the island . The CIA believed that no warheads were found on island . CIA believed there was no evidence of a nuclear bomb .
 The warheads for the short-range, tactical weapons were moved out of storage and closer to their launchers . During the crisis, the Soviet field commander ordered the warheads for short range tactical weapons moved .
 He did so without prior approval from Moscow . He likely would have ordered their use in the event of a U.S. invasion .
 A further fact uncovered is that each Soviet submarine escorting ships bound for Cuba carried one nuclear-tipped torpedo, which could be used without consultation with Moscow .
 Submarine was certain that it was under attack from U.S. vessels and that war may have already begun . One such submarine came very close to launching its nuclear weapon against the United States fleet blockading Cuba .
 Some 250,000 Cuban troops and more than 40,000 Soviet troops armed with dozens of tactical nuclear weapons would have met a United States invasion force . The U.S. invasion force would not have been equipped with nuclear weapons .
 Historians speculate that such an action would very likely have ended in nuclear catastrophe . Such a strike would have led to a nuclear war .
 President Kennedy rejected military advice for a full-scale surprise attack on Cuba . Instead, he delivered the public ultimatum to the USSR on October 22, declaring the quarantine and demanding the withdrawal of all offensive missiles .
 After nearly a week of unprecedented tension, the Khrushchev government yielded . After nearly seven days of unprecedented tensions, the government of Soviet Union broke down .
 Kennedy, in return, agreed to refrain from attempting an overthrow of Castro's government . Kennedy agreed in return that he would not try to overthrow the government . In return, Kennedy agreed not to try and overthrow the Castro government .
 Kennedy won a reputation as a formidable international statesman . Despite this concession, all sides regarded the outcome as a substantial victory for the U.S.
 The USSR, for its part, began a long-term effort to strengthen its military capability, but in the immediate future both nations sought to relax hostilities . The USSR and the U.S. began to strengthen their military capability .
 There were 12 B-47s on the flight line, loaded and ready to go, ready to fly . I may have known before most of you did, there were 12 .
 Part of the deal was removal of the Jupiter C missile from Italy and Turkey . It was a long time before people learned that part of it was removed from Italy .
 The situation with FEMA reminded me of a loaded gun with the hammer cocked and the safety off . The situation reminds me of the safety of a gun, not a gun . FEMA is a federal agency tasked with responding to the situation .
 We didn't know that the 2 men had already been replaced by 3 men 1 representative and 2 body guards . The 2 men were already replaced by a representative and a body guard .
 They flew in during the middle of the night, holed up in the same hotel and were almost totally unobtrusive . They flew into the hotel during the night and stayed in the hotel in a hotel .
 When word leaked out, what we heard was they were trying to repair relations with the National Guard unit . When word finally leaked, it was said to be an attempt at repairing relations between the two .
 It was suggested that they wait until the crops were in the ground before they gave us the bad news . It's suggested that the government wait until they give us the news .
 "We had an abundance of hay, several years supply of biodiesel and if push came to shove, we'd just let the ground lie fallow for a year," says farmer . "We'd just have a year. We had several years to spare."
 Historically, benign tyrannies have tended to be insecure, and to try to maintain their power by becoming increasingly oppressive . Historically, tyrannies tend to become insecure and try to keep their power .
 Rule that initially seems benign is inherently dangerous . Only security is to maintain legitimacy an unbroken accountability to the people . Constitution provides for election of key officials and division of powers among branches and officials .
 The key is always to detect tendencies toward tyranny and suppress them before they go too far or become too firmly established . The key to preventing tyranny is to suppress it before it becomes too much established .
 A pattern would emerge if you kept it up, police say, and that's how they caught serial killers . That was something you might get away with once, once, but if you keep it up . That's how police catch serial killers, they say .
 I'll bet June would be relieved and we could still plant a small one family garden . June would have been relieved and would still be happy to have a garden .
 Jim and Mary would like to have friends come out to the farm and help . That would give them an excuse to help with the farm . Jim says he and Mary are looking forward to having the friends out to help .
 Instead of dumping the milk, we'd make cheese, something that required aging, like Cheddar . We decided to make cheese instead of dumping milk, instead of making cheese .
 Our gardens would produce just enough food to feed our families and maybe enough to feed a couple of friends families . We would like to see how much food we could eat from our gardens .
 I might plant a couple of acres of corn, wheat and barley to keep myself occupied during the next winter . Just enough grain to produce 12 barrels of bourbon could be used to make bourbon .
 I am not, by my nature, a drinking man, but an occasional nip on a cold winter's night helps to take the chill off . I'm not a drinker, but I'm glad to have a drink at the end of the night, and I love it .
 We almost made a tradition of sampling the whiskey on the 4th of July . And we almost made it a tradition . The whiskey is available in the U.S.
 Those contracts with the grocery stores contained an out; we couldn't be held to selling food we didn't produce . "Those contracts with grocery stores contain an out," she says . "We couldn't ... be held ... to sell food we ... produce," she adds .
 Mike, Ray, Paul and Mike were called up by the Sheriff to put up a roadblock at the east Kearny County line . Mike and Ray put up the roadblock . Ray, Ray and Paul had been called up to help .
 There wasn't a lot of traffic that day that day, just locals going about their business . There was no traffic .
 We've overworked the land and are planning on allowing it to lie fallow for a year . Tell them not to bother; we've over worked the land, we're planning to let it go fallow .
 Not a lot, you don't want to tell them anything you want them to know . "Not a lot" is not a lot of what you want to say to them. Not a little bit of what they want to know. "Don't tell them any of the things you
 No matter how secure the FBI thinks its interviews are, these things have a way of getting around . The FBI says it has a lot of confidence in its interviews .
 Possibly a secretary in an office hears something and mentions it to the spouse . Possibly a . secretary in a . office hearing something and mentioning it to a spouse. possibly a secretary . possibly a spouse hears something . possibly an office secretary hears it and says it to her spouse .
 Production has fallen off and we need to incorporate more manure and allow it to lie fallow for a year . We need to allow more manure to be added to the land .
 My old Ford tractor gave up the ghost and I'm going to have to use our horses for part of the work . I'm not sure how much work I'll be able to do with my old Ford .
 We offered what extra energy we might have to the electric company, but they weren't interested . The electric company said it was not interested .
 "I hadn't figured out how I was going to bottle the bourbon in 2-3 years when it was ready," he says . The bourbon will be bottled in 3 years .
 I'd probably end up with 750ml plastic capped glass wine bottles, if I could find them . I'd like to have 750ml bottles of 750ml wine bottles .
 I also did some research on the internet and found out that I need a permit to produce ethanol for biodiesel . I wasn't allowed to produce my own moonshine or bourbon . I also need a . permit to make ethanol for . biodiesel and not allowed to make moonsh
 In the story, The Consultant, the government got too oppressive and it took an armed rebellion to set things right . In the book, a rebellion against the government took place in the country's first rebellion .
 "We had started down that path but, for my part, my conscience got the better of me. We had started . We had been going down the path but ... conscience got better of us. I'm not going to let it happen again," he says .
 Gandhi and King died, but only after they'd started a snowball rolling down a hill that couldn't be stopped . King and Gandhi started snowballing down hill, but didn't die when they died .
 The next thing you knew, our phone was ringing off the hook, people volunteering to help in the gardens, if we'd just make them bigger and they could get a share . The gardeners were so impressed they decided to make the gardens bigger and get a bigger share .
 My problem was that I had already made exceptions for the kids' boy and girl friends . "I was already making exceptions," she says. "My problem was ... that I'm not sure what happened to me."
 After several calls, Mike and Paul came over and said they'd tried to reach us but our phone line had been busy . They said they had been trying to reach the couple but their phone line was too busy . After a few calls, they said they wanted to talk to the couple
 First June and I talked about a bigger garden and then I decided that passive resistance was the best approach . June decided to take a 'passive resistance' approach to the garden .
 Colby is similar to Cheddar, but because it is produced through a washed-curd process, it is a softer, moister, and milder cheese . Colby cheese is produced in a similar process to that of Cheddar but is softer and moister .
 The washed-curd process means that during the cooking time, the whey is replaced by water . This reduces the curd's acidity, resulting in Colby's mild, gentle flavor . Colby is known for its mild and gentle flavors .
 Monterey Jack is a type of cheddar-style cheese using pasteurized cows' milk . It is made of pasteurized milk from pasteurized dairy cows .
 He wrote Quartet in F, opus 96, the American, sometimes referred to as the Spillville Quartet . While he was there, he was at the center of the world's largest musical community .
 Shortly after the completion of Opus 96, he began work on a quintet for strings, the String Quintet in E flat . Shortly after his work he began to work on the quintet, he started work on his own .
 In the quintet's second movement is the first definite suggestion of Native American musical influence . The quintet is a quintet of African American musicians .
 June and I took some time to go through our medical supplies, discarding outdated meds and making a list of things we'd need to replace . June and June went through their medical supplies .
 If those tyrants from FEMA try to seize our gardens, there'll be trouble for sure, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Anyone who was killed in Iraq is a hero in my book, even if all he got was a couple of campaign ribbons and a Purple Heart . Anyone who died in Iraq should be a hero even if he didn't get a medal or a medal, he says .
 Take the discards to the hospital pharmacy and they see that they're properly disposed of of . Take them to the pharmacy . Take the discarded discards .
 I'll write the prescriptions, but you may have to go to the hospital in Garden City to get them filled . The prescriptions will be sent to a local hospital, but the hospital may not be available .
 Testing strips are given away and given away by the company . They give them away and make it up by the high price on testing strips .
 I got Mike the blood sugar tester there plus new strips for the two of us . Mike also got a blood test tester and new strips .
 We also had an older Glucometer Elite by Bayer by Bayer, but it took 60 seconds to read the strips .
 If you have expired strips, you can always test them with the bottle of control solution . If properly stored, they sometimes last longer . If stored properly, they can last longer if they are properly stored .
 You test your fasting blood sugar tomorrow morning when you first get up and give me a call. You test it out tomorrow morning .
 OGTT , FPG, and the usual blood draw where blood serum level of glucose are measured . OGTT, FPG and FPG are used to measure glucose levels .
 gestational diabetes is a condition characterized by high blood glucose levels that is first recognized during pregnancy . Type 1 diabetes occurs when the body's immune system destroys the beta cells in the pancreas . Gestational diabetes first occurs during pregnancy and is first diagnosed as a pregnancy .
 It might be less now after the war, more people are getting more exercise, more than ever before, says the BBC .
 Doctors worry about obesity in children . Farmer: "You didn't see many fat farmers" years ago when farming was a lot of manual labor . Then came the gleaner, the tractor and all of those implements to make life easier .
 A point was made about the SUREVENT™ Disposable Automatic Resuscitator and advised that it required bottled oxygen to work the vent . The device is a portable device that requires bottled oxygen .
 We never had to resort to using the SURVENT Resuscitators during the pandemic . We never used to use the 'surverent Resuscitation' Resuscators .
 It didn't have enough pressure to work the SUREVENT without an accessory to pressurize the oxygen . The SUREvent didn't work without a device that could work without oxygen .
 Hospital oxygen systems are relatively high pressured systems and will run all medical devices . Hospital oxygen is a relatively high pressure system . It will be used to run medical devices in hospitals .
 You need an air pump to run a nebulizer; the oxygen concentrator lacks the pressure . That's why you need air pumps to run the nebulizers . You need air to run an oxygen-freezing device .
 Concentrators are tested to make sure they deliver at least 93% pure oxygen . Concentrators must deliver 93% of pure oxygen at the time of the test .
 Compressed oxygen gas and liquid oxygen are two ways to have oxygen delivered to the home . Liquid oxygen can be compressed gas and compressed oxygen can also be delivered compressed oxygen gas .
 Oxygen gas can be compressed and stored in tanks or cylinders of steel or aluminum . Oxygen can also be compressed in tanks, cylinders or cylinders, or aluminum cylinders .
 These tanks come in many sizes; larger ones are usually left in the bedroom, and smaller ones are used for leaving the house . Smaller ones are often used for going out of the house, and larger ones for leaving .
 Liquid oxygen is made by cooling the oxygen gas, which changes it to a liquid form . Liquid oxygen can be made from cooling the gas gas, changing it to liquid form in the process .
 It is often used by people who are more active because larger amounts of oxygen can be stored in smaller, more convenient containers than compressed oxygen . It can be more convenient to store oxygen in a smaller container .
 The disadvantage is that it cannot be kept for a long time because it will evaporate . It is not a long-term solution to the problem because it can evaporate quickly .
 In addition, oxygen concentrators are available to deliver higher concentrations in the home . In addition to the home, oxygen is also available to be delivered in higher concentrations .
 An oxygen concentrator is an electric device about the size of an end table . It is a device that concentrates oxygen from the air . The device is a small electric device that can be used to concentrate oxygen .
 It produces oxygen by concentrating the oxygen that is already in the air and eliminating other gases . The oxygen is concentrated by concentrating oxygen that's already in air .
 This method is less expensive, easier to maintain, and doesn't require re266 filling, but it is not portable . It's not portable, and it's less expensive to maintain .
 Back-up methods are necessary in case of a power failure, and the electric bill may rise . Back up is necessary in the case of an emergency, and you may have to rely on backup .
 For some patients, oxygen concentrators may not deliver adequate oxygen . Some patients may not be able to receive adequate oxygen at all .
 For people who do not get enough oxygen naturally, supplements of oxygen can have several benefits . For those who don't get enough of it naturally, supplementing oxygen can be beneficial .
 Supplemental oxygen can improve their sleep and mood, increase their mental alertness and stamina, and allow their bodies to carry out normal functions . Supplemental oxygen improves their sleep, mood, and increase their physical alertness .
 Oxygen at very high levels over a long period of time can be toxic and very harmful to one's health . Therefore, a doctor's prescription is required . Oxygen over long periods of time is toxic and harmful .
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a term referring to two lung diseases, chronic bronchitis and emphysema, that are characterized by obstruction to airflow that interferes with normal breathing . The disease is characterized by obstructing the flow of airways .
 Chronic bronchitis is the inflammation and eventual scarring of the lining of the bronchial tubes . It is inflammation and scarring, eventually scarring the lining .
 When the bronchi are inflamed and or infected, less air is able to flow to and from the lungs and a heavy mucus or phlegm is coughed up . The bronchi is inflamed or infected and less air can flow to the lungs .
 The condition is defined by the presence of a mucus-producing cough most days of the month, three months of a year for two successive years without other underlying disease to explain the cough .
 This inflammation eventually leads to scarring of the lining of the bronchial tubes . This scarring leads to an inflammation of the inner lining of bronchia tubes .
 Once the bronchial tubes have been irritated over a long period of time, excessive mucus is produced constantly, an irritating cough develops, and air flow may be hampered, the lungs become scarred .
 The bronchial tubes then make an ideal breeding place for bacterial infections within the airways . The airways then impedes airflow, which eventually impedes it's possible to breathe .
 Emphysema begins with the destruction of air sacs in the lungs where oxygen from the air is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the blood . The disease is a form of form of depression that leads to death .
 Damage to air sacs is irreversible and results in permanent ""holes"" in the tissues of the lower lungs . Damage to the air sac is irreversible . Damage causes permanent holes in the lungs' tissues .
 As air sacs are destroyed, the lungs are able to transfer less oxygen to the bloodstream . Shortness of breath is caused by the loss of oxygen in the lungs, causing breathing problems .
 The lungs also lose their elasticity, which is important to keep airways open . The lungs lose elasticity when they lose airways .
 Years of exposure to the irritation of cigarette smoke usually precede the development of emphysema . Exposure to cigarette smoke can lead to development of the condition .
 Of the estimated 3. million Americans ever diagnosed with emphysema, 95 percent were 45 or older . 95 percent of those diagnosed with the disease were 45-years-old .
 The only way to know which one you have is to autopsy the body . Autopsy is necessary to determine if you have any of the same symptoms .
 The equipment was expensive and the average guy didn't have the stuff sitting around unless the doctor ordered it . "The thing was, the equipment . The thing was expensive," says the author . "It was expensive. The average guy had the equipment sitting around."
 Try and get a defibrillator or oxygen if you didn't have COPD or a heart disorder . If you have a heart condition, try and get an oxygen tank or a defibillator .
 It became the rage to implant combination pacemakerdefibrillators and then they had a product recall . The product recall is the result of the product recall.
 When Paramedics first arose, the need envisioned was immediate treatment of heart attacks . The need to treat heart attacks was envisioned as immediate treatment .
 Patients treated immediately had a much increased chance of survival, doctors say . Patients were treated immediately and had a better chance of surviving .
 Paramedics would reestablish a normal sinus rhythm in the heart and give the patient oxygen . The patient would be given a normal heart rhythm and oxygen .
 They might administer drugs, as appropriate, and transport the patient or send them to the hospital in an ambulance . They might also administer drugs .
 LA City had Paramedic ambulances and LA County Paramedics trucks . For example, LA City City had ambulances, trucks and ambulances .
 With the emergence of sophisticated medical treatments, a dilemma arose . The dilemma arose. With the rise of sophisticated treatments, it was difficult to find a solution .
 The only assurance that anyone has that his or her wishes will be carried out is a Durable Power of Attorney for Healthcare Purposes or a Living Will . Living Will is the only assurance you have that your wishes are carried out .
 Do yourself a favor and make your wishes known in a legal document before the question comes up . Make your wish known in legal documents before you're asked if you're going to marry .
 A persistent vegetative state is a condition of patients with severe brain damage in whom coma has progressed to a state of wakefulness without detectable awareness . The condition is a persistent state of coma that progresses to a waking state of consciousness .
 There is controversy in both the medical and legal fields as to whether this condition is irreversible . There is also controversy in the legal and medical fields over whether it is irreversible.
 Many patients emerge from a vegetative state within a few weeks, but those who do not recover within 30 days are said to be in a persistent vegetative condition .
 The chances of recovery depend on the extent of injury to the brain and the patient's age . Younger patients have a better chance of recovery than older patients .
 Children have a 60 percent chance of recovering consciousness from a PVS within the first 6 months . Adults have a 50 percent chance and children have 60% chance of surviving from PVS .
 After a year, the chances that a PVS patient will regain consciousness are very low and most patients who do recover consciousness experience significant disability . Most patients who recover consciousness from PVS experience significant disabilities .
 The longer a patient is in a PVS, the more severe the resulting disabilities will be . The longer the PVS patients are in the hospital, the longer they are, the worse the disabilities they are .
 Rehabilitation can contribute to recovery, but many patients never progress to the point of being able to take care of themselves . Rehabilitation is a key part of recovery for many patients .
 This conclusion is in dispute, however, as there have been cases like those of a man in Australia who was closely followed for years before suddenly waking up . The conclusion is disputed, but there has been a number of cases in dispute .
 In the U.S. it is estimated that there may be between 15,000-40,000 patients who are in a persistent vegetative state .
 This typology distinguishes various stages of the condition rather than using one term for them all . The typology is based on the fact that there is no single diagnosis for the condition .
 Terri Schiavo's case involved disputes over a diagnosis of PVS given by several court-appointed doctors . Terri's case was highly publicized after she was diagnosed with PVS . The case was the subject of a highly publicized case involving Terri and Terri .
 Schiavo's feeding tube was removed, leading to her subsequent death . Ultimately the court challenges were unsuccessful and she died after her death .
 Autopsy revealed extensive damage to nearly all brain regions, including the cerebral cortex, the thalami, the basal ganglia, the hippocampus, the cerebellum, and the midbrain .
 The neuropathologic changes in her brain were precisely of the type seen in patients who enter a PVS following cardiac arrest . The changes were the same type of changes seen in those who enter PVS after cardiac arrest following a cardiac arrest.
 The large pyramidal neurons that comprise some 70 percent of cortical cells were completely lost . The loss of the neurons was part of the loss of some 70 per cent of the cells critical to the functioning of the cortex .
 The pattern of damage to the cortex, with injury tending to worsen from the front of the cortex to the back, is typical . Injuries tend to worsen between the front and back of the brain .
 The damage was, in the words of Thogmartin, irreversible, and no amount of therapy or treatment would have regenerated the massive loss of neurons . The damage is irreversible and no treatment or therapy would have been possible .
 "In my humble opinion, you've qualified as a diabetic, but Doc can run some tests and you will know for sure," says author .
 These levels are considered to be risk factors for type 2 diabetes and its complications . These levels of diabetes are considered a risk factor for diabetes .
 "If Mike took care of himself, there was a good chance he'd avoid becoming insulin dependent," says Dr. Mike .
 If you get too much radiation, there isn't a pill that will do much more than ease your pain . However, if you are suffering from radiation radiation, you may have to take a pill .
 For bleeding gums or sore mouth, use a half teaspoon salt to a quart of water . Use a mouthwash made up of a half teaspoons salt to make a half a teaspoon salt .
 Diarrhea medication or a mixture of kaolin and pectin may help relieve diarrhea . A mixture of the two ingredients may help with diarrhea .
 "We had one set down in late spring that tore up some pasture and the ground we were leaving lay fallow. We had to leave some of the pasture in fallow," he said .
 "Those clouds came up rather sudden and I was watching the sky, just in case," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Jim and Mary were in their last month of their junior year and at school . Jim was in their final month of junior year . Mary was in her junior year of high school and was in junior class .
 It might turn out to be one of those summers where tornadoes popped up now and then; I guess I'd better keep a radio on . It might be a summer when tornadoes pop up now or then, it might be one summer .
 If we had to have a tornado summer, it was better that we didn't plant crops, a tornado will suck up quite a bit of corn or wheat . A tornado can suck up a lot of corn, wheat or corn .
 I decided to plant 40' of field corn next to the sweet corn to get 2 acres of corn . The corn was planted in the middle of the corn bed to get more corn .
 Post began his breakfast empire in 1892 when he opened La Vita Inn sanitarium on this site . Post's breakfast empire includes La Vita inns, a sanitorium, a hotel and a hotel .
 Post's first commercial success occurred in 1894 when he created the hot beverage Postum . Postum was Postum, a hot beverage made from a hot drink made from the same ingredients .
 His continued experiments with grains resulted in Grape-Nuts, his first cold cereal, in 1897 . His continued experimenting with grains led to the creation of Grape-nuts, in 1896 .
 Sales from Grape-Nuts, Postum, and Post Toasties surpassed $5 million in 1908-09 . Sales from Postum and Post Tooms surpassed $4 million in 1909 .
 Upon Post's death, his daughter Marjorie ran the company, continuing to advertise extensively, and expanding the product line .
 The Philip Morris Company purchased General Foods in 1985, and the plant became part of Kraft Foods in 1989 .
 It didn't take long to plant the wheat and barley and I had the garden plowed as soon as the ground allowed, in this case, April 29, 2013 .
 I used the planter to plant 8 rows of sweet corn and 8 rows . I used it to plant eight rows of field corn .
 I could also plant the peas and change the plates to plant the green beans for June, saving her time and allowing her to plant spuds . The plates should also be changed to plant green beans instead of peas .
 The living room and dining rooms were full up with tomato plants and pepper plants, the living room was full of tomato plants . "We didn't have a greenhouse. We didn't use a greenhouse," she says. "The living room, dining rooms, were full of tomatoes and pepper
 "Maybe with the free time I had this summer, I should get some plastic and build one," he says . "I'm not sure what I would like to do with this summer."
 The plants were in flats making it easier to move them around and share the sunlight coming in the windows . The plants are in flats so they can be moved around and shared the sunlight .
 We got the flats from Maverick Manufacturing Company in Clarksville, Texas . The flats were made by the company .
 There wasn't room to walk, but we had racks (similar to bread racks) that helped on space, but not on the light . There was no room for walkers, but racks were racks that helped .
 By using the 3"" pots, we didn't have to transplant until it was time to plant the garden . We didn't need transplant until the garden was ready to be planted .
 "In personal terms, it's something you can't legally have anywhere I've ever lived," says Simon Cowan . "I'm not going to be able to live with it," he says .
 Talking about building a greenhouse actually doing it weren't the same . Talking about the greenhouse was the same. Talking about it actually being a greenhouse was not the same thing .
 I went looking for a contractor who could convert the plans into a finished building . I'm looking to find a contractor to convert the drawings into finished buildings .
 Strike 2: "I couldn't find anyone who had the know-how AND could get the materials" Strike 3: "Strike 2: I couldn't come up with the materials. Strike 4: I can't find someone who has the know how to make the project . Strike 2
 I contacted the company in Clarksville, Texas, to ask them if they knew where I could find a greenhouse contractor . So, I contacted them and asked them for help finding a contractor .
 I hired them to build a greenhouse about the size of the plan I had, their American Classic model . The greenhouse was built by the American Classic greenhouse company .
 "I couldn't have assembled the thing, it was steel and aluminum framed and I chose polycarbonate panels," he says . "It's steel, aluminum and aluminum, and it's not easy to assemble," he adds .
 We had a place to start plants the following year and given the size of the greenhouse, we could start everyone's plants . The greenhouse was a place for everyone to start their own plants the next year .
 The garden was in by the time the company showed up to erect the greenhouse . The greenhouse was erected by the company in a hurry .
 June wouldn't let me watch, saying that if I had time to stand around and watch, I could help in the garden, she said . June said she would help with the garden if she had time .
 It suited me; I cultivated the things I planted, greatly reducing the hoeing needed . I cultivated myself; I planted things I wanted to grow . It was a good time to be a farmer, not a farmer .
 "They were still running disaster stuff on TV, and I wondered where they got the programs, sometimes," says Bob Greene . "I wondered where the programs were getting," says Greene .
 A pal of mine from Iowa had lived through the worst tornado in Iowa history on May 15, 1968 . The worst tornado was in Iowa's history on that date .
 It was an F-5 that left a trail of destruction on the ground for 55 miles . It was a plane that left the ground 55 miles in the wake of the crash .
 It had by passed most towns only striking his home town Charles City . Charles City was the only town hit .
 News coverage of the killer tornado got little press coverage . Must have been a busy news day, that was little more than a month after the King assassination .
 Xenia, Ohio, lost 34 people in the super outbreak six years ago . Xenia was the site of a super outbreak in which 34 people lost their lives .
 That town in Iowa was one of the last bastions of true conservatism . That town was once a bastion of conservative conservatism .
 Most of the deaths were people who had been on social security for ages . But if you looked at the obits in their newspaper, most of them were people with age-old status .
 "It was slam bam, thank you ma'am and they were done. Those people assembling the greenhouse must have done it before," she said . "Those people assembled it before, it must have been done," she added .
 I'd gone ahead and gotten the automatic vents, maybe I could spend all of our money and go on the dole . Maybe I could ... spend all the money ... maybe I'm going to spend it on the job . I'm not sure .
 The federal government could see you clear to providing ammonia, insecticides, herbicides and all the modern things we need to farm on tired soil . I might be able to plant crops, but I might not be able .
 "I was short a few parts we needed to rebuild the tranny and the rear end. I was short of parts," he says .
 As luck would have it, I found a dealer who had the missing parts and his mechanic was familiar with working on the old Fords . As luck, he was able to find a mechanic who could fix the car .
 "I told him the cheese was aging. Then he went on about the dairy herd and I told him that he was aging," he said .
 Mike had been experimenting through the winter, getting a brewing recipe he was happy with . Mike had to wait for the winter to find a recipe he liked .
 Paul was going to have to start making wine, and then we'd have a well-rounded production of alky-hall, he says . Paul says he plans to make more wine in the future .
 Vintage ports are aged in barrels for a maximum of 2 years before bottling . Vintage ports often require another 5 to 15 years of aging in the bottle before reaching the proper drinking age .
 Since they are aged in barrels for only a short time, they retain their dark ruby color and fresh fruit flavors . They are aged only in barrels, so they can retain their ruby color .
 It was an adaptation of original barbecue where people in the Caribbean slow cooked a whole goat . It was a slow-cooked version of the Caribbean's famous 'slow-cooked' goat .
 Mike had acquired several empty beer kegs and cleaned them then kegged them and had it chilling . Mike had several empty kegs cleaned and cleaned and kegged the beer then had it chilled .
 Barbecue sauce, on the side, maybe yea so many sliced tomatoes and don't forget the watermelons or the corn on the cob . Watermelons, watermelon and corn on cob . Barbecue sauces, on side .
 High proof beer Mike brewed . Not being a drinking man, he got waylaid by the high proof beer .
 Carlings has a commercial 10% brew . Canadian beer sometimes runs to 8% and Carlings runs to 10% beer .
 Mike figured on that and had a few six-packs as care packages for the drivers . Mike had a couple of six packs of beer in his care packages .
 When everyone had their fill, the wives packed up any leftovers for the troops, mostly in empty plastic coffee cans . Wives packed up leftovers in empty coffee cans, mostly empty plastic cups .
 We told the CO it was for the troops who hadn't been able to come to the celebration . We told him it was a special occasion for the soldiers to celebrate .
 "I think we made some new friends, which was the whole idea of the first place," she says . "We made new friends," she adds .
 The only thing missing was fireworks, but by then we weren't in any condition to be playing with explosives . "We weren't going to be able to play with explosives. We're not playing with fireworks," says one of the crew .
 "I'd heard her, but the thought got in my brain and started fighting with those demons that were pounding on the drums," she says . "I'm not going to let her go, but I'm going to listen to her," she adds .
 The first time was in the Army, before he'd met June, 1, 1/2 a lifetime ago . June is June's second anniversary .
 She said I should eat something, but my stomach felt like the food I'd eaten the day before was still there waiting for my stomach to wake up and digest it . She told me to eat something but her stomach still felt like it was waiting for it to digest .
 Every time someone came to compliment the 3 of you they brought you each a glass of beer . "Every time someone comes to compliment us, they brought us each a beer," she said. "I'm so proud of you, I'm so happy to be able to see you all
 "I wasn't concerned that I had a drinking problem, unlike a drunk," he says . He wasn't in any rush to drown the drummer, unlike drunk, drunk .
 "I don't know what really accounted for my behavior, probably the built up stress," she says . "Probably the built-up stress. I don't really know what caused my behavior," she said .
 FEMA showed up and our first reaction to their appearance wasn't anything I was going to write home about. It began accumulating when FEMA showed showed up, and we're not going to be impressed with it .
 "It wasn't our finest hour, we just did what needed doing and made ourselves some good friends along the way. Our venture up in Leoti, wasn't your finest hour," says John Defterios. "We made ourselves a good friend along the journey."
 I didn't think so, or they would have had people in Lakin as well as Garden City, Lakin, Garden City . "Lakin" is a popular nickname given to Lakin residents .
 I'd told that FEMA guy we'd be waiting for him and we would, with loaded weapons . We'd told him we'd been waiting for FEMA guy and would be waiting with loaded guns . We would, he said, "with loaded weapons"
 We didn't have cellars for cheese aging so we'd done the next best thing, built buildings that we buried in up to 6' of soil . The cheese was buried in a 6' area of soil, and the cheese was then stored in a cellar .
 "It was tough getting the hang of it, but once we figured it out, it wasn't such a big deal," he says . "Once we figured out, once we had figured out it was easier to play, it was more fun," he adds .
 Cheese was made from the milk solids that you took off by way of curdling the milk . The cheese was made of the solids which were curdled by curling .
 Cheddar is an English cheese and Jack Cheese is uncolored Colby Cheese . Jack Cheese means uncolored colby cheese . Cheddar cheese is English cheese .
 Mozzarella was originally made from buffalo milk . The pizza cheese is the string variety of the pizza cheese . It is the first variety of pizza cheese to be made out of buffalo milk.
 FEMA guy called in a bunch of feds when the National Guard refused to back his play . FEMA guy calls in bunch of federal agents after National Guard refuses to back him . FEMA official: "It's not a joke. It's a mistake"
 They're on a farm outside of Deerfield and they came up against some farmers who won't play ball with them . They say they're on the farm in Deerfield, Illinois .
 The Sheriff called in Mutual Assistance from Finney County but they'll be slow responding . The Sheriff calls in the Sheriff's Department of Homeland Security to help .
 You heard 'bout the legend of Jesse James and John Henry, just to mention some names . Jesse James, John Henry and Jesse James are some of the most famous men .
 "They swear he got asphalt a-runnin' in his veins, a foot like lead and nerves like steel," he says . He says he's got 'asphalt a-running' in veins .
 He hit Mont Eagle and it started to rain so hard he couldn't even see the passin' lane . The rain was so bad it was impossible to see the passing lane .
 He started down the grade when he lost a gear, he reached for them brakes, found he had no air . Well, he started . He reached for the brakes, he found he . had no . air .
 The mount Eagle grade is steep and long and everybody that seen it thought the bandit was gone thought it was gone . The bandit is believed to have been in the area for a week .
 Jackknife's truck Jackknife turned completely around, he was cornin' down backwards 'bout the speed of sound'
 Everybody asked Bandit how he made it down . Well, he got to the bottom safe and sound . Bandit got down safely and sound.
 You heard the legend of Jesse James and John Henry just to mention some names . Jesse James, John Henry, Jesse Henry and Jesse James are among the legendary figures .
 "They swear he's got asphalt a-runnin' in his veins, a foot like lead and nerves like steel," says one of his fans .
 "We're east bound and down, loaded up and truckin' a' we gonna' do what they say can't be done We've got a long way to go, and a short time to get there I'm east bound"
 "The boys are thirsty in Atlanta, and there's beer in Texarkana and we'll bring it back no matter what it takes" "We gonna' do what they say can't be done," says the Bandit .
 All wearing Blackhawk tactical gear with FEMA is big white letters on the back . FEMA is in the back of the tactical gear .
 They had us outnumbered 2 or 3 to 1 and they were wearing H&K handguns and carrying MP5K-PDWs . They had them outnumbered 2-3 to 1 . They were wearing weapons and wearing MP5PPDWs.
 A group of farmers, maybe 15 altogether, held their hands high in front of them . They were surrounding a group of people holding hands high . The group was surrounded by farmers, perhaps 15 altogether .
 I worked my way to Ray and slapped on an ACS, using the compression bandage to hold it in place . I worked with Ray to put the ACS in place, using an ACS .
 I was grazed myself, but it wasn't bleeding so bad I needed to worry about it. Moving back to cover, half dragging Ray, I was half dragging myself myself . Ray had been grazed himself, but was not bleeding so badly .
 It was probably only seconds, perhaps minutes, but it seemed like hours . "I felt like I was in the air for a few minutes," she said . "It was probably just seconds"
 Last thing he ever said, got him in the heart and when I checked, he didn't have a pulse . "When I checked on him, he no longer had a pulse," says victim . "He was in a stable condition, but he had no pulse," she says .
 "Mike cried out something indistinguishable. I changed magazines and got a couple more of them when Mike cried out "something indistinguishable" "Mike" cried out when he cried out, "I changed magazines, got more and more magazines."
 National Guard troops were firing on FEMA workers, FEMA officials say . "I heard a sound and looked around and here came those National Guards troops and they were firing," says survivor .
 "I felt the jolts as first one, then two and finally three of his rounds hit me," says Rory McIlroy . "I'm not going to be able to fight back, but I'm not afraid to," he says .
 I grabbed at my first responders bag to get an ACS, but it was so far away, I couldn't reach it . "It's so far from where I was going to get it," she says .
 "Ray grabbed the bag and started slapping on the bandages, but I was losing blood fast from 3 wounds," he said . Ray grabbed the  bandages and slapped them on, but they were losing blood quickly .
 "Randy got one of those FEMA guys and the guy gunned him down as he fell,"" Ray explained . "The guy gunned down as they fell"
 "They started it ma'am, but those National Guardsmen and what there was left of us finished it," she said . "Those National Guardmen ... finished it. They started it Ma'am," she added .
 "I'm afraid we lost most of our contingent, 37 dead and the other 3 of us wounded. I'm afraid most of my contingent was killed," says author . "We lost 37 dead," he says .
 It couldn't have come at a worst time, Mike, Paul and Randy getting killed, like there is ever a good time for someone to die . Mike's death comes at the worst time for Mike and Paul, Paul, Randy .
 Ray Ray had said, / don't know what bravery is ma'am, but it seems to me that laying down your life to protect and defend the Constitution of this Country counts for something . Ray said, ‘I don’t know what brave is ma’am
 Jim and Mary were as distraught as I was, this was the third time in their lives they'd lost someone they were close to, first their father in Iraq, then their mother to the H5N1 and finally, Randy, a victim of tyranny . Randy, Randy and Mary
 The people from Lakin pitched in and made sure we didn't lose any of our garden produce, heck they even canned it for us .
 FEMA jack-booted thugs killing over 40 people in Kearny County, Kansas all over some grain and livestock, couldn't be kept quiet for long . Everything needs a beginning and these FEMA thugs killed over 40 .
 By the time the mass funeral was held on Thursday, July 12, 2013, there must have been more media in Lakin than residents . Lakin's funeral was attended by more than 200 people .
 They'd shown up on our farms, only to be run off with guns by Don, Jason or Susan . They'd run them off, but they'd never been found . Don's wife: "They'd been there for years, and they'd been running them off"
 "I suppose we could have made statements, but like Randy once told me, / understand how Ms. Ms. Kelly felt like she was in the right place,” she said .
 "I was cut to the quick, broken hearted, but proud of Mike, Paul and Randy," says Randy . "Mike, Paul, Randy, Mike and Randy. I'm proud of them," he says .
 Widows are supposed to wear black at funerals, but Rachel, Marilyn and Marilyn brought new red dresses, perhaps to reflect the anger we felt . Widows should wear black, but they brought red dresses to reflect their anger .
 Randy had insurance policy, paid in full, for $300,000 with Principal in Des Moines, Iowa . Randy had policy paid in in full . Randy's insurance policy was paid in part .
 Des Moines hadn't been hit by the Chinese on July 4, 2009, thank God for that . Des Moines was hit by a Chinese missile strike in 2009, but it was not .
 "What we had in the garden would keep the 3 of us going until the following year. But we couldn't just run to the grocery store for food and what we had to do would keep us going for the next year."
 Randy, Paul and Mike had staged what amounted to a sit-in . Rather than continue the violence, Randy and Paul had staged the sit-ins . Randy: "Randy, Paul, Mike and Mike were there to protect the community"
 Randy wanted for the bourbon he was illegally brewing out in the machine shed and to mix horse feed . They passed on planting crops, except for that corn, barley, oats and wheat Randy wanted . Randy wanted to use the bourbon for that bourbon .
 He'd gotten his old Ford tractor repaired, but never gotten the chance to use it . He had gotten it repaired but never used it . "It's a good thing to say goodbye to the tractor," he says .
 "Randy favored making lists, it was God sent. I suppose he was a bit obsessive-compulsive, but Randy favored lists," she says .
 Our husbands had been smarter than we knew, Limited Liability Corporations with the stock held by the husband and wife as Joint Tenants in Common with Rights of Survivorship .
 The corporation was the beneficiary of the policy and before the kids started back to school, the land was free and clear and we had operating capital . The corporation has operating capital. The corporation is the beneficiary .
 "I went down Randy's list, topped off the propane, got a load of coal and finished up with the garden" "Randy's list" is a shortlist of Randy's favorites .
 I kept myself busy, idle hands are the Devil's playground and when you're busy, it seems to dull the pain . "When you've got busy it seems the pain seems like it's dulling the pain," she said .
 The kids' dog, Shep, seemed to sense how I felt and began to sleep on the floor next to the bed . "Shep" was the first dog to sleep in the kids' bed next to them .
 Randy's list of the summer's best summer reads . Randy's lists help you get through the summer of 2013 . Randy: "How we got through summer 2013 is anyone's guess"
 In a way, it was if he was still here, looking out for us, not buried next to his parents in Lakin, Lakin . "In a way of it, it's if he's still here," he said .
 People compare the Kearny County Massacre to the Branch Davidians and Randy Weaver's standoff on Ruby Ridge . Randy Weaver hadn't much cared for the media, but in this case, the story of the shootout grew .
 It not only cast the previous events in a better light but it seemed to become the core of some new movement . It seemed to have cast a new light on the events in the past .
 "We'd lost all of the sworn officers of the Sheriff's Department, for example," says the mayor . "We had all of our sworn officers," he says . "It was a very difficult time," he adds .
 Deputies from Finney County Sheriff's Department and Garden City Police Department appointed one of them Acting Sheriff . They hired some Deputies to help with the situation .
 President Obama EOs seemed to wither away and FEMA never came back to Garden City . FEMA was supposed to be a disaster-stricken state of the year . FEMA never recovered from the devastation of the disaster .
 There hadn't been elections in 2012, and Obama wasn't in office legally anyway anyway . Congress quickly remedied by removing both him and Joe Biden .
 The President until the elections in 2016 would be the former Speaker of the House, a Republican, but more moderate . He would be a more moderate Republican .
 The Iroquois model of representative government influenced English philosophers, as well as Benjamin Franklin . It inspired the Americans and French to create representative democracies, and inspired other nations .
 The U.S. Constitution is the supreme law of the United States of America . The United States Constitution is a supreme law .
 It was completed on September 17, 1787, with its adoption by the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania . The Constitution was later ratified by special conventions in each state .
 It created a federal union of sovereign states, and a federal government to operate that union . The union was created by the Constitution of the Union of States .
 It replaced the less defined union that had existed under the Articles of Confederation . The union was replaced by a less defined Union that existed under Articles, Confederation .
 It took effect on March 4, 1789 and has served as a model for the constitutions of numerous other nations . The constitution was created in 1789 .
 The Constitution of the United States of America is the oldest federal constitution in current use . It was written in 17th century . The Constitution is now the oldest constitution in use .
 It was about as good as a people could get, but it was less than perfect . It was 'as good as you could get', but it wasn't as perfect .
 The results of the World War II project were interpreted by some of the world's most famous people . But they were interpreted, and sometimes the results were less than satisfactory .
 Randy always opposed the Supreme Court's interpretation of the Second Amendment . Randy always opposes the interpretation of that amendment .
 He took the position that owning firearms and carrying arms was an individual right and should have been written more clearly . He said owning firearms was a personal right .
 Their weapons had been returned to them by those National Guardsmen before they packed up and went home . "Their weapons had returned to us by those [National Guardsmen] before they ... went home," she says .
 The Commanding Officer of that National Guard Company had to excise his own demons to excise . The commanding Officer was a National Guard commander .
 Then he hadn't arrived at the scene of the Massacre soon enough, according to some . Then he didn't arrive at the site of the massacre soon enough. Then he wasn't there, some say .
 The general sentiment was that had he gone with FEMA in the first place, the bloodshed could have been avoided . The public sentiment is that he should have gone to FEMA instead .
 He'd been right to refuse to follow an unlawful order and had arrived quickly, the minute he heard that there was trouble in Kearny County, New Jersey . He'd arrived quickly and had been right, he said .
 The upper echelons of the military had just wanted to avoid the controversy and had accepted his resignation and dropped the matter . The matter was dropped by the military and the matter has been dropped .
 John proposed to Mary just after school started, and she accepted . John proposed just before school started in August .
 Just before Thanksgiving, Jim proposed to Julia just before Thanksgiving . Julia accepted the proposal .
 The four of them talked it over and it was decided to have a single, joint wedding on the date that John and Mary had picked . The four-decade-old couple decided to marry on the same date as Mary .
 We have a load of used medical equipment that belongs to Doc and both my late husband and I had been trained in its use . We have been trained to use the equipment since Doc died .
 The Sheriff had offered to deputize Jason as a Reserve Deputy, but Jason had never taken him up on the offer, a move that probably saved his life . Jason's life was likely saved by the Sheriff's decision to take up the offer .
 The certificate that said Jason had completed the necessary training was in the Sheriff's files . Nevertheless, the certificate was found in the files of the sheriff .
 Anyone who knew that certificate wasn't the genuine thing is dead, so I think I'll apply . Anyone who knows that certificate is dead is dead so I'm going to apply .
 "Jim still needs some guidance and I'm not sure how much John knows," says Jim . "I don't know how much of John knows. Jim still needs a lot of guidance," he says .
 Randy had planned to build the herd of Clydesdales to 64 working horses . Randy had hoped to build a herd of 64 horses to 64 horses .
 If you have any questions, you'll have to contact Mike McGilvray up in Bird City . If you want to know more about the project, call the iReport@dailymailonline .
 Physician assistants practice medicine under the supervision of physicians and surgeons . Physician assistant is a member of the medical community .
 Medical assistants should not be confused with medical assistants, who perform routine clinical and clerical tasks . They should be not confused with other medical assistants .
 PAs are formally trained to provide diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive health care services, as delegated by a physician . PAs can also provide diagnostic and therapeutic services as part of health care .
 Health care team members take medical histories, examine and treat patients, order and interpret laboratory tests and X-rays, and make diagnoses . Working as members of the health care team, they take medical history and examine patients .
 PAs record progress notes, instruct and counsel patients, and order or carry out therapy . PAs are responsible for the care of patients in the hospital .
 In 48 States and the District of Columbia, physician assistants may prescribe medications . In 48 U.S. states and D.C. physician assistants can prescribe medications.
 Some order medical supplies or equipment and supervise technicians and assis287 tants . Others supervise medical supplies, supervise technician and order technicians .
 PAs may be the principal care providers in rural or inner city clinics, where a physician is present for only 1 or 2 days each week . However, PAs can be the main care provider in rural clinics . PAs are often the primary care providers for patients in rural and inner
 In such cases, the PA confers with the supervising physician and other medical professionals as needed and as required by law . The PA has a duty of supervising physicians as needed .
 PAs also may make house calls or go to hospitals and nursing care facilities to check on patients, after which they report back to the physician . PAs may also go to hospital and nursing facilities to report on patients .
 The duties of physician assistants are determined by the supervising physician and by State law . State law requires physician assistants to be a physician assistant .
 Aspiring PAs should investigate the laws and regulations in the States in which they wish to practice . PAs are required to be licensed in the U.S. and practice in states where they want to work .
 Many PAs work in primary care specialties, such as general internal medicine, pediatrics, and family medicine . PAs also work in specialties such as family medicine and internal medicine .
 Other specialty areas include general and thoracic surgery, emergency medicine, orthopedics, and geriatrics .
 PAs specializing in surgery provide preoperative and post-surgery care . They may work as first or second assistants during major surgery . PAs provide pre and postoperative care and may be first assistants .
 In Kansas, PA programs are two years in length and require anywhere from two years to four years of pre-PA college courses for admission . In Kansas students must take four years to prepare for admission to the program .
 General Chemistry 1 and 2, Biology 1 and . 2, Microbiology, Human Anatomy, Human . Anatomy and Human Physiology, College Algebra, Pharmacology, Pathophysiology, Immunology and Medical Terminology . General . Chemistry 1, 2 and 3: Biology 1
 "I didn't have a college education and after talking to Doc about the PA program, he suggested that I get the Paramedic training. He suggested that he get the . Paramedics training. "I'm not a paramedic. I'm a firefighter. I didn't
 Once a Paramedic, I'd have many of the pre-requisite courses out of the way . He said there were a couple of reasons for his suggestion, but primarily because he wanted to become a paramedic .
 The PA Program took 3 years of intensive study and he considered this the most productive direction for me to take . The PA program took three years of intense study .
 The program had been a killer and more than once I wondered what I had gotten myself into. The program was a killer, and more often I wondered if I'd gotten myself in .
 "I didn't have a lot of time to think about my loss. It had been a blessing in disguise," she says .
 Marilyn and Rachel helped Jim and Mary get through their senior year and get ready for their weddings . Marilyn andRachel pitched in and helped Jim get through his senior year . Mary and Mary got married at the age of 18 .
 "The two of you don't know how much I appreciate all that you did," she says . "The kids got through their senior year and preparing for the weddings," she adds . "I appreciate all the things you did, getting the kids through their high school and getting them through
 "If I hadn't had to work so hard in school, I might have taken him up on it," she says . "I didn't tell them that he was very attractive, for a kid, and I didn't say that," she adds .
 Randy switched from the idea of having a basement shelter to a culvert shelter . Randy switched the idea from the basement to the culvert .
 A couple of kids who might have lost their parents to the Pandemic have been adopted by the shelter . The shelter was set up to provide a home for a couple of children who may have been orphaned .
 As far as the garden goes, I see the greenhouse is full of starts that should be planted soon . As far . as far . from the greenhouse, I have a garden in the garden, which should be ready for spring .
 He converted wheat, barley, oats and corn into bourbon and horse feed with Jason's help . Jason converted the wheat into bourbon with the help of his son .
 Jason told Jason that the oldest stuff should be ready to bottle in a year . Jason told him that he hopes to bottle the old stuff in the year .
 Feds tended to stay away from Kearny County during the past year . The kids' would need the BATF on their backs .
 I fired up Randy's computer and printed myself a certificate; then, I went to see the Acting Sheriff . "I went to Randy's office and printed a certificate," he says .
 The Sheriff had the Chief Deputy take me to the Range and I had to qualify with a handgun, shotgun and rifle . The Sheriff's Chief Deputy had to take me on the Range to qualify .
 "I think Randy was there, watching over my shoulder, like a guardian angel, I passed," says Randy . "Randy was there watching over his shoulder," he says of Randy .
 "They headed to the range to practice and told me to fire up that printer," she said . The printer was set up for the printer .
 I fudged the dates and put the same dates on their certificates that Randy had put on Mike and Paul's . Randy put the dates on Mike's certificates . Randy had Randy put Mike's on his certificates .
 "I had taken my guns with me when I'd gone to school and when I got too frustrated with school, spent time on the range, shooting at a picture of the guy who had killed Randy . I had spent time shooting at the photo of the man who killed Randy. I
 I bought myself one of those Springfield Armory XD .45s while I was at school . I bought himself one of the Springfield Armory . 45s .
 "Honey, let me tell you something, I'm one girl you don't want to mess with," she said . "I'm one of the most powerful women in the world," she added .
 I can shoot you in the heart or right between the eyes and if I'm out of bullets, I'll just cut your heart out, he says . "If I'm not in love with you, I'm just going to kill you," he says of his killer .
 Think of Sharon Stone's nastiest role, Sharon Stone times 10 times 10, or Demi Moore times 20 . Think of an actress in her worst part of her career, think of her worst .
 The wedding had been lovely and we were having the reception at the Methodist Church. The reception was held at a Methodist Church . The wedding was lovely and the reception was lovely .
 In the 2 weeks since I'd gotten back, I'd put in our garden and the people from town had bought all of the plant starts that were left over after Rachel and Marilyn had their pick .
 The company had objected to my carrying the XD and I'd gone to concealed carry . When you're a size 4, that's easier said than done . The company objected to the idea .
 One thing Randy always told me that holding grudge and getting revenge hurt you more than the other guy. "Holding grudge" and "revenge" hurt more than anyone else, he said .
 "In this case, the other guy was dead and my focus was more on the system than the man," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm more concerned about the system and the man, not the man."
 The government, under the new President, took a new approach, they bought instead of took and offered premium prices . The government took a 'new approach' to the new approach .
 "I needed the time, to grieve and to consider what I could do to balance the scale," she says . "It's a good thing to say, but it's not always easy to say goodbye," she adds .
 That was the last full week of June and by this time he knew who most of the folks in Kearny County were . He knew most of those folks were. That was a week after June .
 "LEO and military only firearms" was the keystone, clearing the way for us to keep our less than legal aka LEO or military only guns . The keystone was the ability to keep guns legal in the U.S.
 When we went anywhere in a group, I followed suit, carrying Randy's gun . Since the magazines weren't interchangeable, when we went around, I used to carry Randy's handgun .
 "I was asked several questions, how was I feeling, had I intentionally lost weight, was I having sleep related problems, the whole depression litany. That was followed by several questions." "I had a lot of fun fun fun with my life," she said .
 I told him I was fine, but had literally worked myself to the bone getting through Paramedic school, to which he replied, Imagine something 3 times worse. Imagine something three times worse, he said .
 "When you spend 30 years of your life with a man, you adopt his thinking, to an extent," she says of her relationship with her husband . "You adopt your thinking, he says, to the extent. When you spend time with a partner you adopt your own thinking,
 For a man who had been a Force Recon Marine, he had a pretty short fuse . For a very short fuse, he said: 'I'm not going to be happy with this. I'm not happy with it'
 Marilyn was probably a little brash while Rachel was quiet and more reserved, putting me somewhere in the middle of the middle . Marilyn was likely to be brash, but Rachel was more reserved .
 I was relatively sure Rachel wouldn't remarry; she had her 4 grandchildren that she shared with Marilyn . Marilyn had been married to Rachel for more than 20 years . Marilyn was always concerned Rachel would not remarry .
 "I did learn that my sister in Kansas City was gone, taken out in the attack," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to my sister, but I'm glad to learn that she was gone," he adds .
 I'd long suspected that, I hadn't heard from her since and that was very unlike her . I'd always suspected that. I'd just suspected that . I had long suspected she, I . hadn't been heard from . since . and that's very unusual for her .
 Just after Independence Day, Jason, Ray, Don, John and Jim headed to Bird City to talk with McGilvray . Jason and Ray visited Bird City just after the Fourth of July to talk about the city .
 Jason says he didn't know about Mike, Paul and Randy and sent his condolences . According to Jason, Jason didn't think he knew about Mike and Paul's death .
 He also told them he was retiring and they could buy him out, lock, stock and barrel . He also said they could get him out of the company lock, lock and stock .
 "I like the idea; it will give us time to get to know each other better," she says of the idea . "I think it will be a good thing for us to be together again," she adds .
 I'd lost weight evenly and needed new clothes so I decided to go shopping and treat myself to a new wardrobe from the skin out of the skin .
 The choices were better in Garden City and I called Marilyn and Rachel to see if they wanted to go . The choices of Garden City are better than Garden City . Marilyn, Rachel and Rachel wanted to be there .
 Rachel said she wanted to finish weeding, but Marilyn was ready to go, she only needed 30 minutes . Marilyn said Rachel wanted to stay weeding but Marilyn said she was ready for 30 minutes to go . Rachel and Marilyn were able to get back in the garden .
 "I was going for a new look, with the proper clothes I might be able to take off a few years," she says of her new look .
 "I didn't take that much off, maybe I needed a new hair style and to get my nails done," she said . "Maybe I needed to get her nails done. Maybe I didn't need to take a lot of off."
 "I didn't dare do too much with my nails. Nothing to elaborate, it had to be an easy to care for style," she said .
 "I got a Dorothy Hamill cut aka The Wedge" and my nails were short acrylics . I got a 'Dorothy Hamill' cut aka 'The Wedge' and her nails were acrylics.
 Some of the men might think the new look meant I was easy or looking but they were in for a rude awakening . Some of them might think it means I'm easy, but they're in for an awakening .
 "I went home, saddled a horse, strapped on the revolver and slid the Winchester into the scabbard. I went home ... and saddled my horse," he says .
 I'd ride the stallion today; he hadn't been ridden for a while and was full of spirit . I'd like to ride him today. He hadn't ridden a horse in a while, and he was full spirit, she says .
 Dorothy Hamill skated for the United States in the Olympics in Innsbruck, Austria in 1976 . Hamill was a member of the U.S. Olympic ice hockey team .
 "I didn't get the impression that he was having any severe adjustment problems," says Toni Kroos .
 "We visited a while and I headed back to the house, it was getting late. We visited a lot of the world's most famous people," she said . "I'm not going to be surprised," she added .
 On the way home, for no particular reason, I got to thinking about a lecture from school . I got into thinking about the lecture .
 The maximum recommended daily dose is 4 grams, 8 Tylenol Extra-strength . The maximum daily dose of the drug is 4g, 8g, or 8g .
 Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed in therapeutic doses, with peak levels in 1-2 hours and 2-4 hours in the overdose setting . Peak levels are in the overdosed setting .
 Small protein binding of 10% occurs, with a volume of distribution of 0.5% . Small protein binds 10% of small protein binding, with the volume of the distribution being distributed .
 The liver metabolizes more than 90% of acetaminophen to glucuronide and sulfate conjugates, which are eliminated in the urine . The liver does this to metabolize more than 80% of the drug .
 Only a small amount of acetaminophen is excreted unchanged by the kidney . Acinaminophen can only be absorbed by the kidneys .
 Hepatotoxicity is the result of formation of the reactive and toxic metabolite NAPQI by the cytochrome P-450 system . The metabolite is a reactive metabolite by the metabolite known as NapQI .
 As glutathione stores are diminished, NAPQI is not detoxified and covalently binds to the lipid bilayer of hepatocytes causing centrilobular necrosis . This is due to a decrease in glutathion stores .
 Glutathione stores are affected by age, diet, liver disease, and medical conditions such as fasting, gastroenteritis, chronic alcoholism, or HIV disease .
 Acetaminophen-induced hepatic failure is the second leading cause of liver transplantation . Acetamophen is a form of liver failure that leads to liver failure .
 N-acetylcysteine is the active ingredient in a formulation known as Mucomyst, an oral agent given to counteract liver damage in cases of acetaminophen overdose . The drug is an oral formantion known to counter liver damage caused by the use of N-
 The history should include the dosage, route of administration, duration of therapy, and names of other medications ingested concomitantly .
 The nomogram is intended for use in patients with no concomitant risk factors for hepatotoxicity . It assumes a single-dose ingestion and a known time of ingestion .
 If these conditions are not met, the nomogram is not accurate enough to be useful . The nomogram must be accurate enough for the most accurate nomogram to be used .
 Liver toxicity cannot be predicted from serum levels determined earlier than 4 hours after ingesting, experts say . Liver toxicity can't be predicted by early hours of ingestion, experts warn .
 In addition, their use may further irritate the gastrointestinal tract, making oral antidote administration difficult . In addition to their use, they may also irritate their gastrointestinal tract .
 Hemodialysis may remove 10% of the ingested dose but has not been shown to add any clinical benefit . Hemodials have not been proven to be beneficial to patients .
 Activated charcoal should be administered to bind acetaminophen in the stomach . It should also be administered as a form of charcoal to bind the drug .
 This antidote replenishes glutathione in the liver, allowing the metabolite N-acetyi-p-benzoquinoneimine to be broken down to a nontoxic substance .
 It helps prevent binding of NAPQI to hepatocytes and enhances synthesis of additional glutathione and sulfate . It also helps .
 It should be given if the serum level of acetaminophen was not measured within 8 hours after ingesting it . It should also be given after 8 hours of consumption .
 Acetylcysteine is proven effective in prevention and treatment of hepatotoxicity up to 24 hours after ingestion . If acetaminophen is detectable in serum or if biochemical evidence of hepatic dysfunction is ongoing, it is effective .
 The possibility of charcoal binding to acetylcysteine is a concern because availability of the agent would then be decreased . It is also a concern that charcoal binding could lead to the decrease of the availability of acetylcyclsteine .
 Some investigators advocate that a 50% increase in the dosage of acetylcysteine may be warranted if activated charcoal was administered . Activated charcoal may also be used in the study .
 Other methods to ease administration include diluting the solution even more, changing the diluent, chilling the solution, using a straw, and using a covered container .
 If vomiting occurs within an hour of administration, the dose should be repeated . The risk of vomiting is not to repeat the dose if vomiting occurs in an hour .
 Metoclopramide may be given intravenously for marked vomiting, because only a small amount of the agent is metabolized by the liver . Metoclopside may also be used intravenously .
 The benefits of intravenous use are ease of administration and reduced nausea and vomiting . However, there is a 10% chance of allergic reaction due to the pyogens in the formulation .
 Some experts advocate that an institutionally approved protocol for intravenous administration be created for use in patients with severe acetaminophen poisoning .
 This protocol should include recommended indications and procedures, informed consent information, and details of administration .
 In patients at high risk of hepatotoxicity, a second intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg should be given 4 hours after the initial dose . In patients who are at risk of liver toxicity, an intravenous injection of 50mg/kg is recommended .
 Those in whom severe liver damage develops have a 5% to 25% mortality rate . Those who develop liver damage develop have 5% or 25% chance of death .
 Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with fulminant hepatic failure . Liver transplant is an option in patients who have fulminants in their liver failure .
 You can see why school was difficult, that was only one small lecture out of many . You can also see why it was difficult to learn at school .
 I was home; it was quite a lecture on the dangers and treatment of Tylenol overdose, whether accidental or intentional . "I was home. It was quite an interesting lecture," she said .
 Before the war, we saw more cases of intentional overdose, but after, most of the cases seemed to be accidental . Most of the overdose cases seem to have been accidental, experts say .
 Use of oral NAC generally induced vomiting with the patient bringing forth large volumes of what had the appearance of coffee grounds . From an experience in the hospital, use of NAC often induced vomiting .
 It was best to give the patient a container to hold the vomit before you gave them the glass of Mucomyst .
 Wolfgang Puck's Old Fashioned Beef-Barley is a special treat for Wolfgang . Puck served a can of soup, a special taste of beef beef-barley .
 A slice of homemade bread and a jar of home canned peaches made the meal . The rest of the jar of peaches was home canned .
 I tended to munch on fresh veggies if I got hungry and they were available . I tend to eat fresh vegetables if I'm not hungry, I said .
 She was being catty and if I really wanted to know, I'd have to get the appraisal of a man, like my partner on the nightshift, she said . She was . Being catty, she was being . Catty .
 Leer, pretty much described his look if the lady was particularly attractive . Leer's look could be described as 'pretty attractive'
 To look with a sidelong glance, indicative especially of sexual desire or sly and malicious intent, is to look with sidelong glances . To look especially sexual or malicious, a glance can indicate a desire for sexual desire .
 If he gave me, I'd know what I wanted to know and also shut him down, quickly, quickly. I would know what he wanted to say, quickly . I'd also shut down quickly if he gave him the look I'd want to know, quickly."
 Andy Griffith was best known for his starring roles in two very popular TV series, The Andy Griffith Show and Matlock . The late Griffith was known for starring in the popular series .
 One of the other drugs we studied was Flunitrazepam , the date rape drug .
 Flunitrazepam is known to induce anterograde amnesia in sufficient doses . Individuals are unable to remember certain events that they experienced while under the influence of the drug . The drug is also known to cause amnesia .
 This effect is particularly dangerous when flunitrazepam is used to aid in the commission of sexual assault . Victims may not be able to clearly recall the assault, the assailant, or the events surrounding it .
 It's difficult to estimate just how many flunitrazepam-facilitated rapes have occurred in the United States .
 Very often, biological samples are taken from the victim at a time when the effects of the drug have already passed . Only residual amounts remain in the body fluids of the victim .
 The residual amounts are difficult to detect using standard screening assays available in the United States . These residual amounts can be difficult, and sometimes impossible to detect .
 If flunitrazepam exposure is to be detected at all, urine samples must be collected within 72 hours and subjected to sensitive analytical tests .
 The problem is compounded by the onset of amnesia after ingestion of the drug, which causes the victim to be uncertain about the facts surrounding the rape . The drug can also cause amnesia and lead to confusion about what happened .
 This uncertainty may lead to delays or even reluctance to report the rape and provide appropriate biological samples for testing . This uncertainty could lead to critical delays, even reluctance, to report rape .
 If a person suspects that he or she is the victim of a flunitrazepam-facilitated rape, he should get testing for the drug as soon as possible . If you are a victim of rape, contact the National Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1-800-273
 Scopolamine is used criminally as a date rape drug and as an aid to robbery . The most common act is the clandestine drugging of a victim's drink .
 It is preferred because it induces retrograde amnesia, or an inability to recall events prior to its administration . It is also preferred to induce retrograde amnesia or a memory loss .
 Victims of this crime are often admitted to a hospital in police custody, under the assumption that the patient is experiencing a psychotic episode . Victims are often treated in a hospital under the assumed that they are being treated for psychosis .
 The patch is programmed to deliver approximately 1 mg of scopolamine over 3 days . The patch was programmed to . deliver approximately . 1 mg over three days . It is designed to deliver .
 Any substance that renders you incapable of saying no or asserting yourself and your needs can be used to commit rape . Technically, any substance that causes you to say no or assert yourself is a crime .
 This can include alcohol, marijuana or other street drugs, designer or club drugs like ecstasy . Over-thecounter sleeping pills and antihistamines, even cold medications can be taken .
 In the United Kingdom, the use of flunitrazepam and other ""date rape"" drugs is becoming widespread as a means of sedating victims and stealing from them .
 Up to 2000 men and women are robbed each year after being spiked with powerful sedatives . Drug-assisted robbery is a more common problem than drug-assisted rape, experts say .
 A number of people are expressing fears that some benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms last forever, and that they can never completely recover . Some people express fears that withdrawal symptoms can never fully recover .
 All the evidence shows that a steady decline in symptoms almost invariably continues after withdrawal, though it can take a long time even several years in some cases .
 Most people experience a definite improvement over time so that symptoms gradually decrease to levels nowhere near as intense as in the early days of withdrawal, and eventually almost entirely disappear . Symptoms gradually decrease and eventually disappear .
 All the studies show steady, if slow, improvement in cognitive ability and physical symptoms .
 Most studies have not extended beyond a year after withdrawal, the results suggest that improvement continues beyond this time .
 There is no evidence that benzodiazepines cause permanent damage to the brain, nervous system or body . There is absolutely no evidence there is any damage to brain or body.
 "My weapon was in the BOB, which was just like an AMEX Card," she says . "I never left home without it. My weapon was ... my BOB"
 I had time to build BOBs for John and Julia, too, too and told Mary and Jim to find an appropriate firearm to add to their collection . I also told Mary, Jim and Julia to find a suitable firearm .
 Speer Gold Dot 124gr +P JHP ammo, that some called flying ashcans, was the key . The key, I felt was that Speer . Gold . Dot 124 grands +P . JHP ammunition .
 Aside from physiological differences, men and women think differently . Men and women have different ways of thinking, including in the brain .
 I didn't say one gender was smarter than the other, just that they have divergent thought processes . "I'm not saying that one gender is smarter than one," she says. "It's not that they're smarter than others," she adds .
 What may seem to be perfectly obvious to a woman may completely escape a man and vice versa . A man may not be able to tell a woman what he thinks is an obvious thing .
 Women mature mentally more quickly than men, or so experience seems to show . Men mature mentally faster than women, research shows .
 While the female may be emotionally driven, men generally aren't and thus appear to be insensitive . Men tend to be more emotionally driven than women, according to experts .
 Couples who spend much of their lives together generally know what their spouse would do in any given situation . That being said, wives more often than their husbands .
 The women who suddenly found themselves widows and walk away from their former life, or continue to carry out the course their husbands envisioned, are widows .
 "The night shift at the hospital, that's where we're based, is generally quiet," says the hospital worker . The night shift is "quieter" for the night shift .
 Kearny County's population, being small, meant we didn't get many calls . Kearny's population was small, so it was hard to get many of the calls . The county was small enough to have a very small population .
 If being a Paramedic hadn't been so much a cause, rather than a job, I couldn't have lived on the wages they paid. I'm proud to be a paramedic, not a firefighter or paramedic. I've been in the ambulance department for 20 years.
 "I still get flashbacks to the day that Randy was killed. I haven't decided," he says . He says he still gets flashbacks of the day he died .
 Most of the National Guard troops attended a party just a few days before on Independence Day . "We had a big party just days before," she says .
 Mike had 2 barrels of home brewed beer and we did a side of beef on a spit . Beef was served on the spit .
 They kept bringing Mike, Paul and Randy glasses of beer to thank them for the great meal . "I'm afraid they got drunk,"" I explained with a shutter .
 Ron was 'more of a letch than the type of man who would follow through' Ron was more of a 'letch' than a 'following-through' man .
 You'd think a Paramedic with several years of experience had seen enough that a woman's body wasn't a subject of fascination . You'd be surprised to find out that a paramedic with a lot of experience has seen enough .
 "It just doesn't seem right, putting our bourbon without a label on the bottle," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States has 4 deserts, Chihuahuan, Great Basin, Mojave and the Sonoran . The desert is the largest desert in the country .
 The High Plains are a subregion of the Great Plains in the central US . They are located in eastern Colorado, western Kansas, western Nebraska, central and eastern Montana, eastern New Mexico, western Oklahoma, western Texas, and southeastern Wyoming .
 In some definitions of the subregion, parts of South Dakota and North Dakota are included . The subregion includes parts of western South Dakota, North Dakota .
 The movie High Plains Drifter wasn't filmed on the High Plains, but rather on the shores of Mono Lake in California . The movie was filmed in Mono Lake, California .
 Randy's HDD must have contained 10,000 files and it was as informative as going on the internet . Randy's "HDD" must have been as big as the internet. Randy's 'HDD' was as large as the Internet.
 We'd had almost no snow last winter, and the Arkansas River was dry again . The Arkansas River is dry again, but it's still dry again this winter .
 I worked on the computer for a while and eventually designed a label that I could print on the Avery 3""x4"" labels that came 6 to the sheet .
 A rare glass of wine, he favored the Merlot, or an occasional cocktail, usually an old fashioned . He favored a rare Merlot or a rare cocktail, or a Merlot .
 When you think of cocktails, it is often the Martini that first comes to mind . The Martini is a popular drink in the world .
 The term Martini has become synonymous with, if not outright replace, the label of ""Cocktail"" when talking about this style of mixed drink . The Martini is one of the more simplistic drinks in the cocktail category .
 It is similar in basic form as the Martini, but its ingredients are often considered more complex and robust in flavor . To many cocktailians it provides a much better representation of this category .
 Only a few other cocktails that have survived to modern day that come from the era of the Martini and the Manhattan . The Manhattan is one of the few cocktails that has survived to the modern day .
 There is one cocktail of similar lineage, but holds nowhere near the same level of respect and esteem as either the Martini or the Manhattan . The Manhattan cocktail is one of similar, but still holds no respect .
 The Old Fashioned is often seen as just one of those old slop drinks that isn't worth the time it takes to make it . But instead of being held in any sort of awe, the Old-fashioned is seen as a low-cost drink . The Old-Fashion
 Many modern bartenders serve it the way they serve it, it's no surprise . And to taste it, they say, no surprise.
 They remove the spoon, add a cherry and a slice of orange and often top the glass off with soda . Add a cherry, slice an orange and slice of an orange to the glass .
 It was probably originally a man's drink, but a Lady can like them too . The drink was probably first created by a man .
 Lakin provide little experience and Garden City had a population in excess of 25,000, hence more calls . Lakin provides little experience . Garden City has a population of over 250,000 people, hence the calls .
 I also switched to working days and nights, according to their rotating schedule . "I've been here for a year and a half," she says . "It's been a great experience," she adds .
 A little over 30 miles one-way, there was an ample supply of E85, now. "I drove my car. There was a little over a 30-mile commute. Heck of a commute. I drive my car."
 We were having what they call an Indian Summer, it remained very warm out and slightly hazy . It remained warm out of the sky, but it remained hazy and hazy in the summer .
 The term Indian Summer is generally associated with a period of considerably above normal temperatures, accompanied by dry and hazy conditions ushered in on a south or southwesterly breeze .
 A true Indian Summer cannot occur until there has been a killing frost/freeze . Several references make note of the fact that a true Summer can't occur until the killing frost is over .
 Frost and freezing temperatures generally work their way south through the fall . This would give credence to the possibility of several Indian Summers occurring in a fall, especially across northern areas where frost/freezes usually come early .
 There are several theories or possibilities of the origin of the term 'Indian Summer' yet no one theory has actually been proven .
 Given the fact it has been centuries since the term first appeared, it will probably rest with its originators . It will probably best rest with the originators of the term, which first appeared in 17th century .
 It is an abnormally warm and dry period, varying in length, that comes in the autumn time of the year . It is usually in October or November, and only after the first killing frost/freeze .
 There may be sever305 al occurrences of Indian Summer in a fall season or none at all . There are sever305 instances of this type of summer .
 I had a bad spell of depression in early July that started around Independence Day and lasted perhaps 3 weeks . I'm not sure how long it lasted .
 "I quickly identified it as a seasonal depression that related to the Massacre and my losing Randy," says author . "It was a seasonal depressism that I quickly identified as seasonal depression"
 Typically one doesn't treat a short lived period of depression, unless it deepens, unless the depression is deepened .
 Anti-depressants take about 3 weeks to kick in and even longer to take full effect . Most anti-depresses take about three weeks to start taking full effect.
 "I talked to Doc about it and he told me we'd wait about a month and treat it if it didn't lift. I talked to him about it," he said .
 There are several types of antidepressant medications used to treat depressive disorders . They include antidepressants and antidepressants .
 SSRIs and other newer medications that affect neurotransmitters such as dopamine or norepinephrine-generaliy have fewer side effects than tricyclic's . SSRisand other newer . medications that . affect dopamine have fewer . side effects .
 Each act on different chemical pathways of the human brain related to moods . Each acts on different . chemical pathways, such as moods, to act on mood .
 Usually antidepressant medications must be taken regularly for at least 4 weeks and, in some cases, as many as 8 weeks, before the full therapeutic effect occurs . Although some individuals notice improvement in the first couple of weeks, usually antidepressant medications are taken regularly .
 To be effective and to prevent a relapse of the depression, medications must be taken for about 6 to 12 months, carefully following the doctor's instructions .
 Medications must be monitored to ensure the most effective dosage and minimize side effects . Medications need to be monitored for most effective dose and to minimize side-effects .
 Long-term treatment with medication is the most effective means of preventing recurring episodes of depression . For those who have had several bouts of depression, treatment is most effective .
 He concluded that the timing of the depression probably reflected the Anniversary, as it were, of Randy's death . Randy died in 1994 .
 He suggested that I remain aware of the possibility of a reoccurrence next year, but since I had started a new life, he expected it would pass with time . He said that since he had started his new life he expects it to pass with .
 Jason and Jim bottled the bourbon and affixed the Proprietor's Reserve labels . When it cooled off, the bourbon didn't really get cold . Jason's bourbon was bottled and labeled with the Reserve .
 "We were afraid that ATF would be pounding on our door as soon as the stuff hit the streets," says the owner of the store . "We're not afraid of ATF," he says of the ATF .
 The way they marketed the stuff was to take a bottle of the bourbon to the various bars in Lakin and Garden City . The way to sell the bourbon was to go to various bars .
 It noticeably lacked the tax stamps and didn't appear on any of their back bars . It was noticeably lacking the tax stamp on the bars .
 Kansas Law says inventory may only be purchased from a retail liquor store, which has a federal wholesale liquor license or from a licensed distributor . Kansas law says, in relevant part, inventory must be purchased at a licensed liquor store .
 The retail liquor store, which provides the liquor, must be in the same or adjacent county as the club or drinking establishment . Retail liquor store must be within the same county of the club .
 We sold it for $15 a bottle or $180 a case and we ended up selling 90 cases . You figure it out. You figure out, we sold it at $15, $180 .
 Proprietor's Reserve is a key ingredient in an Old Fashioned made with the Reserve .
 A woman, sitting alone, in a bar in Garden City just naturally attracts attention . A woman sitting alone in a Garden City bar attracts attention. A woman in the bar is sitting alone .
 The lesson was that if I wanted a drink after work, I'd better have it at home . "I didn't want to be labeled as a Tart. I wanted to be a Tart," she says .
 "It was about that time that I purchased a S&W Chief's Special revolver," he says . It was about the time that he purchased the revolver .
 It was a model 360P, with the optional Crimson Trace grip, .357MAG/.38+P and blued finish . It was an optional .357 MAG/38/P and fitted with a .357Magn/.38+.
 It was bad enough with the .38 Special, but when I switched to the .357MAG, it took an extremely firm grip . The .357 MAGS took a very firm grip on the gun, and it took a lot of patience .
 Crimson Trace laser grips need to be zeroed and I needed to train properly so that I could manipulate the laser under field conditions . As with any laser aiming device, any laser aims device needs to be used properly .
 The device was adjustable for both windage and elevation using an Allen wrench . The device is adjustable for windage, elevation and windage using a wrench .
 Mary was due in February and both Susan and Karen were expecting, yet again . Susan was pregnant in February . Karen and Susan are expecting their third children .
 Karen's kids ranged in age from teenagers to teenagers and she was pregnant . Karen was pregnant when she died . Karen's children ranged in ages from teens to teenagers .
 Don pressed the soybeans and everyone was busy converting the oil to biodiesel . Don had pressed soybeans, everyone had to convert the oil into biodiesel. Don's wife and daughter was in the middle of the conversion process .
 It was easier to just sell most of the corn to the ethanol producer in Garden City; he had all of the proper licensing . "It was easier than just selling corn to an ethanol producer," he says. "It's easier to sell corn to a company that has all the proper
 It didn't take a lot of corn to produce 12 barrels of bourbon or to feed our growing herds of livestock . The corn is used to make bourbon, bourbon, and to feed livestock .
 I suppose than some might think we were corrupt, what with making Moonshine ala bourbon . We're not corrupt, we're making moonshine with bourbon .
 You can lay the blame for the current state of the laws right at the foot of our own Carrie Nation . You can blame the state-of-the-art laws for the state's lack of laws .
 She went through Medicine Lodge over in Benton County like a whirlwind. She went from Medicine Lodge to Medicine Lodge .
 She would march into a bar and sing and pray, while smashing bar fixtures and stock with a hatchet . Alone or accompanied by hymn-singing women, she would march in and pray in a bar .
 Prohibition didn't stop people from drinking; it just helped expand organized crime . Prohibition was a boon to organized crime in the U.S. and helped expand it .
 Even prominent citizens and politicians later admitted to having used alcohol during Prohibition .
 Harding kept the White House well stocked with bootleg liquor . Harding voted for Prohibition, but as a Senator, he voted for prohibition . Harding kept a White House stocked of bootleg alcohol .
 This discrepancy between legality and actual practice led to widespread disdain for authority . This discrepancy was the result of widespread disdain toward authority . It is not the first time this discrepancy has been found out .
 Prohibition agents took bribes to overlook illegal brewing activities of gangsters . Some Prohibition agents were paid to overlook the illegal brewing activity . Prohibition agents also took bribes .
 It had been estimated that six million dollars would be needed to enforce prohibition laws .
 Over time, more people drank illegally and money ended up in gangsters' pockets . Over time more people drink illegally . Money ended up going to gangsters .
 Gangsters bribe officials to ignore their illegal activities . Gangsters would then bribe them to ignore illegal activities. Gangsters then bribe officials into ignoring their activities .
 In some cases, the money likely ended up in corrupt Prohibition agencies .
 Al Capone built his criminal empire largely on profits from illegal alcohol . Capone was one of the most infamous bootleggers of all time . He built his business on illegal alcohol profits .
 Oklahoma, Kansas, and Mississippi were still ""dry"" in 1948 . Some states continued to enforce prohibition laws after repeal of the national constitutional amendment .
 Mississippi, which had made alcohol illegal in 1907, was the last state to repeal prohibition, in 1966 . Mississippi had prohibition in 1907; prohibition was repealed in 1966; prohibition ended in 1986 .
 There are still some dry counties and communities in the United States . In practice this means that people wishing to buy alcohol must travel some distance to do so .
 I thought back remembering all of our early preps, the change from a basement shelter to the culvert, the standby genset, the small wind turbines they went to Denver to get and later that 2mw monster that we had to hire someone to maintain . We had to
 The expansion of the farm came in stages, it doubled when John Hansen had a heart attack and doubled again when James Jones decided to retire . The farm doubled in stages when Hansen had heart attack .
 Randy bought that single premium insurance policy just after that, just in case something happened . Randy bought a single premium policy just before that .
 The amount was calculated to enable me to pay most, if not all, the money we owed on the property . The amount is said to be enough to cover most of the money owed to us .
 Now, we produced biodiesel, replenishing our usage and selling the remainder to Lakin and the County at $6 a gallon . The rest of the biodiesel is sold to the county and Lakin County for $6 .
 A tenth acre garden plot costs $75 for a tenth acre .
 We preserved our heirloom seeds and provided spring plants and potato cutttings quite reasonably . We preserved seeds and cuttings for spring plants . We are happy to share this information with the public .
 The eyes were collected when we peeled spuds, just keeping a little extra meat . It was unconscionable to charge much for the potato eyes, says the chef .
 "We generally got the flats and small square pots back because we provided garbage cans for people to drop them in. We generally got them back because of the garbage cans," she says .
 We mixed our own potting soil with a mixture of soil, vermiculite, sand and a little fertilizer . We mixed it up with a mix-up of soil and sand and fertilizer .
 Fresh peppers were blanched and frozen and green beans generally canned . Green beans were generally canned along with sliced beets and pickles . Fresh pepper was blanced and frozen . Pickles were sliced and pickled .
 We rotate the recipes from dill to sweet to bread and butter, a different kind every year . As for the pickles, we rotated the recipes between dill and sweet . The pickles are made from dills, sweet and butter .
 "I didn't believe in ghosts, still don't, but Randy was there with me, at least in spirit," she says . Randy was with her when she died, but she says he was there at the time .
 He reminded me of Don Galloway, Detective Sergeant Ed Brown on Ironside . He was a detective detective on the BBC's "Irisense" series .
 Retired Command Sergeant Major with 30 years in the Army, retiring in May of 2009 . Retired in May 2009 just before the crap hit the fan .
 He was born and raised in Iowa, but his late wife was from Garden City, Garden City . When he retired, they settled there, they moved to Garden City.
 He had been Marine Infantry, not Force Recon, although Force Recon dated to the '50s . He was Marine Infantry . Force Recon dates to the 1950s .
 The Marine Corps Special Operations Command had been activated back in February of 2006 at Camp Lejeune, NC by then SecDef Donald Rumsfeld . The command was activated at the base in February 2006 .
 The Corps had always played 3rd fiddle when it came to getting their share of funds for the military . The Corps has always played third fiddle in funding for the U.S. military .
 Rachel now wears dark colored clothes, usually black, to the funeral of her friend .
 She wasn't an unattractive woman, but dressing down as she did sent a clear signal . She was not unattractive, but dressed down .
 He'd badly sprained his wrist and came in to have a doctor check it out . He'd come in for a doctor to check out the injury .
 We must have visited for the better part of an hour; he was polite and excused himself to take 2 of the pain pills the doctor had prescribed .
 They ought to erect a Memorial; I think that sometimes the government forgets it place. The government forgets it place, he says .
 "The name of this Country is the United States of America, not the State of America," says President Obama . The name of the state of America is not the name of America .
 They sometimes forget that their power is derived from the people, not the other way around . They sometimes act like they forget that . They often forget that they forget . That's what they do .
 I put a roast in a crock pot on low and the meat should be falling apart by the time I get home . I put it in the crockpot on low .
 I have a large house, bring a change of clothes and if it gets late, you can sleep over . Maybe you shouldn't drink and drive, she says .
 Heart attack victim had heart attack at 4:30 p.m. and it was after 5 by 5 by the time we got back to the hospital, police say .
 "We filled the doctor in, gave them our report and I went to look for Dan. We filled in . We filled the . doctor in . gave them their report and went to find Dan. Dan .
 He made 6 barrels the first year and then, 12 barrels a year until he was killed, he says . He made about 12 barrels per year until his death .
 We both had EMT-1 and EMA-2 training but didn't have the time to get the Paramedic training . We both have EMT training but not the time for the training .
 He had an insurance policy that paid the farm off and left enough for me to go to school . He had a farm that paid off, and he left enough to go back to college .
 Doctor recommended Paramedic training instead of Physician's Assistant training . "Doc" recommended that he be a paramedic .
 The Sheriff told FEMA people to stop what they were doing and the head guy simply shot him . The head guy was shot in the head, the sheriff said .
 Deputies and Reserves get killed in a firefight with most of them getting killed . Most of the Deputies were killed in the firefight . The sheriff's deputies and reserve officers were killed .
 She knew she was at some risk, her mother died of the same thing, but she put off having the mammogram because they made her so uncomfortable . Her mother died from the same type of cancer .
 The previous exam had produced a false positive resulting in an ultrasound and biopsy and that may also explain why she put it off . She put off the exam because of the false positive .
 The tumor is larger than five centimeters and has spread to the lymph nodes under the arm, or a tumor that is any size with cancerous lymph nodes that adhere to one another or surrounding tissue . A tumor larger than 5cm and spreading to lymph nodes is a cancerous tumor that has
 When breast cancer metastasis, the majority of women know that it is an illness that's ultimately going to take their life . Breast cancer metastasies are often metastatic, metastatic breast cancer .
 "We now have a large herd of Clydesdales and Morgans to ride," says owner . "Right after, he and the other two went looking for draft horses," he says .
 Paul and he also went to Denver and bought wind turbines before the war, he says . Paul and Paul also bought turbines in Denver, Colorado, before war .
 Sunflower Wind Turbine Farm east of Leoti will install 2mw turbines at Sunflower Farm . The farm will be the first of its kind to be built in the area .
 Farmers escaped the area after a group took over the town . They were farmers who escaped from the area . The group was a group of farmers who had taken over the area.
 A force was put together and they went up to Leoti and I suppose you can say that they liberated the town . The town was liberated by a force of troops, but the town was never liberated .
 The maxim is Qui tacet consentiret, the maxim of the law is Silence gives consent . Silence is silence, silence is consent, silence gives consent, the law says .
 When Dan went to bed in the Guest Room, he didn't need the Tylenol . Dan didn't use it too much, but when he was in the guest room, he needed it .
 I liked this man, from what little I knew of him; a definite 4 and just possibly a 5 . I liked him from the little he knew, but I'm not sure if he was a 4 or 5 .
 You might expect temperatures like this in late March, but not in January . Temperatures in New York City are expected to remain below freezing temperatures .
 Once Dan was in the saddle I tied his jacket behind the cantle and got on the stallion . The stallion was the first horse to be saddled in a saddle for the first time .
 I met Dan at the hospital yesterday and because of his injured wrist invited him over for dinner . I met him yesterday and invited him to the hospital for dinner.
 The house we bought had a basement shelter and we stayed there until the fallout cleared . We stayed in the basement shelter until the fall-out .
 "I spent a lot of time with my wife. Then we went through her first cancer scare," he says . "Then we had a lot more time with her," he adds. "Then she had a cancer scare."
 There wasn't much work after that and the government got caught up on my pension . I was able to get my pension back on track after a decade of work .
 "I puttered around the house and such for quite a while, unable to find work," says the author . "It was a hard time for me to get a job," she says of her career .
 "I won't bother you with the details, but she died about a year and a half ago," she says . "She was a very special person," she adds .
 I offered to take her out for a drink but instead she invited me home for supper . She invited him home for a meal, and he said she was going to be there for dinner . She said: 'I'm not going to take a drink. I'm going to have a
 "I was going to say no, but it was roast beef with potatoes, carrots, onions and garlic," she says . "I'm not going to deny it, but I was going for it," she adds .
 "I turned in, in the guest bedroom. We had dinner, toured the shelter, had a couple of more drinks and I turned in," she said .
 This morning she had breakfast when I got up and asked me to go riding, she said, 'I'm going to go for a ride'
 The insurgency began using what amounted to a shaped charge that the uparmored vehicle couldn't protect against . Once they got involved, the insurgents began using shaped charges that couldn't be stopped .
 Our next stop was the old Jones farmhouse where John and Mary lived . We made a pit stop before we left; we weren't going to make every stop begin with a potty call .
 When we finished, I offered to help with dishes, but Mary told me she'd just have John rinse them and put them in the dish washer . Mary said she'd be happy to wash up the dishes . John said he'd have to wash them up .
 They'd been having problems with the placements, physical and sexual abuse . The children were placed in a home where they had been placed with a group of other children .
 I had one egg and one slice of toast for breakfast, a small bowl of chili with a half-slice of bread for lunch . I only plan on the steak, mushrooms and a small potato tonight .
 "I knew that Dan enjoyed Randy's bourbon so I served him some of the way he wanted it, on the rocks," she says . The bourbon was served to Dan, who was served on a rocks .
 The spuds went in the oven and I opened a can of button mushrooms to saute in butter . The spud was cooked up in a large pot of vegetables .
 "I was trying very hard to make a good impression on Dan. During dinner, it occurred to me that I was trying to impress Dan," she says .
 There was just something about him, he was direct, honest enough and yet laid-back in a way . He was direct and honest enough, but laid back, he said . He said: 'There was something there about him that was honest enough'
 Samantha tries to figure out why Martin's behavior is so erratic . The episode was part of the episode where Samantha tried to find out why he was erratic .
 His reply indicated that he realized he had a problem and was willing to admit it . "His reply indicated he realized that he was going to have a problem," he said .
 He later showed up at an NA meeting, his first step on the road to recovery, he says . He says he is now on his way to recovery .
 When the dryer buzzed, I took his shirt out and hung it on a hanger and put the whites in to dry . I took the shirt on to dry and put it in the dry dryer to dry.
 Weatherman had several comments about the unseasonable warmth . For a change there didn't seem to seem to be anything brewing .
 Dan explained that Maxwell was a blond singer, sort of a cross between Joan Blondell and Mae West . Dan said Maxwell was like Joan Blondeell, Mae West, and Mae East . Maxwell was the blond singer .
 "I didn't see him again until Wednesday when he popped in to know if I wanted to go to lunch," he said . "He popped in and asked me if I want to go for lunch," she said .
 If I went the first route, an accessory or two could make it full dress up and if the other way, I could dress down but not up . I'm not sure if I want to dress down, but I'm going to dress up, I'll dress down and dress up
 "I had just the thing, an outfit from Maurice's that was only casual because of the open knit sweater," she says . "It was just a casual outfit," she adds .
 If you left the sweater off and added a string of pearls, it could pass for full dress up, just short of a cocktail dress . If you added a few pearls to the outfit, it would pass for a dress-up .
 Her bag had a makeup bag, a nightgown, a couple of changes of underclothes, jeans, western cut shirts, pumps, boots and jewelry .
 We only had a single call on Friday, an auto accident with minor injuries . "We only had one call Friday, a minor injury," police said .
 "When I got off at 5, I showered and changed, taking special care with my makeup," she said . "I showered, changed, took special care of my makeup. When she got off, she changed, she said."
 Both under ripe and overripe grapes lean away from fruit and towards herbaceousness . Ripeness seems critical; both under ripe grapes lean towards fruit .
 Kathryn was striking and about my size before I lost the weight; the same and yet clearly different . Kathryn was struck and about his size before he lost weight, he says .
 If I styled my hair the same way she did, I suppose we might pass of distant cousins . I'm not sure if I styled her hair the way she styled it .
 "I knew our personalities weren't the same; she was less outgoing and, according to Dan, timid," she says . Dan says she was more outgoing and timid when she died .
 If taking Dan home for dinner didn't count as a first date then this was our first date and it wasn't going to happen. Not on a second date I wasn't . Not on second date, he said .
 The movie was a spy movie based on the novel There Are No Spies by Bill Granger . The film was based on a novel by Granger .
 He was an average, maybe above average, actor who had played James Bond in several films . He had played Bond in many films, including several Bond films .
 "It's hard when you been out of the game for so many years to know these things," he says . "It was hard to learn these things. It's hard to know when you've been out the game so long"
 Unbidden, he had made me another Old Fashioned and was sipping some more of the bourbon . Unbidden he'd made another Old-Fashioned and sipped some more bourbon .
 "We went to our rooms and I changed out of my clothes and into my night gown," she said . "We were in our rooms. We went into our rooms," she added .
 It was near February and it hadn't really cooled down with temperatures remaining in the 70s during the daytime . Temperatures continued to remain warm throughout the day .
 "I'll have to find and buy more of the Avery labels, I didn't have that many," she says of her favorite .
 "When I walked into the house, Marilyn was sitting at the kitchen table," she said . "I'm not going to be surprised when I walked in and see Marilyn," she added .
 The human heart is very strange; it can expand to make room for the love of a man, and later 2 children . "The human heart can expand, and then expand, to make space for a man and later a woman," she says .
 Doc claimed Paramedics need a year of seasoning after they're certified . Doc claimed paramedics need a lot of seasoning before certification .
 Paramedics are assigned to an experienced paramedic who acts as a training officer or guide .
 Emergency medicine is built on the differential diagnosis, explained earlier . The differential diagnosis is a key part of emergency medicine . Emergency medicine was built on a differential diagnosis .
 "We follow protocols based on urgency, Airway, Breathing and Circulation," says the hospital .
 The further up the food chain you get, the more you can do to restore and maintain them . The further you get you can also do the same to maintain your food chain .
 Emergency medicine "must be a calling, more than a discipline," says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Emergency medicine must be a 'calling' for emergency medicine, he says .
 It's nothing like a doctor seeing a patient in the office, this is often life or death and time is the enemy . It's often life-or-death and the patient is often the enemy, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 QuikClot, for example, doesn't repair the torn vein or artery; it just stops the blood loss . Quik clots can be used to stop blood loss, but not to stop the bleeding .
 He has to decide if the patient will bleed out before they can do an MRI, it isn't an easy job . The patient has to wait for an MRI before the doctor can do anything .
 You'll get asthma attacks or other forms of acute respiratory distress, strokes, heart attacks, and depending where you're located, gunshots .
 One of the largest antivenin banks in the United States is at the Miami-Dade Fire Rescue . The Miami Fire Rescue is located in Miami, Dade .
 They have 38 types of antivenin covering 95% of the world's snake species . Antivenin is used to treat venomous snakes in the wild .
 One bottle of CroFab runs $750 . There are hundreds of bottles and when you consider that, you can understand why, the refrigerator is locked .
 We don't get many rattlesnake bites in Kansas, Copperhead, Cottonmouth, Massasauga, Timber ratter and the Western rattleschake . The Western ratter is the largest rattles snake species in the world .
 We had more green beans than any other vegetable, I opened a quart and heated half, with a little vinegar and bacon bits . We had a quart of green beans .
 The amount of rehabilitation and the time needed for full recovery after a sprain or strain depend on the severity of the injury and individual rates of healing . Injuries and recovery time depends on severity of injuries and rates of healings .
 For example, a mild ankle sprain may require up to 6 weeks of rehabilitation . A moderate sprain could require 2 to 3 months of rehab .
 With a severe sprain, it can take up to 8 to 12 months to return to full activities . With a serious injury, it may take 8-12 months to get back to full fitness .
 I don't think she shoots it; maybe I can work out some kind of swap with her . "I'm not sure if I'm going to shoot it, but I'm sure I'm not shooting it," she says .
 "When I first saw you that day in the hospital, you almost took my breath away. When you first saw me that day I almost thought you were going to die," he said .
 "I haven't seen Jim this week so I can't tell you what Mary may have told him," she says . "Mary may have said something to Jim that he may not have heard"
 We decided that he would move to the farm in July, after I finished my year and quit my job . We decided to move him in July after he had finished his year in the farm .
 He could help with the harvest and learn to make bourbon and biodiesel . He could also learn how to make biodiesel and bourbon .
 The real problem I saw was that we had a year without winter; that worried me . That worried me. That worried him. That's the real problem . That's what I saw .
 "With the river dry, the only water we had was whatever rain we got and our wells," says one resident . "We had to rely on our wells and rain," she says .
 The extension office said we'd need big wells if we wanted to irrigate, a 12"" well on each farm . The man from the extension office told us we need to have big wells . The farm will need to be irrigated by 12 wells per farm .
 On Saturday morning, I called to let Marilyn and Rachel know and Rachel said Ray would handle it . Rachel said she and Marilyn would handle the situation . Ray is still in the care of Marilyn and Ray, Marilyn said .
 For some people the grief associated with losing a loved one is so crippling that it dominates their lives for years to come . Dealing with death is part of life but for some people it is even more difficult to deal with .
 As many as a million Americans a year develop a chronic, disabling condition known as complicated grief brought on by the loss of someone they love . It is estimated that as many as one million Americans develop a condition called complicated grief .
 'Just don't say anything to him about the terms of our deal or to anyone else, for now,' he says .
 Once you have enough grenades for the M203, you're carrying more weight and aren't any better off . But, I'll tell you Dan, Dan, once you've got enough grenades, you'll carry more weight . Dan: "Once you've had enough grenades ... you're
 Darned shame, we made it through the flu, the plague and the Chinese attack . We made it out of the flu and the plague, but now we're back in the United States .
 The daughter is expecting any day and I don't know how well the boy and I hit it off. The daughter has a baby due to be born this year .
 She missed out on the H5N1 vaccine and couldn't use Tamiflu . She couldn't make ends meet and ended up working and missed out of the vaccine . She ended up going back to work and lost her job . She said she was too sick to take Tamif
 June's Husband Randy was killed in the Massacre along with Marilyn's husband Paul and Rachel Jenkins's husband Mike . June's husband Randy was also killed along with her husband Marilyn and Rachel's husband .
 One big happy inter-married family; and you almost need a program to know the players . The players are inter-marital .
 When Gunny had the glasses ready, Marilyn raised hers and said, "I raise my glass to toast the brave men and women who have given their blood, sweat and lives to keep this country free" Marilyn raised her glass to thank Gunny for his support .
 It seemed clear that the new men in our lives held the former men in their lives in very high regard, it was a good start . It was clear that . it seemed clear . that . the new . men in . our lives . held the . former men . in high regard
 I told him to go deep; I had a feeling that the year without a winter forebode something bad . I had told him, "Go deep," he said. "I told him he had a sense of something bad," he added .
 Randy John McCartney was born at 7 pounds, 6oz and 22" long . He came out at 7.5 pounds and 22"" long . Randy John was named after his father .
 The farm is clearing close to $150,000 a year . We don't need it for now, says the owner of the farm . The farm will be cleared close to that amount .
 "As long as there is water in the deep aquifer, we can irrigate to produce crops," says farmer . "We need to be able to irrigate our crops," he says. "We have a long way to go"
 Ralph said we're going to need to replace some parts in that wind turbine sooner than he thought . Ralph said that we're . going to . need to replaced some parts sooner than thought, Ralph said . Ralph says that we are going to have to replace parts in the turbine sooner .
 "It is a bit dated now, but it still works and I've been trained to use it," she said . "I've trained it. It is a good job, but I'm not sure if it will ever work again," she added .
 "Doc and I have kept the equipment serviced and have replaced things as they need replacing. Doc and Doc have kept things serviced, have kept it serviced .
 The little pharmacy we have doesn't amount to much, mainly drugs for the 3 families and some of our neighbors . The pharmacy is "a little pharmacy" for the three families and a few neighbors . "The little pharmacy is a little bit small," says owner .
 "The way it is wired now, it's totally automatic. Our primary power source is the big turbine, the secondary is our wind turbines and the last backup is the generator . The way it's wired now is wired .
 "That new wife of mine could be harder than high tensile steel, yet soft and caring when the situation called for it," he says of his new wife . That new wife could be hard, but soft, caring when needed, he says .
 Barely 6 weeks after she'd lost her husband of 30 years she had enrolled in school and followed up on plans the two of them had had . Barely six weeks after her husband's death she had followed up her plans to go to school .
 "I found it interesting that an outsider would have trouble telling they hadn't been born and raised on a farm," says the author of the book "Farm Girl"
 "If a person considered all those kids had been through in their lives, they had turned out well rounded, healthy individuals," says the author . "They turned out to be well rounded" individuals .
 In those rare instances, I sensed, rather than knew, that Jim had a score to settle with the feds . "In the rare instances," Jim knew he was going to get back at the feds," he says .
 The dairy herds numbered about 40 on each farm and other cows strictly for raising beef cattle . The dairy herd was about 40 cows per farm .
 Jason got a small percentage of the farm profit for managing the farm . June explained that Jason was salaried and got a salary . Jason's wife said Jason is a family member of the family .
 There was a cheese operation that used about half of the milk, a biodiesel operation that produced all the diesel fuel they needed . There was also a small ethanol production that produced anhydrous ethanol and or bourbon .
 With few exceptions, a person could have built a wall around the three farms and ignored the outside world . The wall was built by the owner of the farms, but it is not a wall .
 None of the farms had sheep; hence no wool and they didn't grow cotton . The farms had no wool or cotton, hence no sheep and no cotton was grown .
 "One of my old friends who was still in the Army called one day just to say hi, extend condolences and congratulations, and catch up on old times. One of his old friends still calls from his time in the military .
 During the course of the conversation, he mentioned that he'd be retiring soon and was thinking of locating in a rural setting . He said he was retiring soon .
 I pitched this area and also asked if he had some things he thought could come in handy in the future . I pitched the area and asked him to share some of his ideas with me .
 It was, he said, doable despite severe controls now in place by a struggling government . He said it was 'doable' despite controls now being imposed by the government .
 It involved munitions, certain individual weapons and a few crew served weapons . The weapons were used in the World War II era .
 He fabricated a unit out of whole cloth that he then proceeded to supply a basic issue and subsequent resupplies . He fabricated the unit and supplied it with supplies .
 It was a mammoth computer exercise these days that only required a single signature at the end of the line by someone wearing BDUs and CSM stripes . It was only required to be signed by someone in the line .
 As mysteriously as the Platoon appeared on certain paperwork, it just as mysteriously disappeared a few months before he retired . The Platoon disappeared from certain paperwork on certain documents .
 I remember how Randy had to supervise construction of our greenhouse, so I just naturally assumed that Dan would supervise the Quonset hut . I remember Randy had been supervising construction of the greenhouse .
 No sooner had I said yes, he was on the phone talking to someone about the hut . "No sooner than he said yes," he said, "I said yes. No sooner than that he had said yes."
 A couple of days later, some fellas showed up, he showed them where I said he could put it, and he went back to his chores helping Jason . "A couple of weeks after I said I could put the thing down, I found it and he showed it to them
 They graded and put in a slab the same day and a few days later were back and popped that hut up in a matter of hours . The hut was put in place in just hours and was put up in hours .
 Dan paid them in gold coins, signed a piece of paper and they were gone . Dan paid the money in gold and signed a paper saying 'thank you'
 After that, about once a month, he'd get a phone call and the next day wear BDUs . The next day, he would get a call from the White House and wear them .
 A 5ton Army truck would pull into the farm, and unload the equipment into the Quonset hut, Dan would sign and they'd be gone . Dan says he would sign the equipment off the farm and they would be gone.
 "That continued for about 6 months and I didn't really have time to look into it," she says . "I'm not really sure what happened to me," she adds .
 "When I said 'I Do' it meant that I did. Either I trusted him or I didn't," she said . She said: "I trusted him either I did or not"
 The place wasn't locked so I could have looked at any time, but I didn't . "I didn't want to look at it. The place isn't locked," says the author .
 "I had gotten coal for the furnace, had the LP tanks topped off and they even had the bourbon made and stored" "They even had to have the bourbon stored," he says .
 "We had Thanksgiving on the farm and invited his boys and their families," he says . "We were invited to the farm"
 By this time any problems the kids may have had with him or I had evaporated . By the time the kids had had any problems, any of them had vanished .
 "I managed to get everything done at the same time and on the table promptly at 2pm," says the author . "Everything was on the plate at the time of 2pm. It was a great day for me," she says .
 This was our first Thanksgiving as a married couple and I wanted it to be perfect. This was their first Thanksgiving together, she says . She says she and her husband wanted to be the perfect family .
 I guess I struck some kind of resident chord with his boys when they learned that I was a Reserve Deputy with the Kearny County Sheriff's Department . "I'm a reserve deputy," he says. "I've got a lot of respect for the residents of Kearny."
 Dan also had completed the necessary training to become a Reserve Deputy as had Gunny . Gunny had also completed training to be a reserve deputy .
 He was surprised they had the time what with being career military types but he had the proof right there in his hands in black and white . He said he was surprised that they had time .
 I think that Dan's boys were more surprised than the Sheriff, they knew better . I think . Dan's Boys were more . surprised than . Sheriff's boys . They knew better.
 I think he probably told them, Ask me no questions and I'll tell you no lies, he says . Ask me 'ask no questions' and I won't lie. Ask him no questions, and he probably tells them no lies. Ask them no questions .
 I also think that by now a certain Sheriff had figured several things out . "I think by now, by now I have figured out several things about the Sheriff," she says .
 The school had been destroyed on July 4, 2009, but it was difficult for him to confirm what he suspected .
 In the aftermath of the Kearny County Massacre, changes had occurred throughout Kansas, indeed the Country . After the massacre, changes were made in the state .
 There wasn't one state that didn't have a state defense force beholding only to the Governor of the state or his or her designee . State defense force is behold to Governor of state or designee of state .
 There had also been some landmark Supreme Court cases overturned earlier decisions and forcing the states to do the same .
 There was still a National Firearms Act of 1934, it hadn't been overturned, but some of the supporting decisions had been made . The act was still in place in 1934, but was overturned by the Supreme Court .
 The F in BATF had its fangs pulled and getting their permission for a NFA/NFR weapon was mostly a matter of a criminal background check as it should have been all along . The decision was made by the BATF to get the weapon .
 Reserve Deputy Sheriff's was superfluous, unless you wanted to help the Sheriff . Reserve Deputy Sherriff's is a reserve deputy sheriff .
 Paramedic says he got called out on any operation where there was the slightest possibility of someone getting hurt badly enough to need immediate medical assistance . He says he was called out to help with anyone who needs medical assistance.
 I had upgraded the equipment that Randy and I had previously to reflect my new status, not that it took much . "I had, of course, upgraded my equipment," he says. "I'm not surprised. I had to upgrade my equipment to reflect that."
 For all practical matters, there is only so much one can do in the field . For the future, there will be no way of knowing how to deal with the situation in the future .
 The Sheriff had allowed lights and siren to be installed in the pickup, though the lights were behind the grill . The Sheriff's truck had lights and a siren, but the siren was not installed inside .
 If you're in southern Kansas and see a pickup with lights and siren bearing down on you, give way . It isn't Walker, Texas Ranger, it's just little of me and I'll run you off the road .
 Country music singers have been a real close family, but lately some of their kinfolks have disowned a few others and me . Country music has been a close family for years, but some of them have disowns me and others, he says .
 I am very proud of my Daddy's name although his kind of music and mine ain't exactly the same . I am proud of his music and I'm not quite the same as mine . I'm very proud .
 "If I'm down in a honky-tonk some ole slick's trying to give me friction," he says . "I don't know what's going on when I'm in the honky tonk," he adds .
 "I said leave me alone I'm singing all night long it's a family tradition. I said . I said leave . me alone," she said . "It's a tradition. It's a different way of life," she says .
 Lord I have loved some ladies and some ladies, and Jim Beam and they both tried to kill me in 1973 . Lord says he has loved Jim Beam, Jim Beam. Lord I love Jim Beam . He says he's been in love with Jim Beam since 1973 .
 Mike and Paul stormed off to help the Kearny County Sheriff put a cap on FEMA's outlandish behavior . Paul and Mike went storming off after FEMA's outrageous behavior .
 A 22 week course required to become a Reserve Deputy was given to him by his wife . She told him she had completed the course necessary to be a reserve deputy .
 The sheriff's daughter got lights and a siren installed in Randy's pickup . Randy says she gets called out at times whenever the Sheriff thinks it's one of those DangerWill Robinson Danger types of situations .
 "If some bad guy thinks he's going to shoot my new wife, I've got a bit of a surprise for him," he says . He says he has a "surprise for him"
 The Reserve Deputy Pool could use a proficient shooter in the Reserve Deputy pool . Besides, it could also be a good pool of talent .
 Gunny went along for the same reason, so he could go with Marilyn if she got called up . Marilyn went along with Gunny, so she could stay with him if she was called up for duty .
 BATF and Kansas Revenue Department had no clue as to who was producing the Proprietor's Reserve Bourbon . They wore latex gloves when they handled the bottles and labels .
 After I got the final delivery from my friend in the Army in December, I took June to the Quonset hut and showed her what we had on hand . The final delivery was delivered in December .
 There were M16A4s, new, for 3 rifle squads, some including M203s for the grenadiers . There were new, new-style M16s, for three rifle squads .
 We had M67s, a few crates of M18A1s, and all manner of what had been standard military hardware about 10 years back . We now have a lot of what was standard military equipment . We had a lot more of what we had been with 10 years ago
 This was an Infantry Platoon that included 3 rifle squads and one weapons squad . We didn't have mortars but we didn't use mortars . This was a platoon that included three rifle squads, one weapons squads .
 "I thought that I'd better stick with the tried and true that I was more familiar with. I thought that it was better to stick with a tried-and-true that I . well . That's what I thought of the tried-true .
 "My buddy didn't have any spare Striker IFV lying around," he said . Besides which, he said, "I'm not sure if I'm going to have a spare IFV"
 I realized there were ample weapons on the 3 farms for everyone, but remembered the story of when they had liberated Leoti with a force of 80 some people . I realized that there were plenty of weapons for everyone but remembered that there had been 80 people .
 With that many machine guns and the necessary ammo, we might need more ammo bearers . There were also a few spare A4s, with that many machines .
 I had 6 of those SPMOD accessory kits for the M4s and they were complete, including the Knight Armaments suppressors . The Knight suppressors were also complete, as well as the Knight .
 When I bought the house in Garden City for Kathryn and me, I hadn't expected to ever need that basement shelter . On the other hand, when I bought this house for Kathryn, I had expected it to be empty, he said .
 We found in Iraq that every soldier ought to be equipped with one and have the necessary training. We found this in Iraq, we found in . Iraq . Every soldier should have a weapon, and every soldier should be equipped .
 Someone always gets to collect on a life insurance policy . It could just be expensive insurance, but someone always gets the money .
 I thought the snow we got during nuclear winter was bad, but this cold came from Canada . The Indian was going to have to find a stump to stand on when it started to snow .
 Midwestern expression, ""buttdeep on a 9' Indian"", search the web. Hey, it's a midwestern expression .
 The atmosphere was saturated and when the cold air came in the air lost its moisture holding capacity . That was a switch; we went from a year without winter to a winter with record snowfalls . The atmosphere is saturated .
 The heater in the hut was propane fired and for a while there, I thought we could run out of propane, we only started with 1,500-gallons . The heater is propane-fired, and the heater is fired by propane .
 We ended up on the generator, no problem there because we had 30,000-gallons of separately plumbed propane . The generator was set up on a generator, and the generator had to be powered by a separate generator .
 Every home on the 3 farms had a fuel powered source of power, Randy and the fellas had seen to it . Randy says every home in the farm was powered by fuel powered . Randy: "Every home on three farms had fuel powered sources of power"
 Rachel had solar power and backup wind turbines to the main wind tur345 bine . She also had backup wind turbine backup to main wind turbine to wind turbines .
 We could switch to imported power at the flip of a switch, but those lines were down too . The power lines were also down too, and the power lines had to be shut down . We are not only able to use imported power, but we have to rely on our own power
 'I suspected it the moment I laid eyes on you and you didn't have a wedding band. Later than that, but I suspected it, but ... later than that'
 The year without a summer was 1816 and that was attributed to the April 5 to April 15, 1815 eruption of Mt. Mt. Olympus . The eruption of the volcano caused the lack of summer in 1816 .
 On July 4, 2009, we had a nuclear war during a period of global warming, author says . We had nuclear war in 2009 during a time when global warming was on the rise .
 The polar icecaps continue to melt along with the Greenland Ice Cap . Although it appeared to be returning to normal, the polar ice caps continued to melt . Greenland's ice caps are melting along with those of the polar regions .
 That raised sea level by nearly 2 meters in Miami and the Florida Keys . That in turn raised sea levels by nearly two meters .
 My sense is that we should begin stockpiling like we did before the pandemic and the war. We should stockpile like before the war and pandemic, he says .
 "The first thing I plan to do in the spring is put in a bigger fuel tank to supplement what we already have," says the owner .
 We need to store additional food and if that means contacting major suppliers, like canning jar suppliers, I believe we should do it . We should contact major suppliers such as canning jars suppliers, she says .
 Dan, 8 canners each processing 19 jars at once doing 3 shifts daily . Dan says the canners work 3 shifts a day a day . Dan: "Think about it Dan, Dan, 9 hours a day, 9 days a day"
 Between the 3 farms, we have tremendous storage capacities . I know that much of this is new to you, but the storage capacity is tremendous .
 When Mike acquired the other half section of his farm, he had the 10k diesel tank cleaned to store soybean oil . Mike had the tank cleaned for soybean oils .
 "I try to line up other supplies and have them stored in warehouses until we can transfer them," says N.J. "We have a lot of other supplies that we need to get back into the system"
 All we'd have to add would be a basement and septic system, we have excess energy most of the time and it's free to everyone on the 3 farms . All the excess energy would be added to the farm .
 If you can find out the make, model and size of his home and we'll have the basement installed and a genset located . We'll have to find out, get the make and model of his house and get a basement installed .
 We'll probably opt for a propane generator, there is ample propane available . There is also plenty of propane in the UK .
 I explained to Dan about keeping the area around the buildings clear, with our large herds, this is especially important . The area is important to keep clear, especially for the large herds of animals .
 I talked to Marilyn via radio and she said she would teach home school, if necessary . Marilyn says she would do it if necessary. Marilyn said she's willing to teach at home school if needed .
 The school had a weather report and made sure the kids took their books home with them together with an envelope containing home schooling instructions . The kids also had to take home school books and home education instructions .
 Jim and John had struggled through the snow to help with the livestock . Jim, John and John were able to get out of the snow and help with their livestock .
 "I'll have to work the road every day or it will close up tighter than a drum," he says . "It will be hard to get back on the road," he adds .
 Marilyn said she'd do the home schooling and I talked to Karen about Jason, Jr. and Daniel . Karen also talked to Marilyn about the future of her children . Marilyn and Karen's children will be home-schooled .
 In revealing a little about the people we'd spent most of our lives with, we were opening some hidden door revealing more about ourselves . We were opening a hidden door to reveal more about themselves .
 We never compared the present with the past; they were distinct and separate, people wise . We were never compared to the past with the present, we said, but they were separate and wise .
 The past is a guide to dealing with your current circumstances, which in this case, weren't good . The past has been a guide for dealing with current circumstances .
 You couldn't eat it hot out of the refrigerator, but I over did it a bit with the chilies . You can't eat hot from the refrigerator but you can eat hot out .
 If a good one comes along, you'd best grab 'em before someone beats you to it . If you want to buy a new home, it's a good time to buy it .
 The U.S. imported diesel gensets from China in the '90s and '01's first decade of the new century . Diesel genset was imported by the U.K. in the 1990s .
 They were inexpensive by comparison and were well built, probably by slave labor . They were probably built by slaves .
 While I was in town, I could also check out the possibility of acquiring a used diesel truck with a snow blower mounted .
 A Hanson snow blower for a % ton truck with its own Kohler 27hp gas motor . The truck has a 27hp motor .
 I got 2 12kw China diesel portable generators in Garden City and said hello to the boys while I was in town .
 I set the generators on top of the load of sand I got to weigh my pickup down and headed home . The generators were loaded up with sand .
 I paid for them and told the guy to hold them for me; that I'd pick them up on the way out of town . "I told him that I was going to get them for him," he said . He said he paid for the items and told him he'd pick
 When the pickup was ready, I got a load of sand for weight, picked up the generators and headed home . I got back to the U.S. when it was ready .
 My new husband was a winner, a gentle man through and through; and a gentleman . He was a gentleman, a winner and a winner . She says he was a gentle and winning man .
 Wasn't half bad in... oh never mind, I might tell Marilyn but nobody else needs to know that. Wasn’t half bad, I'll tell Marilyn, but nobody needs to tell Marilyn .
 I think by the time spring came, Dan was nearly out of shear bolts for the snow blower . Dan says he was almost out-of-shear bolts when spring came .
 When they finally got the phones up, he arranged for the 40'x 100' Quonset hut and for a contractor to put in a basement for his friend Tom .
 She'd better not look like the Mistress of the Dark or he and I are going to have a very serious talk . The pair have been married for more than a decade .
 I only bring it up because I was going through some of the files on Randy's computer and re-read the Abrupt Climate Change Scenario authored by Schwartz and Randall . Randy's son says he was looking at the files in his computer when he found out about the scenario .
 Some species could die out if we're going through a major climate change, scientists say . While they hadn't predicted an ELE, some species may die out .
 The TTAPS study discussed the possibility of nuclear winter . When one considers it, nuclear winter was a major climate change .
 All of the seedlings in the greenhouse are beginning to outgrow their pots . All of those seedlings are growing out of their pots and are growing bigger than ever .
 If we have those conditions, the feds will try and step in to redistribute the food, the same as they did last time . The federal government is expected to step in if conditions are similar .
 "We don't want another confrontation with the government, we lost 37 and they lost nearly 100," says President Obama . "We lost 37, and we lost almost 100. We lost 37," he says .
 You give a person some power and a gun to back it up and they can easily turn into your worst nightmare . You give them power and the gun, back them up, and they will be a nightmare .
 The great thing about cloth diapers is that they make very good cleaning rags when they get too ratty to use as diapers . Clap diapers are great for cleaning and can be used as a cleaning rag when they're not dirty .
 It had taken quite a while after the war to restart many of the manufacturing plants . It was taken a while to restart some of the world's most important manufacturing plants.
 A large stack of packages of cloth diapers in a Garden City store, I bought them and put them up, just in case . So, when I saw a huge stack of diapers, I decided to buy them, just to be sure .
 Up until the 1920s feminine hygiene products made of cloth and other natural fibers were simply the norm . Natural fibers were the norm in the world of feminine hygiene .
 With the introduction of disposable menstrual products in Europe and the US, women were sold their ""liberation"" from this monthly cycle . Women were suddenly sold their 'liberation' from this month cycle .
 People gave little thought to the environmental impact of manufacturing and disposing of these products . People give little thought about the environmental impacts of manufacturing, disposing .
 Many of these products are scented, bleached, and made extra-absorbent through the inclusion of synthetic fibers . Nor to the chemicals absorbed into women's bodies from using these products .
 Someday, big cities will probably have special cans for contaminated waste . Someday the cans will be used to dispose of contaminated waste in big cities .
 It has been referred to the Subcommittee on Health, where it sits, and where it has died several times in the past . The subcommittee on Health has passed several times before .
 The problem with the Rely product wasn't the product itself, but how the product was used . The problem was not the product, but the way it was used, it was the way they were used .
 Rayon says there isn't any dioxin in the products and if there is a problem synthetic, it's Rayon . Rayon's products are not dioxins, but they are synthetic, the company says .
 Earle Haas invented a cardboard tube of compressed cotton with a little string inside . Haas invented the invention in 1936 . Haas was a Denver physician .
 TSS cases rocketed when the Today contraceptive sponge was released to the market in 1983 .
 Not all the people who die from TSS are women; it kills men and children too . TSS kills men, children too, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Persons of all ages are affected; most do not have predisposing underlying diseases . Most do not suffer from predisposing diseases such as cancer .
 This is in sharp contrast to previous reports of GAS bacteremia, in which patients were either under 10 or over 60 years of age . Most had underlying conditions such as cancer, renal failure, leukemia, or severe burns or were receiving corticosteroids .
 30% to 70% of patients die in spite of aggressive modern treatments . Complications of current GAS infections are severe; bacteremia associated with aggressive soft tissue infection, shock, adult respiratory distress syndrome and renal failure are common .
 Only 10% of patients does systolic blood pressure become normal 4 to 8 hours after administration of antibiotics, albumin, and electrolyte solutions containing salts or dopamine . In all other patients, shock persists .
 renal dysfunction progresses or persists in all patients for 48 to 72 hours in spite of treatment . Many patients may require dialysis, and many may require it .
 In patients who survive, serum creatinine values return to normal within 4 to 6 weeks . Patients who survive will be released from hospital within four weeks .
 Renal dysfunction precedes shock in many patients and is apparent early in the course of shock in all others . Renal function precedes shocks in many of the patients .
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs in 55% of patients . It generally develops after the onset of hypotension . It is a form of respiratory distress that can be triggered by acute respiratory distress .
 Supplemental oxygen, intubation, and mechanical ventilation are necessary in 90% of the patients in whom this syndrome develops .
 The upside to a winter was that I got a lot of time to spend with my new hubby in front of the fireplace . I got to spend most of the winter with my husband, who is now married .
 Dan harnessed a Clydesdale, a bit of overkill, and off we went across the fields . One of the many blessings we had was a sleigh, and while I got the Ob kit ready, Dan harnesss a Clydedale .
 "It was an uncomplicated delivery and my kit included everything I needed. It was an easy delivery and I was pleased with the delivery," she says of the delivery .
 Dashing through the snow In a one horse open sleigh O'er the fields we go Laughing all the way . Bells on bob tails ring ring making spirits bright .
 It was also flood month and we can't plant month and why the heck did I ever get into farming month and when is summer coming month . It was flood month . We can plant month .
 We had the time to stock the Quonset warehouse before we could plant the garden . We had time to buy the garden from the warehouse .
 Tom and Elle's basement and septic system were installed just in time for them to move in . They did get the basement and system installed just a few weeks before moving in .
 The contractor had selected the Kohler GNAC and installed the generator in their basement, wiring it into the automatic transfer switch . The generator was installed in the basement of the home .
 He had run an intake and exhausts though the basement wall and added rain caps above ground level .
 Dan quickly paid Tom when they arrived and Tom and Elle went shopping for new furniture . The couple quickly paid for the purchase of the furniture they bought .
 The sun finally came out, but it was too late to plant anything except grass and we had sufficient hay . Oh yes, the sun did come out, finally .
 We had enough stored corn, wheat and barley to make 12 barrels of whiskey . However, all was not lost; we had enough to make a whiskey barrel .
 "Not a banner year, but we had enough income to refill everything except the biodiesel tanks," says owner . "We were able to refill all of our tanks, including biodiesel, with enough money to fill them"
 They buy all the biggest, best, new machinery and get low crop yields . Low crop yields in a market with falling prices. Low prices.
 "I didn't see action in all of them, just Desert Storm and 2 tours in Iraq in the second action" "I was in Desert Storm, Iraq, and I was in Iraq," he says . "I saw action in Iraq and Desert Storm"
 Those insurgents got weapons easily and started with crude lEDs, RPGs and AKs, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "Those insurgents started using crude weapons easily," he says .
 He didn't like talking about it, most soldiers who have seen action don't . He said: "Most soldiers ... don't. Most of them don't like to talk about it."
 Many people who have seen action say the same thing, hours of boredom followed by moments of sheer terror, or some variation on the theme . Many people in action say they have experienced moments of boredom .
 With the land free and clear, only fixed cost was property taxes and fuel . The land was cleared and the land was free to clear for the first time . It is now clear that the land is now free to use for a living .
 We could get by for a fair amount of time living off the garden, such as it was, and the sale of livestock and other commodities . We were able to get by by selling livestock and selling other commodities, but now we have a problem .
 Without a crop, the only concern would be feeding all of that livestock . The only concern is feeding all the livestock .
 "It's getting late in the season, if we're going to add that new propane tank, it might be a good idea to do it now," the mayor says .
 Wal-Mart and Sam's Club became our source for food supplies . Stocking the warehouse hadn't been difficult, but it was easier to stock .
 "I hadn't realized how big 4,000ft 2 of floor space was until we began stocking shelves," says owner of the store .
 We could pack some things ourselves when we got a crop, wheat for example . We would pack some of these things ourselves, like wheat .
 Don had established the merlot cuttings and in a year or two we'd have our own wine, he says . Don's wife says he's been working on the wine for a year and a half .
 We hit a manufacture's outlet and stocked up on work clothing, socks and underwear .
 "I had gone ahead and ordered the mason jars, before we knew what the weather would do," she says . "I'm not worried about the weather," she adds .
 Glassware is less expensive when you buy it wholesale from the distributor . A case of jars ran about $6.99 when you bought the glassware .
 New jars come with rings and lids meaning all you need to add are extra lids for recycling the jars . New jars can be added with rings or lids to make it easier to recycle .
 The National Weather Service is forecasting an early winter with moderate to heavy snowfalls . It's not good news for Kansas farmers . The weather service says it will be a tough winter for farmers .
 The cooling of the northeast continues and the citrus crop from Florida established record lows this year . Florida's citrus crop is a record low this year, according to USDA .
 Market prices of livestock have risen in response to reduced feed grains . Market prices have also risen in a bid to reduce feed grains prices .
 Libertarian John Jay equally divides the vote in most primaries . John Jay is the Libertarian Party candidate for the fall elections . Jay is a Libertarian candidate for President Obama .
 Jay is running on a platform to reduce the size of the federal government by up to 10% a year . Jay says he wants to reduce government spending by 10% per year .
 The last major election where a third party candidate had such a strong showing was the 1992 election campaign when Ross Perot opposed Bush and Clinton . Perot was the last major party candidate to have such a large showing in major elections .
 Jay maintains that in the years since the war, the U.S. had maintained tight borders enhancing the job pool for Americans . Jay maintains in the past that tight borders have helped the American economy .
 Both parties have lost touch with the people, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's about time the people put someone besides a Republican or Democrat in the White House . Both parties are losing touch with voters, he says .
 You men should try and harvest 10 cords of wood per family and I'll see if they have stoker coal available this year . You should try to harvest 10 cord of wood each family .
 If you froze the chicken and then packaged it, you could pack it according to the cut . You could pack the chicken according to cut; either breasts or wings quarters or leg quarters .
 When a brood hen's production fell off, she'd end up packaged whole as a baking chicken . A brood hen would end up in a whole package of chicken .
 Each family processed meat according to the size of the family and the number of hired hands . The meat was processed by each family at the request of each member of the community .
 We generally processed 3 steers, 1 dairy cow and 7 hogs, providing meat for our family (a side of beef and a whole hog per family) plus meat for Jason and Karen, Ralph and Johnny, and now Tom and Elle .
 The hams were processed and divided into butt and shank portions . The bacon came sliced and the bacon was sliced .
 "I'm sure we ate too much bacon and sausage, we always had to get more bacon at Wal-Mart," says Dan . "Dan preferred bacon and eggs over pancakes or cereal," he says .
 The beef was packed in small cuts; just enough for 2, like half roasts, half a round steak, 2 steaks, etc. The beef is packed in just small cuts .
 One of the things I like most was the homemade sausage the locker plant produced, which accounted for the extra hog . It went with the trimmings on the other hogs into sausage, divided 6 ways .
 We also took leftover fat and rendered it into lard, it made great pie crusts . We also used leftover fat to render it into a pie crust . The leftover fat was rendered into a lard .
 If the grates ever wore out I might consider it, Randy's father had put it in new a long time ago . Randy's dad had put in new new new grates long ago, Randy says .
 The propane dealer was more than willing to install a 3,300-gallon tank, it meant selling us an additional 3,000-gallons of the moderately expensive fuel . The dealer also offered to install the tank for $3,300 .
 That tripled our storage capacity and we wouldn't have to worry about running out. That triple our capacity, we would be able to run out. We wouldn't need to worry that we would run out of our storage. That's a good thing for us. We need to be able
 With that snow blower, we're well prepared for another bad winter with heavy snow . With that blower we're prepared for a bad winter, we were well prepared .
 Tom's a heck of a man, just because he was in supply didn't mean he didn't see action . Tom is a great man who has a long-term relationship with the world's top footballer .
 John and Mary have a barn and there's no reason they can't keep some of the horses, they say . They say they hope to keep the horses in the barn .
 Jason asked me if he could keep saddle horses and a team down in his barn . Jason asked for permission to keep the horses and teams down in the barn .
 Dan had a point, although you'd really have to look to find anything except the empty bottles .
 We may have produced 24 barrels this year, but were lucky just to get some food out of the garden . The decision to increase the production to 24 barrels a year was pushed back one year .
 Bottle cases were buried under the cases of mason jars as a precaution but that wouldn't keep a sharp revenuer from finding them . The bottle cases are buried under mason jar cases as a safety precaution . The bottles were buried in the cases as well as the jars of jars .
 "We didn't keep everything set up all of the time. Maybe it was silly, but we didn't," he says . "Maybe it was stupid, but maybe it was ... silly," he adds .
 "We didn't do the same with the biodiesel production equipment because it wasn't a problem," says the owner of the company . "It's not a problem. It's a problem that we have to deal with it," he says of biodiesel .
 We Ladies sat in the kitchen and discussed practical matters, like our personal lives, the coming winter, our grandchildren and the usual girl talk .
 The guys didn't take long to adjourn to the small Quonset hut to go over the inventory of defense supplies . The guys then adjourned to a small Quonet hut where they discussed the inventory .
 Gunny had 28 years, Dan 30, Tom 30 and Rachel's boyfriend Hank, 20 . Hank is a retired Master Sergeant, 20. Gunny was married to Rachel for 28 years . Dan, Dan, Tom, Tom and Rachel had 30 years together .
 The dynamite that Mike had had, had been disposed of when the shipment of M67s came in . Mike's dynamite had to be disposed of .
 She said her name had been a real problem over the years, everyone associating her with Cassandra Peterson, so she'd always preferred Elle . She said she had always preferred her name to Cassandra .
 One was a ranger trying to get into Special Forces and the other was a combat medic . One was trying to become a Special Forces soldier . The other was trying for Special Forces, one was a Combat medic .
 Tom, she said, had done 2 tours in Iraq, trying to keep the troops supplied with everything from rations, fuel and medical supplies to ordnance . Tom is a veteran who has served in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 I mentioned Dan suggesting redistributing livestock and feed supplies . Marilyn and Rachel thought it was a good idea . Dan suggested redistribution of livestock and food supplies .
 "They had followed our old practice of keeping everything on the home place and it was causing problems," says the club . They had followed their old practice, keeping everything in their home place .
 I mentioned the sleighs and how I thought it might make getting around easier in winter . Then I mentioned how I wanted to make it easier to get around in winter, I said yes .
 The previous year, Dan had bulled his way to town to get the snow blower and could keep our road partly cleared if it didn't snow too much . Dan's road was partly cleared in the previous year .
 The biggest concern was the predicted moderate to heavy snowfall and the fact that we hadn't grown any crops this past summer . "The biggest concern" was the lack of crops grown this summer, the mayor says .
 There were odds and ends that needed to be taken care of before anyone went to bed . There were also many other things to be done before the bed .
 Dan told me that the fellas had helped him mount the snow blower on his pickup, just in case . The fellas helped Dan mount the blower to his pickup on his truck .
 He also suggested that we distribute some of the SINCGARS radios so that all the homes could keep in touch . He also said that Tom had suggested that . Tom suggested that some SincGARS . radios should be distributed to all homes .
 The military was using a newer generation radio and our having frequency hopping equipment would provide us with secure communications apart from what everyone else used .
 The other men had each taken enough to equip their homes and all of their vehicles . They had taken enough of the equipment to equip themselves .
 He'd mount ours, the radios were the AN/PRC-119F man packs that operated on 12vdc. He'd mounted ours, he'd mount theirs, the radio were the radios . He said the radios would be used to communicate with each other .
 Spearheads was the latest addition to the ITT Industries family of tactical communications systems . Spearheads, a few years back had been the latest additions to the company's tactical communications system .
 I told him that the girls thought it was a good idea to divide up the livestock and feed supplies, but wondered what effect the snow would have on accomplishing that . The girls said they wanted to split up livestock, feed supplies and livestock .
 We can begin the process tomorrow afternoon after church and move the hay and feed first, unless we have a terrible snowstorm . The process will begin after Sunday afternoon .
 The National Weather Service advises that the massive arctic cold front won't hit Minnesota until late Monday . It won't reach northern Oklahoma until Wednesday at the earliest . The arctic front is expected to hit Minnesota late Monday and Oklahoma late Wednesday .
 Long range forecasts show another front following that could hit us as early as 10 days . Forecasters say it could hit the area within 10 days of the weather .
 The cold is expected to spread as far as Florida, which is already experiencing massive rainfall . The cold will also spread to parts of Florida, already experiencing heavy rainfall .
 We still need to do some odds and ends shopping, but it's not pressing . We're not pressing, but we need to buy a few things, including some of the essentials .
 "I get in touch with them tomorrow and we'll see about getting that set up," he says . "We're going to try and find a way to get that set-up"
 "That's a lot of wood and we already have 30 cords stored at every location," says the mayor . The mayor's office has 30 cords of wood stored at each location .
 A cord of hardwood has about the same energy as a ton of coal . "I've done some research and ... I'm doing some research," he says . "Hardwood is about to be more energy-efficient than coal"
 It might make more sense to get a second delivery of coal for everyone that can burn it and cover it with a tarp . The coal will be delivered to everyone in the area that can be burned .
 The pair returned engaged and Ray had some new guns . Ray returned to the U.S. for the first time .
 "You have all of the qualities I admire in a man, so I suppose that in some ways Randy and you are alike," she says .
 At least the weatherman was right; we should be able to get everything moved by evening . The weatherman said we should have been able to move everything by evening.
 As far back as 2003, they met 2012 emission standards and then E85 got to be real popular . E85 is the name of a new generation of high-end cars that meets 2012 emissions standards .
 There weren't many E85 certified models to choose from, but June and I picked up an even dozen . June and June picked up a dozen E85 models .
 The kids each got 2, Ralph and Johnny got a pair, Jason and Karen got 4 and we kept a pair . Ralph and John each got two, Ralph got two and Johnny, Karen got two . Karen and Ralph also got 2 and Ralph got 2 .
 Jason's 2 oldest boys, Jason and Daniel, were growing up and the age where a young man needs to learn to shoot a rifle and or shotgun . "I said something to June about our doing something special for Jason," he said .
 "I thought Dan had a good idea, but wasn't completely sure how Jason would feel," he says . "I'm not sure how much of Jason's reaction will be to Dan and Dan"
 "I don't think there's a man in the world that hasn't been sidestepped by his wife when things needed to be done," he says . "There's no man in that world that's not been sidestestepped," he adds .
 When we talk guns around here, we're talking a complete set including any appropriate accessories and a starting supply of ammo . This is a complete gun set including accessories and ammo .
 The next farm north had a certain Gunny who had been a Dl for a while . And anyway, anyway, the next Farm north had . Gunny .
 Jason and Daniel are getting old enough to have their own hunting weapons . Jason's wife suggested that Jason and his brother should have his own hunting guns .
 He suggested rifles and shotguns, so I suppose he means he means a .22 rifle and a 12-gauge shotgun .
 It's ideal timing with Christmas coming but I wanted to talk with you first. It was the perfect timing for Christmas, I said, but I didn't want to talk to you first .
 I walked out to the barn where Dan was mucking out stalls and muttering under his breath . Dan was muttering, muttering in his head .
 Monitor SINCGARS on channel 1001 and if I'm going to be late, I'll let you know . Monitor SincGars on channel 101 . If you're ever late, please email us at CNN.com/sincGARS .
 I figured 2 bricks each of each of .22 LR ammo and 2 mixed cases of 12-gauge ammo . I'm not sure how much of the ammo will fit .
 Dan hadn't said anything, but I'd noticed that he'd trimmed down a little, maybe 15 pounds . "I'd noticed he'd trim down a bit," he said . "Dan's been there for a few years, but he's been in great shape," he added .
 Could be that he'd just converted what little flab he had into muscle, he worked hard, especially considering he'd left the farm when he was a young man . Could be because he'd converted what little he had to convert to muscle .
 "With Mary gone off and raising a family, I got to do the eggs all by myself," says father-of-one . He says he's proud of his daughter-in-law .
 I began to wonder how deep the snow would get this year and if we'd be able to plant crops next year . I wondered how deep it would get and if it would be this year's first snowfall .
 We could always get a crop of grasses and try to buy bagged or bulk feed, if it came to that . We could also buy bulk feed or grasses, says farmer .
 A person can do whatever they want, provided they have the money and what they want is available, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I should have told Dan chipped beef on toast, he was thinking hamburger gravy, he said . I should've told him he wanted to eat chipped steak on toast .
 The military finally rescinded the no combat rule for women, when someone sued and won . The rule was rescinded after a woman won a lawsuit against it .
 "Those were good times, the Army, and I'm sure it contributed to my independent thinking and my being as practical as I was," he says . He says the Army contributed to his independent thinking .
 Early MREs were notoriously poor in quality, earning them the nicknames ""Meals Rejected by Everyone" and "Meals Ready to Excrete" in reference to a famine in Ethiopia .
 Randy and I had met in the Army and by the time we got out were already planning marriage . Randy and Randy had already been planning marriage for a year .
 "Kids were off life's menu. Then that thing came up that resulted in my getting the partial and kids were off the menu," she says .
 After the war, Jim and Mary came to live with us and life was looking good for a while; right up until July 7, 2013 . Life was good for the family until Jim's death, Mary's mother died July 7 .
 "I pulled myself together and went to school, fulfilling, in part, a dream that Randy and I had," she says . She says she was inspired by her husband to go to school .
 He'd been cheated just like I'd been; when he had time to spend with Kathryn, she'd gotten sick and was gone . She'd been sick and gone when he spent time with Kathryn . He had been cheated like I had been .
 "Being a CSM, I think he understood people and even better, had a firm grasp on our situation," says the former CSM . "He understood people," says Ms. Smith .
 If we left at noon tomorrow, we'd get there about 8am the following day . We would be at 8am tomorrow, the next day .
 Tomorrow is Tuesday and we'd start back on Thursday, arriving home in the wee hours of Friday morning . We'd be back in the middle of the night on Thursday .
 We could be stuck in the middle of nowhere and have to wait out the storm, CNN.com reports . The storm is expected to make landfall in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 June is worried that one of these days the government is going to shut us down . June worries that the government will shut down .
 The first bootlegger was John Hancock and the Revolutionary War was over, among other things, taxes on alcohol . John Hancock was the founder of the bootleggers .
 After the Revolution the Country was in debt and Washington had to pay off the loans so a tax was imposed on liquor . After the . Revolution the . Country was . in debt . The . country was in . debt . Washington . had to . pay . off the . loans .
 The people ran rather than fight the militia and soon after moved to Kentucky . The people now live in the state of Kentucky .
 Marilyn told him more was better and he ended up with the last 12 Arctic Cats the dealer had in inventory with the 4 cycle, E85 rated engine . Marilyn told Marilyn she wanted to buy more Arctic Cats . Marilyn ended up buying the 12 with the E85-rated engine .
 Due to the lack of a growing season, the price of E85 has slipped up about a buck a gallon . The price of the E85 had slipped up by about a dollar .
 The dealer also had a shipment of new sleds come in, the Magnum Otter sleds . The dealer says the dealer has seen a lot of the sleds in recent months .
 The Country has experienced a substantial recovery since the war, yet much remains to be done . The country has experienced substantial recovery from the war .
 With the loss of substantial portions of our coastline, citrus production has fallen sharply . The loss of parts of the coastline has led to a decline in citrus production in Australia .
 The shortened summer has affected crop production even more significantly . The shorter summer has also affected crop crop production .
 For the first time in recent memory, the U.S. is experiencing a shortage of foodstuffs . Foodstuffs are being rationed out of the country .
 Climatologists are predicting that we could experience shorter growing seasons and longer winters for the next 10 years, possibly longer . We could experience shortened growing seasons, longer winters and shorter winters in 10 years .
 This weather pattern has been documented to be worldwide, affecting nearly every Country . It has also been documented that it affects nearly all of the world .
 Temperatures are already causing reformation of the polar icecaps and the icecap in Greenland . Greenland's icecap has already been reformed by lowered temperatures .
 As frozen moisture accumulates, the salinity of the oceans will increase and eventually, the Gulf Stream will rise . The Gulf Stream is expected to rise .
 Predictions are that it will take more than a century for the ocean levels to fall to the point where we recover major portions of our coast . It will take over a century to recover major parts of the coast .
 In the aftermath of the war, your government attempted to redistribute food resources with devastating results . Your government attempted the same kind of redistribution of food resources in the past .
 Short season crops have been developed and seed will be available in early spring to allow farmers to plant the improved varieties .
 "Working together, we can solve this crisis and meet our needs," she says . "We can help other countries around the world to feed their populations," she said .
 Much of the land mass of the world isn't suitable for growing large quantities of food . The land mass isn't large enough to grow large amounts of food, experts say .
 "What he implied was that the havenot's will take from the haves, using whatever force is required,"" Dan explained .
 It is that you murder and devour one another, that you wage wars, and that many among you perish in civil strife. Hence it is that . Hence it was that you . murder and . devour . one another . That is the reason why you wage war and murder,
 This was one of the earliest expressions of what has come to be called the Malthusian theory of war, in which wars are caused by expanding populations and limited resources . The theory was an expression of what is now known as the 'Malthus' theory of warfare .
 Thomas Malthus wrote that populations always increase until they are limited by war, disease, or famine . Gunny: "Population always increases until they're limited by wars, disease or famine"
 Among the 3 farms, we have nearly 2,000 acres of fertile land to protect against any and all who would seek to steal from us . Among the three farms, the farms are 3 farms . The farms are located in California .
 Had they gone to Nashville, they've have gotten caught in a terrible storm before they made it home . The next storm came in on Thursday and it was a blizzard . Had they been in Nashville, the storm would have been worse .
 Jim had been very impressed by the lesson provided by Dan and Gunny . Jim was impressed with the lesson .
 I believe he finally understood the maxim, Si vis pacem, para bellum. If you want peace, prepare for war. I believe it finally understood that he .
 At the time, we had no idea that food shortages around the country were as severe as the President had implied in his speech . We were shocked to learn that the food shortages are as severe .
 In view of the moderate snowfall, we began to prepare for a massive growing season in 2017 . We are preparing for a 'massive' growing season .
 "I'm sure that people will be more than willing to work for a small share of the crop," says the mayor . The mayor says he's sure people will work hard for a share of his crop .
 We had many of them that ended up in the hands of people who kept them . They used them to can the production of their own gardens .
 At this point, Lakin and Garden City are pretty well saturated and the numbers that are being recycled is increasing . The numbers of recycled items are increasing .
 Every burner can process 19 quarts, says chef . "Among the 3 families, we have lots of burners," he says. "I see what you're getting at, among the three families"
 She had a point and because of Paul's father, she had the ability to implement it . Paul's dad, Paul, has the power to implement the changes .
 The six of us, Hank and Rachel, Marilyn and Marilyn and Gunny and Dan and I sat down and carefully went through the various planning stages . Dan: "The six members of the six sat down to carefully go through the different planning stages. The six went to the planning stages
 Dan said that the huts were available and could be erected during the winter, although probably not on slabs . Dan said: "Huts are available and can be erected in winter."
 We would use one warehouse for processing and the other to store jars and finished goods . The warehouse would be used to store finished goods and processed jars .
 We'd combine my canners with 16 more that Rachel and Marilyn were going to order, allowing us to run 24 pressure cookers at once . Each canner contains 19 quart jars or the 32 pint jars .
 Depending on the output of the garden, we'd just run a day shift and process 1,368 quarts a day . We'd run a shift of a day process and process a quarter a day.
 I'd order ahead and we'd store as many as we had room, both quarts and pints . We'd store up to six pints and quarts of beer .
 We decided to pack pickles in all 3 flavors in pint jars because few people ate a quart of pickles at one sitting . The pickles were packed into pint jars .
 For ease of processing, we'd only can sliced pickles, varying the spices to produce the various flavors . We'd only be able to make the pickles from sliced pickle .
 We checked with two of the grocery stores and learned how much they typically sell of canned products . We asked two grocery stores to tell us how much canned products they typically sold .
 This would be the basis for the proportions of the various crops we planted to produce canning vegetables . The proportions of these crops would be used to make canning .
 It seemed later, more like February, but that's what happens when winter comes early, like on August 28th . It was the first day of the New Year's Day .
 We'd had 5 blizzards before Thanksgiving, not the amount of snowfall . The wind that came with them was because of the wind, not amount of the snowfall, the storm .
 I don't suppose the total snowfall was much more than 15"", above normal but not like the previous year . Snowfall was 15"" above normal" but not as much as last year .
 That particular Indian need a very tall stump, this Indian didn't need the stump, yet . This particular Indian was the first Indian to use a stump .
 "I suppose my biggest concern was the supply of biodiesel because we hadn't produced any this summer, lacking crops," says farmer . "We had to produce no biodiesel this summer because of the lack of crops," he says .
 "We were on generator power about half of the time and on one of the various turbines, usually the big one, the rest of the . We were on generators about half the time, and on turbines about the other half of that time .
 This was where Hank and Rachel had one up on us; they could almost get though the downtime on the turbines with the solar panels, batteries and small generator . This was the first time they had been able to almost get through the downtime of the turbines .
 Heavy snow and high wind prevented clearing the machine shed roof . It wasn't us who ran into problems the previous year with heavy snow .
 The question on how to handle the boys' new guns had been resolved, we gave the guns and ammo to Jason and Karen . Karen told them to handle it however they liked .
 Getting the sleighs hadn't been as hard as envisioned, when the phones were up, we contracted the guy in Nashville and ordered enough for the 3 farms . The sleigh was ordered by the owner of the farmhouse .
 If things went as envisioned in our planning meetings, the only use would be preparing the land and cultivating, it was time to switch to the Clydesdales and saddle horses . The only use the tractors would get would be to prepare and cultivate the land .
 We also planned on making some Pepper Jack this year . Colby and Monterey Jack cheese had been well accepted, while Havarti pepper cheese hadn't . The Havartis cheese was well accepted .
 The Colby was popular because it was mild, but it wouldn't have taken much to vary the recipe and replace the Colby with regular Cheddar .
 We didn't get turkeys this year and were planning on roasting hens for Thanksgiving and a ham at Christmas . We were planning to roast hens and roast ham for Christmas .
 Jason says he wanted time off around Christmas to visit his folks and Karen's family . Jason said he wanted to spend time around Christmas with Karen and his family .
 John and Jim could handle the milking and Dan could process the half of the milk that was going into cheese . That was perfectly ok, John andJim could handle milking . Dan and Jim were able to process half the milk .
 "If the creamery couldn't pick up the milk we sold, we could always turn that into cheese too," says the owner of the shop .
 He said they'd decided to tell the boys the rifles and shotguns were gifts from the farm, rewards for a job well done . He said the boys were given the gifts as a reward for their work .
 Karen and Karen stopped having kids when Karen got the daughter she wanted; they named her Suzanne . Karen and Suzanne had a daughter together .
 Jim and Julia were spacing the babies out, I just found out she was expecting for the second time . Jim's wife is expecting again, she is expecting the first time .
 Having all the kids would solve a part of our labor problem, in about 10 years, he says . Having all children would solve the labor problem in 10 years .
 John and Mary's kids were Randy, John and Jacob, named for John's father . Randy and Jacob were named for their father .
 Those cloth diapers had been one of the best investments I'd ever made, he said . The diapers were the best investment in his life .
 Kearny County was still debating erecting a memorial to its fallen heroes . Kearny Co. is still debating whether to erect a memorial for its fallen hero .
 They had several issues to resolve, including where to put it and what it would look like . They had to decide what to do with the project .
 In 3 years, they'd only managed to agree to erect a memorial but were unable to agree on the other issues . They'd only agreed to erect the memorial but failed to agree that it would be a memorial to the victims .
 In addition to The Wall, there was the Three Servicemen Statue, The Vietnam Women's Memorial and the In Memory Plaque, added in 2004 . The Vietnam women's Memorial was added in 2006 .
 The people on our side who were killed were mostly Reserve Deputy Sheriff's, representing all walks of life . One problem they couldn't seem to overcome was that the people killed were Reserve Deputy Sheriffs . The people killed in the shooting were Reserve Deputies .
 It appeared that they might go with a plaque, listing the names of the fallen . It was also suggested that a plaque would be placed on the memorial .
 The family of the farmer who owned the farm where the fight had occurred didn't want interlopers intruding on their privacy . The fight occurred on a farm in the middle of the night . The farmer who owns the farm said he didn't think the fight was an invasion of privacy
 LNG is cryogenic, very cold and when warmed, converts to natural gas which is mostly methane . When warmed, LNG converts to methane which is mainly methane . LNG can be cryogenic and very cold .
 Propane contains more energy than natural gas, according to the energy requirements of generators . Propane can be found to be more energy-efficient than gas gas .
 Dan and Dan talked about putting in a second load of coal on each homestead and covering it with tarps, but didn't do it . Dan and I talked about using tarps to cover up the coal beds . Dan: "Dan and Dan didn't want to put in a
 We need to look for Christmas presents for the grandchildren and more of the cloth diapers . We should look for presents for our grandchildren .
 We're going to have to give some consideration to what we need for processing equipment too . We're not sure if we'll have to go to the U.S. in the process of processing equipment .
 According to Walton Feed, a family of 4 would require 500+ jars a season to can just for them . According to one source, the family of four would require something like 500 jars a year to can .
 If you divided 12,000 by 500, you'd realize that you'd only be talking about enough jars for 24 families . The jars are only enough jars to be filled with enough food .
 Running 24 canners at a time, 3 times a shift meant we had roughly an 18-day supply of quart jars and 9-day supplies of pint jars, 4-5 day weeks . Running 24 cans a time was roughly 18 days .
 We had lunch and went back to the store to get the other gross of diapers . We went through a different checkout this time .
 I'd make up a list of things that I needed to fill in clothes wise and he could pick anything on the list . He could pick up anything from the list, including anything from a list .
 His preferred outerwear in the winter was a military parka with the wolf fur trim .
 I wanted to get June the current issue Gortex parka, but it wasn't on her list . The Gortex is a Gortex Gortex .
 "I knew where I could buy them and they were on sale at less than half price. I knew where to buy them," she says . "I'm not going to be surprised when I find out where I can buy them"
 I rationalized that I was saving enough money on the coat to pay for everything she did have on her list . The coat was the last coat she needed to buy, but it was too expensive .
 She omitted underwear from her list, probably something she wanted to try on to ensure proper fit . She had omitted underwear .
 June was doing the grandchildren and I wanted to something extra for the kids, g. g., Jim and Mary and their spouses . June was hosting the grandchildren .
 7"" knife blades could serve as both a hunting knife and a fighting knife .
 Hunger is becoming a problem in some parts of the U.S. as the winter wears on . Hunger is a growing problem in the country .
 I wouldn't doubt that more than one family was happy to have Spam for Christmas dinner . Spam is a good thing for the holiday season .
 We'd run plenty of meat through the locker plant and sold all the steers and extra hogs to the Garden City plant in Garden City . We'd sell extra meat to Garden City's meat plant and sell it to the meat plant .
 To save fuel, we brought back lumber, counter top burners and plumbing supplies . We brought back wood, counter-top burners, plumbing supplies to save fuel .
 As far as the cooktops went, we bought the cheapest we could find, the Admiral 30"" with 9,000BTU burners . The Admiral 30" cooktops are the most expensive cooktops available .
 We'd also need stainless steel counters for the preparations area, a standard restaurant kitchen item . Stainless steel counters are a standard standard item for the kitchen .
 It was fine for riding the snowmobiles, but it was too warm to work in . It was also too warm for people to work out in .
 "It was rated to -50° F, and if it got that cold, I wasn't going anywhere," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going anywhere"
 He was content to wear the 50 year old parka most of the time . He was wearing the parka at the start of the season .
 The diapers and pins were greatly appreciated, presents for the babies to be . The diapers, pins and pins are greatly appreciated .
 Randy always said if you got close enough to an opponent that you had to use a knife, you were far too close . Randy says if you're too close to your opponent, you're far too far .
 Gunny and he had been huddling since they came back with the lumber, plumbing and cooktops . "Gunny and Gunny have been huddled together since they got back," he said .
 Dan said they were figuring out how to layout the canning huts, but if you ask me, they were also figuring out to defend the 3 farms should it come to that . Dan said he was figuring out what to do .
 When the war came, there was a reasonable amount of food in the supply chain . It took 3 years before the government was forced, they claim, into redistribution .
 Grain destined for livestock feed was available to be reroute into food for human consumption . Grain destined to be livestock feed could be re-routed into human food for the first time .
 This was far different; the year without a real summer we experienced cut the Country to the bone . The year without real summer in the UK was the worst year of the year . This year was the best year for the U.S. to see the country's economy .
 It took a lot of planning and putting 4 on a cooktop concentrated a whole bunch of weight . I caught a satellite image of the Country on TV; it was hard to recognize it as the good old United States of A .
 We finally decided to build the counters out of 3 laminations of 3 /4"" plywood topped with Formica . The counters are made of 3/4" plywood .
 The counter top looked like a piece of Swiss cheese when it was ready to accept the cooktops . The countertop was designed to look like a Swiss cheese .
 We wouldn't be running any space heater while we were canning, more likely an air conditioner . "We would be running a very large airconditioner," she says .