 I described how the president wrestled with the men who had deceived him . I described the president's struggle to find out what happened to him .
 The April 1961 Cuban cataclysm sowed the seeds of deep animosity toward President Kennedy among disparate American circles . It festered for the rest of the year, and it festered .
 The hostility would only deepen further in 1962, and I believe it played a role in the tragedy that took place in Dallas on 22 November 1963 . That hostility was only worsened by the events in Dallas .
 "My intent in this chapter is to open the door to another unnoticed but important accelerant of the incipient sentiment that President Kennedy had to be brought down," author says .
 That role was inadvertently played by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Nikita played a key role in the downfall of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was not a part of the plot to assassinate President Kennedy, as was alleged by those who originally designed the cover-up of the conspiracy . Those authors today who, one would hope, inadvertently, keep spinning that old canard, are oblivious to the cover they are providing
 Khrushchev knew he would do much worse with a Lyndon Johnson or a Barry Goldwater in the White House . He would do worse with LBJ or LBJ in the U.S.
 Khrushchev did, albeit indirectly, contribute to the tragedy in Dallas by shaping the key events that helped bring it about . The former Soviet leader did, however, contribute indirectly, to the disaster in Dallas .
 JFK's death led to Khrushchev’s overthrow on 14 October 1964 . Ironically, it was those same events and the death of JFK that led to the overthrow of the USSR .
 In 1960, Khrushchev had moved quickly to arm Castro’s regime to the teeth, ensuring that the only way it could be overthrown was by a full-scale U.S. military intervention . The only way to overthrow the Castro regime was to overthrow it was by
 Kennedy understood that short of a resort to nuclear war with the Soviet Union, the price for the invasion of Cuba was West Berlin . Kennedy understood short of nuclear war, the cost of the invasion would be West Berlin, he said .
 Khrushchev’s ultimate goal was to eliminate the “thorn,” the ‘ulcer” of West Berlin, he says . The goal of eliminating the "thorn" was to end West Berlin's "ulcer," he says.
 Check Point Charlie was a dangerous standoff between U.S. and Soviet tanks in Berlin . The standoff took place between the United States and the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Kennedy signaled Khrushchev that he would go easy on Berlin in the future if the Soviet tanks withdrew first . Kennedy signaled the move through a private channel .
 The Soviet premier was also attempting to draw the Americans into a ‘containing’ position in Southeast Asia . The Soviet prime minister was also drawing the U.S. into a "containing” position .
 The idea was to tie up U.S. military power there and put pressure on Chinese Communist leadership to purge Mao Zedong and end the Sino-Soviet dispute . It was also to pressure China to end the Soviet-Chinese dispute .
 Not until the Berlin Crisis appeared to be in remission at the end of 1961 did Kennedy accept the bait in Vietnam . Khrushchev wanted him to. Kennedy accepted the bait, but not the bait .
 The Soviet leader did not seek an immediate overwhelming use of American forces in Vietnam . Moscow’s long-term strategy was a slowly deepening vortex in Southeast Asia that would eventually bring about a SinoAmerican conflict .
 West Berlin would easily fall into communist hands if not a nuclear holocaust had not erupted . West Berlin could be easily taken over by the West Berliners .
 To create a situation in various areas of the world that would favor dispersion of attention and forces by the U.S. and their satellites, would tie them down during the settlement of the question of a German peace treaty and West Berlin .
 He would be willing to negotiate over Laos, Cuba, or the Congo, so long as he came away with Berlin, he says .
 Kennedy humiliated the Soviet premier by forcing him to remove his missiles from Cuba . Kennedy humiliated him by making him remove missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Michael Beschloss, The Crisis Years—Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960-1963 , 1960- 1963 , p.8. "The Crisis Years" is a chronicle of the Kennedy-Khrrushchev era .
 In the months following the Missile Crisis, Kennedy and Defense Secretary McNamara began secretly planning to withdraw the American advisors from Vietnam .
 I believe that during this period, mid to late 1962, a plot to assassinate President Kennedy was hatched . The plot was hatched in the mid-1962, says author .
 His grand scheme went up in smoke as the result of the Kennedy assassination in November 1963 .
 JFK’s death quickly led to a U.S. congressional blank check for massive direct American military intervention in Vietnam . JFK's death led to massive direct military intervention .
 Khrushchev’s fall from power in Moscow took place exactly sixty-eight days after the passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in Washington on 7 August 1964 . That meant that Moscow would need land access through China to Vietnam to sustain North Vietnam, and that the price of
 In this manner, Khrushchev’s manufacturing of crises to push the West out of Berlin succeeded only in his own overthrow in the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy . In the same way, he was overthrown in the wake of the Kennedy assassination .
 The removing of the “ulcer” of West Berlin had been a principal Soviet objective since the end of World War II in 1945 . The removal of the "ulcer" had been an objective since 1945 .
 All of the socialist regimes in Eastern Europe, except Romania, were peacefully toppled in 1989 . That goal came to its inevitable and ignominious end with the demolition of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989 .
 At the end of World War II, Germany was partitioned into Soviet, American, British and French zones of occupation . The European Chessboard—1945-1960 was the European chessboard .
 Berlin remained deep inside the Soviet zone, with the Soviets taking the eastern part of the city . The city of Berlin was also split by the Soviets, taking control of the eastern half .
 Stalin’s attempt to blockade West Berlin in 1948 had been thwarted by a massive Allied airlift . Stalin's attempt to block West Berlin was thwarted in 1948 by Allied airlifts .
 During the Cold War, Europe had become the chessboard upon which the geostrategic competition between Moscow and Washington played itself out . Europe had been a key part of the Cold war, and Europe was a key battleground .
 France occupied the Western subcenter squares on the chessboard . With the only substantial land army on the continent, France occupied Western sub center squares .
 France was key to America’s NATO strategy to contain Soviet influence . France was the key to the NATO strategy .
 Washington turned its back on African and Asian nations in deference to Paris’ foolish attempt to maintain control of its colonial empire in North Africa and Indochina . As a result, Washington repeatedly turned its . back on . African nations . Washington turned back on Asian nations .
 This occurred at a time when independence from colonial rule had become the dominant trend in the world . This was during the period when independence had become a dominant trend for the world.
 Eisenhower did this to newly independent Congo in 1960, turning a blind eye to Belgium’s attempt to break up the territorial integrity of that mineral rich African nation .
 The center squares on the Cold War European chessboard were occupied by East and West Germany . The center of the chessboard was occupied by West Germany in the 1950s .
 Berlin anchored the Cold War in the dangerous reciprocal hostility that would grip the world for three decades . Berlin was a lonely pawn at the center of the board, anchored by the city .
 In 1958, Khrushchev had demanded a German peace treaty to permanently legitimize the division of Germany . In 1958 he had demanded that a peace treaty permanently legitimized the division .
 The Paris Summit Conference exploded in May 1960 . The Paris summit conference was the first to take place in Paris .
 Khrushchev’s secret scheme for testing the newly elected forty-four-year-old American president . And it would become the focal point in Khrushche's secret scheme .
 The March 1961 CIA Survey of Berlin-Related Clandestine Operations . In March 1961, about one month after Kennedy’s inauguration, the CIA Berlin Operations Base Deputy Chief—and also chief of Soviet operations— visited CIA HQS .
 He took part in a survey being prepared in the Agency’s Eastern European Division . The survey is being prepared on possible clandestine activities to support the U.S. mission .
 The ubiquitous Henry Hecksher6 had, as BOB’s chief of operations, supervised the effort to recruit German post office officials who knew the telecommunications wiring for all of Berlin . Heckher6 was BOB's chief of operation .
 Murphy enlisted in the Army during WWII and was sent to California to learn French but due to a clerical error ended up learning Russian instead . Murphy was sent home from the Army to learn Russian instead of French .
 Murphy arrived at CIA HQS in 1961 to help with the East European Division Berlin survey . The Bay of Pigs landing was just a month away . Murphy helped with the survey of East European division Berlin .
 Jake Esterline and Jack Hawkins wanted to resign because they were certain the plan was doomed . DDP Bissell's two top operations men for the invasion wanted to quit . Bissell: "Almost no one was aware" except for Bissell, that his two top . operations men
 DCI Allen Dulles and several of the Pentagon chiefs intended that the invasion would fail . Ironically, neither Esterline nor Hawkins understood that Dulles intended to fail .
 The president had declared that under no circumstances would he authorize the use of U.S. military forces in Cuba .
 Dulles and several of the chiefs were certain that once the Cuban exiles were being cut down on the beachhead Kennedy would have no choice but to send in the Air Force and Marines .
 In March, the unabated exodus of refugees fleeing to the West through Berlin seemed more likely than Cuba to develop into a crisis . Berlin's influx of Cuban refugees to Berlin through Berlin seems more likely to develop a crisis than Cuba's .
 The EE survey of potential clandestine operations in Berlin had been requested by Henry Kissinger . Henry Kissinger was in Washington from Harvard to advise the administration on the Berlin problem .
 See especially John Newman, Countdown to Darkness—The Assassination of President Kennedy, Volume II , see Chapters Nine and Twenty-One .
 The recommendations included a larger presence in Berlin that would increase international interest in the city’s continuing freedom . It would also counter communist propaganda, the recommendations said .
 The final section concerned fomenting an ‘insurrection’ in East Germany . The final part of the book was about an East German "insurrection" The book was published in Berlin in 1964 .
 CIA had no illusions that it was possible to cause a popular uprising against a Soviet-supported communist regime in Central Europe through the use of externally mounted clandestine operations . The CIA believed that it could cause an uprising against the Soviet-backed regime in the region .
 Senior CIA officers and those close to invasion planning knew full well that a Cuban uprising in 1961 was a myth . In Chapter Twenty of Countdown to Darkness, I laid out the evidence that shows senior CIA officers .
 DDP Bissell and DCI Dulles lied to Kennedy by telling him a Cuban uprising would succeed . Yet, even so, they lied to JFK by saying it would succeed, he says .
 Our original concept is now seen to be unachievable in the face of the controls Castro has instituted . The original concept of the Castro-era Cuba project is no longer seen as viable in Cuba .
 There will not be internal unrest earlier believed possible, nor will the defenses permit the type strike first planned . There will be no internal unrest, and the defense will not permit a type strike planned .
 I filed a FOIA request for it in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on 12 October 2016 .
 The CIA indicated that they would take action by 24 May 2017, but they missed that deadline and revised that deadline to 19 December 2017 . The completed date of the action has been revised to 19 Dec. 2017 .
 CIA did not locate “any records responsive to your request” regarding the strange note . CIA indicated that they did not find ‘any records’ on 28 May 2018, the CIA said .
 On 17 August 2018, the Agency acknowledged that they had received my appeal . The agency said it had received an appeal for the case .
 East German communist leaders saturated their realm with more spies than had any other totalitarian government in recent history . To ensure that the people would become and remain submissive, East German communists saturated the realm with spies .
 Using Wiesenthal’s figures for the Nazi Gestapo, there was one officer for 2,000 people . The Gestapo had one officer per person, one for two,000, according to the figures .
 As for possible insurrection, the reaction was firm and to the point . When one adds in the estimated numbers of part-time snoops, the result is nothing short of 6 . The reaction to the possible insurrection was firm .
 Never before had a Soviet Premier taken such an intense interest in a U.S. presidential campaign . President Barack Obama is expected to win the White House in 2016 .
 In late November, the President-Elect sent campaign advisers Walt Rostow and Jerome Wiesner to Moscow to meet with Soviet disarmament experts .
 During test ban talks, the Soviets must be “very generous” about on-site inspections, the U.S. must be "very generous" about inspections, officials say .
 The two leaders must meet “before those who would not like to see agreement have had a chance to act and prevent it’s happening,” he says . “The two leaders need to meet before those who want to see it happen,’ he adds .
 It would not have been unreasonable to assume that at least one Stasi informer was present in any party of ten or twelve dinner guests .
 The two survivors were Captain John B McKone and Captain Freeman Bruce Olmstead . Captain McKone was killed in the attack .
 The United States disputed the Soviet claim that the American airplane had entered Soviet airspace . The U.S. disputed the claim that it entered Russian airspace .
 Khrushchev pivoted his policy abruptly toward détente by releasing the American RB-47 pilots and approving other measures to improve relations with the U.S.
 There was much more to Khrushchev’s courting of Kennedy than unassuming congeniality . Kennedy was courted by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The Premier was facing pushback from hardline Soviet leaders over his proposal to reduce the Soviet armed forces by 1. million men . He also faced a heated dispute with Beijing over the size of the Soviet Armed Forces .
 Khrushchev needed a quick rapprochement with the U.S. to continue this course, and he had calculated Kennedy would be easier to manipulate than Mao Zedong .
 Khrushchev wanted a summit as soon as possible, before Kennedy’s policies on Berlin, a test ban, and the arms race were cast in concrete . The summit took place in the early 1950s, before the arms war and the Berlin test ban began .
 The United States Ambassador to the USSR, Llewellyn Thompson, lobbied JFK to meet Khrushchev . President Kennedy was interested in meeting with him, and Khrushchchev was interested .
 Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev proposing a summit take place in Vienna, Austria, in 1961 . The summit took place in Austria on 27 February 1961 .
 Khrushchev interpreted it as a sign of weakness, validating his view that he could manipulate Kennedy on Berlin . Kennedy’s failure in Cuba was a bonus for Khrushvic, he said . He said, “I’m sure you’re going to
 Khrushchev had been secretly plotting since March 1961 to close Berlin’s sector borders and build a wall in the city . The Soviet Union had been planning to close the city's sector borders in 1961 .
 Kennedy’s colossal loss at the Bay of Pigs barely ninety days into his presidency played heavily into Khrushchev's hands . The loss of the Cuban invasion of 1961 played into the hands of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet leader then decided to play for more and test the president straight away on Western access to Berlin . He then decided on a deal with the West .
 Khrushchev’s plan was to lure the president into a summit meeting and ambush him with an ultimatum on Berlin . While publicly feigning a cooperative posture toward JFK, he planned to lure JFK into a meeting with the president .
 The meeting's agenda concerned what he planned to do to Kennedy at the Vienna summit . The meeting’s agenda was concerned about what he would do .
 The premier said he relished the opportunity for a summit with that “son of a bitch” Kennedy to bring “the German question’s to a head”
 Mikoyan argued Khrushchev underestimated the U.S. willingness to engage in conventional war over Berlin . He argued that the Soviet leader underestimated the American willingness and ability to engage .
 He said America’s European allies and world public opinion would restrain Kennedy from responding with nuclear weapons to any change in Berlin’�s status .
 He said de Gaulle and Macmillan would never support an American lurch toward war because they knew the Soviets’ primary nuclear targets, given the range of Moscow’s missiles, would be Europe .
 Kempe’s account is based on a stenographic record of the meeting from the AVP-RF—the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives . Kempe: The meeting took place in Moscow, Russia's capital, during a visit to Moscow .
 We consider them illegal, though we won’t use any strong-arm methods for their removal . However, we will use strong-armed methods to remove them from the internet .
 We will not cut off delivery of foodstuffs and will not sever any other lifelines, says minister . "We will not be cut off deliveries of food and other supplies," he says .
 Khrushchev shot back that Kennedy so feared war that he would not react militarily . Kennedy feared war so would not respond militarily to the threat of war . Kennedy said that he feared war and would not have reacted militarily if he did .
 Around Berlin the Kremlin’s superiority was unquestionable . He told the Presidium they perhaps would have to compromise in Laos, Cuba, or the Congo, where the balance was less clear .
 Mikoyan countered that Khrushchev was backing Kennedy into a dangerous position where he would have no option but to respond militarily . Kennedy was backed into a 'dangerous' position, Mikoyans said .
 Mikoyan suggested that Khrushchev continue to allow air traffic to arrive in West Berlin, which might make his Berlin solution more palatable to Kennedy .
 He replied that he would shoot down any Allied plane that tried to land in West Berlin . He said he would shut down the air corridor and would also shoot down planes landing in the city .
 Khrushchev ended his overbearing performance with a discussion of whether he should follow protocol and exchange gifts with Kennedy in Vienna . The former Soviet leader ended his speech with a debate over whether to follow protocol .
 Foreign Ministry officials suggested he give President Kennedy 12 cans of the finest black caviar and phonographic records of Soviet and Russian music .
 Among other gifts, aides had a silver coffee service for Mrs. Mrs. Obama .
 The Pentagon and the CIA were not the only executive agencies in disarray after the Cuban fiasco . The Pentagon, CIA and other executive agencies were also in trouble .
 The frustrations of the summer over Berlin over Berlin brought the president’s discontent with his Department of State to a climax . The president's frustration with his department of state came to a conclusion .
 The State Department's acquiescence in the Bay of Pigs, the fecklessness of its recommendations after the disaster . Kennedy with little doubt that the State Department was not yet an instrumentality fully responsive to presidential purpose .
 It was not only Kennedy’s youth but also the feebleness of otherwise experienced American diplomats at this critical juncture that gave the wily Soviet premier the element of surprise .
 The 3 June discussion in the U.S. ambassador’s office was a preliminary sparring match by both leaders . The meeting was held in the American ambassador's office .
 He planned to take the gloves off in the afternoon session the next day at the Soviet Embassy . The session was scheduled to take place in the evening .
 As the argument went on endlessly, Khrushchev dug in his heels and became ever harsher . As the debate raged on, he became harsher and became even harsher . He says, "As the argument raged on and again, the war broke out"
 Although the conversation was civil at first, it had turned into a scuffle by lunchtime . The incident was described as 'civil at first' and 'not violent'
 Kennedy tried to tone down the rhetoric in a final effort to avoid a crisis . It began as Kennedy tried . Kennedy was trying to . tone down .
 The president expressed hope that in the interest of relations between their two countries, the chairman would not present him with a crisis involving the American national interest as Berlin .
 Of course, any decision Khrushchev wanted to make about the Democratic Republic was his own . The decision was made by the late Soviet leader .
 If East German borders were violated by land, sea or air, force would be met by force . If the president insisted on occupation rights after a treaty, force could be used against East Germany's borders .
 The U.S. should prepare itself for this, and the Soviet Union would do the same, the author says . The United States should also prepare itself, he says .
 Khrushchev said again that it was up to the United States to decide on peace or war . The U.S. would have to decide whether to go to war or go to peace, he said .
 Khrushchev’s bullying had failed to win any concessions from the president . The Americans still had no idea that the original plan, the Berlin Wall, was coming .
 Khrushchev planned to restrict that secret to only a few people until the very last moment . The secret was to be kept secret until the last minute .
 Kennedy’s secret, which he confided to almost no one, was his fear that Khrushchev would move against Berlin . Kennedy confided his fears to almost everyone, including himself .
 Kennedy was so uncertain about the American commitment to the divided city that he was willing to brook the humiliation of the Bay of Pigs rather than face a new Berlin crisis .
 The Soviet premier wore his wartime lieutenant general’s uniform while those participating watched a documentary film about Khrushchev's life as a military and political champion . Those participating in the film were watching a documentary about his life .
 Khrushchev decorated seven thousand others who had contributed to the flight . The Soviet leader was the only person to be decorated with a medal .
 Khrushchev’s pompous demonstration at this anniversary celebration was an act . Unsuccessful at the Vienna summit, the Soviet leader's pompous display of power is an act, says historian .
 Khrushchev knew that he had refused to compromise while Kennedy had signaled he was ready to negotiate . Yet he knew he had to compromise, while Kennedy signaled he would negotiate . Kennedy was willing to negotiate, but Khruschev knew he would not compromise .
 The premier also knew that the USSR could not keep pace with U.S. military development . The Soviet Union could not be kept pace with American military development.
 His declaration that the USSR’s military strength would grow so much that the West would suffer complete failure was no more than an empty boast . The West suffered complete failure in the West, he said .
 The historic truth is that during the assault on Berlin there was not a single American, British, or French armed soldier around it, except for the prisoners of war whom we freed . The historic . truth .
 Allies’ claims to special rights in Berlin so long after surrender are unfounded, he says . Thus, he said, the Allies' claims to have special rights are entirely unfounded . The Allies' claim to have had special rights is entirely unfounded, the official said .
 Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky: U.S. "gigantic military apparatus" and "aggressive blocks" ringing the Soviet Union had to be resisted . Malinovski: "Aggressive blocks" ring Soviet Union were resisted .
 He needed a compromise on Berlin and, more than ever, he needed the U.S. president in order to make it work . He needed to make the deal work, and he needed to do it with Obama .
 Kennedy had suspected that he would have to face more mischief from Khrushchev over Berlin . Kennedy had hoped to avoid further mischief from the Soviet Union .
 The costs of unilateral U.S. intervention in Cuba for the cause of freedom in the hemisphere far outweighed Castro’s continued presence . President understood that the costs of . unilateral . intervention in . Cuba outweighed . Castro's continued presence in Cuba far outweighs the cost of
 Kennedy advisor Theodore Sorensen suggested that there was another imperative at work in Kennedy’s ardent refusal to send American forces into Cuba .
 Khrushchev sprung his Berlin bluff on Kennedy at the summit . And so, those forces were not tied down in Cuba, the Congo, or Laos, when the crisis occurred .
 The president was fully aware, however, that—short of using nuclear weapons— United States force levels were inadequate to deal with the developing Berlin crisis . The U.S. president was aware of the situation, but was not prepared to use nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy responded to Khrushchev’s ultimatum by ordering his administration to undertake a comprehensive review of the situation and make recommendations on the political and military measures .
 President Truman sought out President Truman’s Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, to help him lead this effort . President Truman's secretary of state sought out Achesons to help lead the effort .
 Dean Acheson turned down the president-elect’s offer to be ambassador to NATO . The only appointment he would have accepted was his previous one—Secretary of State . Achesons would have turned down as ambassador .
 The administration had begun to consider its Berlin policy well before the president went to the Vienna Summit . That changed when the administration began considering its policy .
 The U.S. should try to convince the USSR that it would stir up dissidence in East Germany and Eastern Europe . The United States should persuade the USSR it would and could, in event of a Berlin crisis, stir up Dissidence in the region .
 Dave Murphy from Berlin Operations Base attended a meeting of East European Division officers . On that occasion, Dave Murphy attended an East European meeting of officers .
 Given the high efficiency of the East German police state, the group concluded that it was not possible to incite a popular uprising in East Germany .
 It is unrealistic to believe that we could infiltrate into the East Zone a sleeper net of sufficient size, reliability, and skill to play a significant part in organizing resistance groups as well as remain in a state of readiness until called up .
 "Our abilities are not equal to this task when balanced against the defensive capability of the [East German] Ministry of State Security," he says . "We have not been able to defend ourselves," he adds .
 It was a revealing indication of just how serious the Berlin Crisis had become . It was, however, an indication that the crisis had become serious .
 Secretary of State Rusk began the discussion with a summary account of the current state of the department's work on Khrushchev’s 4 June aide-mémoire, and on other pressing matters .
 Acheson argues that Khrushchev’s purpose in starting this crisis was to weaken NATO, buttress the East German regime, and legalize the Oder-Neisse Line with Poland . He says that Khruschev wanted to weaken the NATO and buttress his regime .
 Acheson averred that Khrushchev would take willingness to negotiate as a sign of weakness . The Soviet leader had confronted the U.S. with a test that could not be backed down from, he said . The test was not backed down, he added .
 Kennedy said he thought it was difficult to sustain a strong political posture, while being prepared with the right answer if Khrushchev proposed another summit that summer . Kennedy said, wryly, that he thought he would be prepared if he faced another summit .
 In reply to a summit proposal, for example, the president could readily suggest that conversations be undertaken first at a lower level . The president could easily suggest that such a conversation should be held at lower levels .
 Acheson believed that there were plenty of ‘elderly unemployed’ people like himself who could be sent to interminable meetings .
 U.S. forces in Germany outside Berlin should be reinforced immediately by two or three divisions, he says . He says two divisions should be added to a total of six, adding to the American presence .
 The Soviet Union had recognized this boundary as the East German frontier . The underlying 40 percent of the border was the border with East Germany .
 If anyone was to back down over Berlin, it would have to be the Soviets . The Soviet Union would not have backed down over the issue .
 Acheson report also included a plan to deter the Soviets from provoking a Berlin crisis by stirring up dissident groups to destabilize Eastern Europe . The plan was also included in the report .
 Some of those present in the NSC meeting were troubled by Acheson’s apparent indifference about the risk of nuclear war . The meeting was held at the White House in 1945 .
 They preferred negotiation to demonstrate that the West favored a reduction in tension over West Berlin while protecting Western access rights . They preferred negotiations to demonstrate the West wanted to reduce tension over Berlin .
 The president said very little during the meeting, except that he did not think the U.S. people were prepared for the ambitious course Acheson proposed . The allies would be even less enthusiastic, he said .
 Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, voiced his opposition to the scale of the action proposed by Acheson . Uncharacteristically, he voiced opposition to an airlift unconnected with a probe .
 Acheson responded that the military force had to be large enough to convince the Soviets that if the fighting continued, nuclear weapons would be used . The military force would have to convince them to use nuclear weapons, he said .
 The upshot of the meeting was a decision not to make any substantive decisions based on that first discussion . The meeting was held in New York City on Monday .
 The president directed his security advisor, McGeorge Bundy, to prepare a list of departmental assignments for proposals . The proposals could be tabled for further discussion and decisions in two weeks .
 Burke had personally—and unsuccessfully—confronted Kennedy in the oval office while the exile forces were still fighting on the beachhead at the Bay of Pigs .
 Burke confronted Kennedy in the White House after he refused to send U.S. forces into Laos . Two weeks later, Burke again personally confronted Kennedy over that decision .
 By the time of the 29 June 1961 NSC meeting, Burke was just hoping to hold on to his job . Burke was hoping to keep his job at the NSC .
 CIA had been at odds with the State Department hawks since at least March 1961 . CIA had wanted to use clandestine operations to incite insurrection in the East . State hawks were opposed to CIA's plan to use covert operations in East .
 Kennedy saw his administration breaking into two camps on the Berlin predicament . Kennedy's administration was divided on how to deal with Berlin .
 Hard-liners included Acheson and other lesser lights at the State Department, the Pentagon, and Vice President Johnson . The hard-liners were hard-liner .
 Ambassador to the USSR, Llewellyn Thompson, Ambassador to USSR Llewyn Thompson and Ambassador to Soviet Union, Charles Bohlen . White House consultant and Harvard professor Henry Kissinger; special counsel Ted Sorensen; . Kennedy security advisor McGeorge Bundy; .
 Schlesinger organized a plan to provide a ‘thinking man’s alternative’ to Acheson . After the NSC meeting, he began to organize a plan for the U.S. government .
 The 1961 Berlin Crisis leadership alignment in the Kennedy Administration was not lost on the Pentagon chiefs at the Pentagon . The Berlin Crisis was the result of the Kennedy administration's leadership alignment .
 In the ten weeks before the Bay of Pigs fiasco, their boss, Secretary McNamara, was more inclined to take their advice, but less so afterward . McNamara was less inclined to follow their advice after the fiasco .
 Kempe: CIA leadership was absent from the two groups listed by Kempe . Kempe says the CIA leadership is missing from the list of groups .
 Disgraced by their Cuban performance, their advice was not welcome in the White House . Disgraceful by their performance, they were not welcome to Obama's White House.
 Another telling absence from the group close to Kennedy was Secretary of State Rusk . Rusk was not present at Kennedy's memorial service .
 JFK did not trust Rusk enough to include him in the plan to withdraw the American advisors from Vietnam . In my book JFK and Vietnam, I concluded that Rusk was not trusted enough by the president to include Rusk .
 Newsweek published classified information on the Pentagon’s contingency plans for Berlin, including the mobilization of American military forces . The same week in early July 1961, Newsweek published that same week .
 Khrushchev used this news to justify the recension of his plan to reduce the Soviet Army by 1. million men and increase his defense budget by $3. billion . The plan was followed by a reduction of 1 million men .
 Kennedy was ‘livid’ over the Newsweek leak and so upset that he ordered the FBI to find the source of the leak . According to Kempe, Kennedy was so upset he ordered FBI to look for the source .
 In a Moscow speech, he scoffed at “reports” of Western mobilization plans . The Russian president said he would not comment on the reports .
 Both were attending a performance by Dame Margot Fonteyn at the Bolshoi Theater in Russia . Both were in the audience for a performance .
 East Germany’s refugee problem spiraling out of control, Khrushchev could no longer wait for an answer on a meeting with Kennedy . The East German refugee crisis spiraled into chaos in the 1950s .
 East German refugees who got to West Berlin faced the risk of being arrested for desertion if they travelled by bus or train to West Germany . East Germans faced being arrested if they got to the West Berlin . East Berlin refugees faced the possibility of being charged with desertion .
 They were able to fly unmolested to West Germany from West Berlin from airports in West Berlin . However, they were not allowed to fly to the country .
 The Soviet Presidium met on 29 June and considered the request of East German leader Walter Ulbricht to do something about the “border-crosser’s problem . The meeting was considered by the Presidium of the USSR .
 Soviet Ambassador Pervukhin argued that once a peace treaty had been signed, control of West Berlin would be in East German hands . The goal would be to have all external air traffic from West Berlin channeled through the East Berlin airport at Schönefeld .
 East Berlin would be unable to leave West Berlin by any means . East Germans would be stuck in West Berlin indefinitely . The half-city would have to cope with a permanent influx .
 "The growing flood of refugees was increasingly disorganizing the entire life of the Republic," says President Obama . "It's a disaster for the Republic. It's a crisis," he says .
 The open status of the city caused two severe problems, Khrushchev said . Ulbricht and the East German leadership, he said, were unhappy with the city's open status .
 The GDR had to cope with an enemy who was economically very powerful and therefore very appealing to the GDR’s own citizens . GDR faced a very powerful enemy, and it was the enemy of its own citizens.
 The resulting drain of workers was creating a disastrous situation in the GDR . The GDR was already suffering from a shortage of manual labor, not to mention specialized labor, .
 Residents of West Berlin could cross freely into East Berlin, where they took advantage of communal services like barbershops and so on . Residents of East Berlin could take advantage of all sorts of services such as barbershop .
 Prices were much lower in East Berlin, West Berliners were also buying up all sorts of products which were in wide demand . GDR was losing millions of marks and losing millions .
 Khrushchev asked his German commander-in-chief, General Ivan Yakubovski, to do a study on the feasibility of closing the border between the Western and Eastern sectors of Berlin .
 The two men studied special maps of Berlin at Khrushchev’s Dacha in the Crimea . The men studied maps of the German capital in the 1960s .
 In July 1961, fear that the West Berlin safety hatch might disappear caused the refugee outflow to balloon to even more disastrous proportions—one thousand people every day . One thousand people were forced to flee West Berlin for West Berlin in 1961 .
 It was during those July days at his Dacha that Khrushchev made up his mind to build the Berlin Wall . The Wall was built during those days at the Dacha .
 Super-secret handwritten handwritten progress reports were hand-carried to 59 pages . The progress report was hand-cullied to 59 .
 The United States remained focused like a laser on the crisis of Western access to Berlin . The U.S. remains focused on Berlin's crisis .
 At the Soviet Embassy in Berlin, Pervukhin had a much sharper focus on the crisis of the exploding refugee flow . At the time, he was focused on the predicament of pursuing a peace treaty while that flow intensified .
 Berlin Crisis could be abatement of the Berlin Crisis, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The 13 July 1961 NSC Meeting In support of the 13 July NSC meeting, two days earlier the intelligence community gathered at CIA HQS for final coordination of a Special National Intelligence Estimate on possible Soviet reactions to the United States options with respect to Berlin .
 The Soviet leaders are confident of the prospects for advancing their cause by means short of all-out war . The Soviet leader is confident of advancing his cause short of war .
 We continue to believe that, so long as they remain vulnerable to U.S. strategic power, they will not willingly enter into a situation which, by their calculations, the risks of general war are substantial .
 SNIE said the Soviets probably believed the West had only a limited capability to stir up dissidence in East Germany . In a paragraph devoted to “measures aimed at the Satellites,” the SNIE stated that the Soviets .
 SNIE predicted that overt Western actions to stimulate dissidence would probably produce a stiffening of Soviet resolve . SNIE said overt Western action would probably result in a stiffened Russia .
 If a Berlin crisis could provoke a wave of disorders in the Satellites, then the Soviets might be inclined to proceed more cautiously in their moves against Berlin .
 In the case of Berlin, I favored calling up the reserves for two reasons: We needed to make clear to the Soviets our determination and will to apply force if necessary to prevent them from taking over West Berlin, which was their objective . If we needed to have that additional force, we
 At the 13 July 1961 NSC meeting, the president asked Acheson what he thought about calling up the reserves . At the time of the meeting, President Eisenhower asked him to call up reserves .
 Acheson replied that if they left the call-up of reserves until “the end,” Khrushchev’s judgment about the shape of the crisis would not be affected . Achesons: If they left it until ‘the end’, Kh
 Secretary Rusk agreed reserve training should not be left until too late . Reserve training should be left too late, Rusk said .
 They argued that taking such action might jeopardize the foreign aid bill then awaiting congressional authorization and appropriation . They said it might also jeopardize congressional approval of foreign aid .
 Rusk commented that it would be “a great victory for Khrushchev” if he could weaken the foreign aid program with only a memorandum and a few speeches . Rusk: It would be a great victory if he can weaken the aid program .
 Kennedy’s team debated the merits of a rapid, spectacular build-up versus a slower build up . At the 18 July meeting of a meeting of the Interdepartmental Coordination Group on Germany and Berlin .
 Once again, the pros and cons of declaring a national emergency, modernizing U.S. conventional forces, and troop deployments were discussed .
 Later that day, the president attended a meeting of his senior military advisors on Berlin . President Obama attended the meeting with senior military advisers .
 Kennedy said he wanted to postpone the declaration of a state of emergency until American reserve forces had been mobilized . Kennedy: State of emergency should be declared until reserve forces are mobilized . He said he wants to postpone declaration of state emergency .
 The chiefs agreed it could be postponed until at least 1 September . The chiefs said it was possible to postpone it until 1 September.
 NATO has a better capability for non-nuclear ground action, he said . He added that the expected increases in Allied forces would provide NATO with better capability . The expected increase in NATO forces would help NATO with a better ability to ground action .
 The president met with the Berlin Steering Group on the morning of 19 July in his study on the second floor of the Executive Mansion . The 19 July 1961 NSC meeting was held in the Executive mansion .
 Secretary McNamara described the military program and stated it was not necessary to declare a national emergency before mobilization . McNamara: "It is not necessary" to declare an emergency .
 The reserve call-up could be obtained without congressional authorization, the official says .
 Kennedy asked whether the proposed military build-up would increase the credibility of the U.S. nuclear deterrent . Kennedy also asked whether it would increase U.N. nuclear credibility . Kennedy: "It's not a matter of whether it's a good thing for the United States"
 At the NSC meeting that afternoon, the president again emphasized his own view that the proposed U.S. preparations would not be adequate without an effective allied response, especially from the Germans and French .
 The Acheson plan died a quiet death after an exchange between its author and Defense Secretary McNamara . And then, as Kempe has observed, the plan was quiet death . The plan's author and defense secretary McNamara exchanged an exchange .
 Secretary McNamara opposed a fixed target date, on the grounds that it would be wrong to accept a rigid time-table in advance . Secretary of State McNamara said it would not be necessary to set a target date in advance.
 Six Army and two Marine divisions could be deployed to Europe in the event of a rapidly developing crisis . After some prodding by the president, it was clear that the current preparations would rapidly create a force in being, in the continental U.S.
 It tested Kennedy’s ability to strike an effective balance between intimidating the Soviets and giving them a way out of their dilemma . Kennedy was able to strike a balance of intimidating and giving the Soviets a way to escape .
 One of his principal concerns was the perception that he lacked the will to fight an allout war . He said he wanted to avoid being seen as a weak leader .
 U.S. press reports, probably leaked by Pentagon sources, were unhelpful to the president’s Berlin strategy . Menshikov: The United States press reports were probably leaked to pressure JFK about Menshkov .
 McGeorge Bundy believed it was essential for the president to overcome this perception of weakness . Bundy believes it is essential for President Obama to overcome that perception . Bundy: 'It's essential' that the president overcome this perceived weakness .
 Kennedy’s maneuvering to avoid the intrinsic risks of hardline nuclear missile-rattling and a negotiations-at-all-costs stance exposed him to criticism from both sides .
 The president complained to Schlesinger that Acheson was lopsidedly focused on military solutions . Schlesingers was tasked with writing a paper to bring balance to bear on Berlin .
 Schlesinger delivered a memo to Kennedy just two hours later as he was leaving for a weekend in Hyannis Port with Rusk, McNamara and General Taylor . After working with State Department counselor Abram Chayes and Harvard professor Henry Kissinger, he delivered the memo .
 Memo proposed that the president direct Rusk to explore negotiations and order Acheson to inject “the missing political dimension” to his argument . The memo also suggested that Rusk should direct Achesons to explore the possibility of a compromise .
 Speaking from the Oval Office on 25 July 1961, Kennedy addressed the nation on radio and television . Kennedy spoke to the nation via radio and TV .
 His speech turned out to be a skillful model of how to give something to both sides of the Berlin debate in his administration . His speech was a model for how to address both sides in Berlin .
 It is more than a showcase of liberty, it is a symbol, an island of freedom in a communist sea . It's more than an island, it's a showpiece of liberty in the communist sea, a symbol .
 It is more than a link with the free world, it is a beacon of hope behind the Iron Curtain, an escape hatch for refugees . It is a link between the Soviet Union and the world's most powerful countries .
 Soviet ambitions now meet in basic confrontation with Western courage . But above all, it has now become—as never before—the great testing place of Western courage and will .
 The leader of East Germany, Walter Ulbricht, attended a meeting in Moscow on July 31, 1961 . The Berlin Wall was erected on July 1, 1961, in Berlin, Germany .
 He suggested to Khrushchev that air corridors between West Berlin and the West should be blocked to stanch the huge flow of refugees flying out every day .
 Khrushchev told him to wait until the Warsaw Pact leadership conference, scheduled to meet on 2 September, was held in September .
 Ulbricht cautioned Khrushchev that if the drain of valuable East German workers and professionals was not stopped, East Germany would not be able to meet its production commitments to the Soviet bloc . Ulbrich: If East Germany did not stop, it would be unable to meet production commitments
 Ulbricht rushed to East Berlin to seek the necessary assurances from his security chief, Erich Honecker, and other top leaders . He rushed to the East Berlin headquarters to seek assurances from the security chief and other leaders .
 On 5 September, Ulbricht returned to Moscow to give Khrushchev the news . Ulbrich returned to Russia on 5 September to give the news of his return .
 All communication had to be transmitted orally until just before construction of the wall began . The wall was built on top of the border wall in Mexico .
 On 12 August, Ulbricht signed the order to close the border crossings to the West and erect a wall in Berlin . Ulbrich signed the orders to close border crossings and erect the wall . The wall is expected to be built in Berlin, Germany, in the fall .
 In the darkness at midnight, police and army units laid concertina wire and erected barricades at the main crossing points . The East German army units, including units of the East German Army, laid the wire at midnight .
 CIA Berlin Chronology, 1961; cia.gov.gov/library.com . By morning, the border to 82 CIA Berlin was closed to 82 .
 General LeMay's 12 July appeal for retention of the B-52 and B58 production levels and for an increase in B-70 program funding was not reflected in these appropriations figures . LeMay appealed to retain production levels of B-58 and B52 production levels .
 32,000 combat and engineer troops were brought in to begin building the Berlin Wall . The Soviet Army stood watch close to the city to discourage Western interference . The Berlin Wall was built by the Soviet Army in 1968 .
 Within a few weeks these improvised obstacles would become a formidable heavily fortified and guarded, guarded, and boobytrapped cement barrier . Within weeks they would be a heavily fortified, guarded and . booby-trapped concrete barrier .
 Kennedy’s reaction was low key as his administration mulled over what a fully coordinated response should be . Publicly, Kennedy's reaction was kept low key .
 U.S. reporters were saying that the border closure had shocked and depressed Kennedy . American reporters were . saying that . American press said that . Kennedy was shocked by the closure .
 The president was actually relieved by the news of the wall . He did not hide this reaction from his closest advisors, he said .
 "They were building a prison around West Berlin to lock in its people. Besides, the optics for the communists were terrible," he says . Besides, he says, "the optics were terrible" for West Berlin .
 It was an opportunity for the president to display resolve and statesmanship, he says . It was a chance for him to show resolve and statemanship, the president says .
 Kennedy was able to undertake an impressive mobilization of American military power with the full backing of Congress, without looking like a warmonger . Kennedy was now able to do so without looking warmongers .
 On 18 August 1961, he ordered a battle group of 1,500 men to Berlin to reinforce the garrison . The German capital was occupied by the early 1960s .
 The next day, a plane carrying Vice President Johnson and General Clay landed in Berlin to assure West Berlin that the U.S. was willing to fight for the city’s survival . The plane carrying Johnson and Clay landed the next day to assure the city of West Berlin .
 The United States and the USSR engaged in a tit-for-tat escalation of the crisis . After that, the U.S. and the Soviet Union engaged in an escalating crisis of sorts .
 On 22 August, the Western air corridors to Berlin were threatened by Soviet diplomatic demarches . The access to East Berlin was cut to a single crossing point, Check Point Charlie .
 On 5 September, President Kennedy announced resumption of United States tests, and the United States conducted its first test on 15 September . The first test took place in September .
 On 23 September the United States 7th Army was placed on a “combat ready” alert . The U.S. 7th Army was placed on the alert for combat .
 On 25 September, President Kennedy reaffirmed United States determination to defend the Allied position in West Berlin . President Kennedy, in an address to the UN General Assembly, reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to defending the West Berlin position .
 On 25 October 1961, United States tanks moved to the border of East Berlin, while General Clay decided to “test” Western access to the east sector that was guaranteed by the Potsdam Agreements of 2 August 1945 .
 After initial initial East German harassment, the vehicles were allowed to proceed unmolested . The vehicles were then allowed to continue their journey .
 That evening, unidentified tanks were spotted … in a bombed-out lot in the Eastern sector of the city . The tanks were later spotted in the area .
 When a soldier popped up out of the turret, he asked him in German how to get to Karlshorst . He asked a soldier in German for help in getting there .
 The American asked the same 88 CIA Berlin Chronology, 1961; cia.gov.gov/library.com: "The American asks the same question"
 For the first time in years, an armored Soviet military unit had entered the city limits of East Berlin . The incident took place in the early 1980s and 1990s .
 The unit was comprised of thirty-three Soviet-manned tanks, accompanied by troops . Troops were involved in the battle .
 The show of strength by Khrushchev and Kennedy in Berlin rapidly escalated . The show was a show of show of unity by the two leaders .
 Both sides ended up with ten tanks, with engines running, facing each other at Check Point Charlie . Both sides had ten tanks on board .
 The American tanks with bulldozer blades were conspicuously shown, and American helicopters buzzed over the check point ignoring East German and Soviet protests .
 General Clay’s view that the Russians unleashed the Check Point Charlie confrontation in order to humiliate America was generally accepted . For many years, General Clay's view was accepted, but it was not accepted .
 Ulbricht’s aggressive anti-Western stance had trapped Khrushchev into a situation he did not want to be in, Clay said . However, the unearthing of new documentary evidence suggests that this was incorrect .
 The standoff continued through the ‘chilly’ night and lasted for 16 hours . The standoff lasted through the "chilly" night . It was a 16-hour standoff .
 During the Check Point Charlie confrontation, four missile-firing atomic submarines of the Polaris class were submerged in the North Sea . Each with sixteen warheads aimed at targets in the Soviet Union, Malinovsky said .
 As the crisis in Berlin approached a hair’s breadth from erupting into a violent tank battle, something unseen was also taking place during the dark hours .
 At Check Point Charlie the Soviet guard post was communicating, through General Anatoly Gribkov at the Soviet Army High Command, with Khrushchev . At Check point Charlie the guard post communicated, through . Anatoly . Gribkkov was in charge of the Soviet army high command
 At the same time, the U.S. guard post was communicating, through the HQ of the 93 Taylor, The Berlin Wall, 280. At the moment, the United States guard post at The 93 Taylor was communicating . At the time of the incident, the 93Taylor HQ was
 Clay recalls that when he spoke with Kennedy that evening, the president asked if he was nervous . Clay recalls how Kennedy asked him if he had been nervous that evening .
 The president had his feet up on his desk during the entire call to Berlin . That snarky remark failed to annoy the president .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were messaging through RFK and Bolshakov . Within hours, Kennedy and RFK were messaging . RFK: "Within hours" Kennedy was messaging through Bolshavakov .
 Kennedy offered to go easy over Berlin in the future in return for the Soviets removing their tanks first . Kennedy made the offer in exchange for removing tanks first from Berlin . Kennedy offered the Soviets to remove tanks from Berlin in return .
 Khrushchev spoke to Marshal Konev in Berlin the following morning . The following morning Khrushchevs spoke to marshal Konevs in Berlin . The next day he was in Berlin to discuss the situation in the Soviet Union .
 I proposed that we turn our tanks around, pull them back from the border, and have them take their places in the side streets . I propose that we pull our tanks back from our borders, and take their place in the streets .
 I assured my comrades that as soon as we pulled back our tanks, the Americans would pull back theirs . I assured his comrades that . as soon . we pulled . back tanks, he said. "As soon as . we pull back tanks would pull . back theirs," he said .
 This was how long it would take for their tank commander to report our move and get orders from higher up of what to do . The tank commander had to report his tank commander and then get orders .
 He reported that, just as I expected, it did take only twenty minutes for the Americans to respond to the situation .
 From the time Khrushchev ordered the erection of the Berlin Wall he knew that “starting a war over Berlin was stupid.” Starting a war was “stupid,” he said. “Starting a war is stupid. It’s stupid,�