 Harvard Kennedy School hosted a panel of experts at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs . The panelists discussed their findings at Harvard's Kennedy School in October 2013 .
 Aerial photo of the port of Mariel, Cuba showing Soviet missile equipment by the docks and on-board freighters, October 1962 . Aerial photo shows Soviet missile technology by the dock .
 General Yesin has previously served as chief of staff of the Strategic Missile Forces, department head of the Defense Council, and in the Security Council of the Russian Federation . Yesin is currently the head of Russia's armed forces .
 Mr Yesin participated in 1962 Operation Anadyr carried out by the Soviet Armed Forces in the Republic of Cuba .
 Why Soviet Leaders sent nuclear Missiles to Cuba? Why Soviet leaders sent nuclear missiles to Cuba . Why they did so?
 Why Americans Succeeded in Detecting Soviet Nuclear Missiles in Cuba..............................................................4 3. 4. 3. 5. 4 . 5. 5 . 4. 6. 5: 5. 6: 5: 10: 10. 4: 10, 10: 9: 10
 Why Khrushchev Decided to Withdraw Missiles from Cuba? 4.5 . 5.5 4.4 . 5 .5 . 4.3.5.5 for the U.S.
 The lessons of the crisis are still of great practical value and interest to government officials who make decisions on political-military and military-strategic issues .
 The outcome of a crisis is often determined by nuances in the way each side makes and executes decisions . These nuances are often hidden from view until long after the crisis is resolved, says David Frum .
 The failure of concealment foiled Khrushchev’s plan to deploy the missiles in secret . The failure to conceal the missiles foiled the Soviet leader's plan to install them in secret and present a nuclear Cuba as a fait accompli .
 U.S. intelligence officials obtained and analyzed photographic evidence of missile positions . President John F Kennedy notified President Kennedy who swung into action .
 Russia's most thoughtful military strategists are one of Russia’s most thoughtful strategists . He was a direct participant in the crisis as a young lieutenant serving in the Soviet Strategic Missile Forces .
 Yesin's regiment ended up in Cuba’s Santa Clara Province, where he was promoted to senior lieutenant . Yesin performed so well as his unit's chief engineer that he became a senior lieutenant.
 He went on to become chief of staff of the Strategic Missile Forces . Retired to pursue academic career .
 General Yesin draws lessons from the crisis that are both informative and instructive . Yesin takes advantage of his unique position as both participant and skilled scholar in drawing lessons .
 The author attributes the Soviet Union’s failure to conceal the missile launch positions in Cuba to two factors . The author also attributes the failure to hide the launch positions to the failure of Soviet Union to conceal them .
 Only a very narrow circle of General Staff officers were involved in the top-secret planning process for Operation Anadyr . None were missile specialists, and none were missile experts .
 No steps were taken to adapt standard concealment procedures to the Cuban landscape . missiles were deployed with camouflage nets designed to provide cover in the coniferous forests of Russia, not the palm groves of Cuba .
 The second factor was that “the Soviet missile units were forced to deploy with haste, increasing the chance they would violate proper concealment procedures,” Yesin says .
 He argues that this haste stemmed from unrealistic deployment deadlines that Soviet political leaders placed on the military . He argues this hastiness stemmed from the unrealistic deployment deadline .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba did not have enough engineering equipment to build the launch positions . They were forced to do so with manual labor, which was easier to see from above .
 U.S. spy planes were able to detect five of the six launch positions before the missiles were emplaced . As a result, the United States was able to find the launch positions of the missiles .
 One of the six launch positions was not detected by the United States, a potentially significant intelligence failure . The U.S. did not detect one of the launch positions .
 If Kennedy followed advice of his advisors and bombed the Cuban missile positions, the Soviets would have been free to launch a retaliatory strike against the U.S. from this sixth, undetected site .
 Soviet political leaders should have paid more attention to the planning and implementation of Operation Anadyr . Khrushchev had some, albeit limited, military experience, when he was in charge .
 Soviet Defense Ministry and its General Staff were led by officers who did not have experience executing operations involving strategic nuclear weapons . They did not ask for advice from those who understood the intricacies of transporting and installing missiles covertly .
 Operation Anadyr could have compromised its secrecy, which was the highest priority of the Soviet political leadership . They did not do so in part because widening the circle of participants in the operation would have compromised the secrecy of the operation .
 There is no information available about how Soviet military leaders assessed the damage done to Soviet national security by overflights .
 Soviet leaders failed to better conceal its missile launch sites in Cuba missile . However, it appears that Soviet leaders underestimated this damage . It appears that this damage was underestimated by Soviet leaders .
 This is yet another example of how important nuances in the behavior and thinking of parties in a crisis situation can remain hidden from political leaders at the time, and yet have an important impact on the outcome .
 Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences and 6th Secretary of Russia’s Security Council Dr. Dr. Vladimir Kuznov is a member of the Security Council . He is the 6th secretary of Russia's Security Council, Dr. Alexander Chudkovsky, a member
 Some of the most recent evaluations were given in 2012 in commemoration of the crisis’s 50th anniversary .
 Experts on the CMC have yet to reach consensus on a number of questions related to the crisis . However, experts on the board still have not reached consensus on many of the questions .
 Academics and commentators have missed some of the key lessons from the crisis . Furthermore, academics and commentators should not have missed the lessons, they say .
 Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Andrei Kokoshin chaired the roundtable . The roundtable was held by members of Russia's top scientific body .
 The author offers his interpretation of the answers to the most important of the CMC-related questions that remain open . With these discussions in mind, the author would like to offer his interpretations of the questions .
 He would like to outline a number of instructive lessons of the 1962 crisis .
 Na primere Karibskogo krizisa 1962 goda , trans. and ed. by Simon Saradzhyan and . Nabi Abdullaev , 528. Na. Karibskoev, 528, is a Soviet Union state of origin .
 Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 1 1.1.2.3.5. The Belfer center is located at the Kennedy School of Harvard . It is located in Washington, DC, on the campus of Harvard University .
 Khrushchev's decision to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba is still unanswered . Experts believe the most important unanswered questions are those regarding the political considerations that prompted the deployment .
 The Soviet Union sent a missile division armed with medium-range nuclear ballistic missiles to Cuba . Four factors informed the decision by the Soviet Union’s political leadership .
 Soviet leaders believed that the U.S. was preparing to overthrow the revolutionary government of Fidel Castro . Castro was an ally of the Soviet Union, which was overthrown by the United States .
 These exercises were code-named Lantphibex and Prompt Strike, respectively . The exercises are code-names Lantiphibex, Prompt Strike and Promptstrike .
 Khrushchev also believed that U.S. military superiority in the Caribbean made it impossible to defend Cuba with conventional arms . The Cuban government believed it would be impossible for conventional arms to defend the country .
 To Khrushchev, only Soviet nuclear missiles deployed in Cuba could serve as a credible deterrent against U.S. military aggression . Khrushchchev: Only Soviet nuclear missile missiles could be credible deterrent to U.K. forces .
 Soviet leadership reached this conclusion after the U.S. placed Thor and Jupiter missiles in Great Britain, Italy and Turkey . The United States placed Thor, Jupiter and Jupiter medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles .
 In 1959, two missile batteries of the 72nd Engineer Brigade of the Supreme High Command Reserve were covertly deployed in the German Democratic Republic .
 The batteries operated R-5 medium-range nuclear missiles with 12 launchers assigned to them . The batteries remained on combat duty in East Germany for six months until tensions cooled over Berlin .
 The Soviet Union understood that deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba would not drastically change the imbalance between Soviet and U.S. nuclear forces . The politico-military leadership of the Soviet Union knew it would not change the balance between the Soviet and United States nuclear forces.
 Ambassador to Washington during service of six presidents in 1962-1968] [Ambassador to Washington] 60 years old .
 The Soviet leadership hoped to win political concessions from the U.S. by placing missiles in Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet leadership .
 Khrushchev believed that placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, despite the risk, would yield significant dividends by allowing the U.S. to pressure the United States and NATO over Berlin .
 At that time, Khrushchev intended to squeeze the United States, Britain and France out of West Berlin . At that point, the U.S. and Britain were trying to get West Berlin out .
 By placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, the U.S. could be forced to trade the removal of those weapons for concessions to the Soviets regarding West Berlin . The United States could trade removal of the weapons for a trade deal .
 The Soviet leadership’s primary reason for deploying Soviet nuclear missile units in Cuba was to prevent U.S. military aggression against the Cuban government . Above all, the Soviet leadership wanted to prevent United States military aggression .
 Moscow believed that it was the only measure that could prevent an American attack . Despite the risks, Moscow believes that it is the only way to prevent an attack .
 The American installation of Thor and Jupiter missiles in Europe justified to Moscow a symmetrical Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. installation of the Thor and . Jupiter missile systems in Europe further justified the symmetrical . Soviet policy in Cuba justified the deployment of the nuclear missiles
 It should be noted that as of mid-1962 the geostrategic situation was so tense that the Soviets had to transport nuclear missiles to Cuba in secret in secret . The Soviets transported nuclear missiles in secret to Cuba .
 Soviet transport ships with R-12 and R-14 missiles on board would have been blocked by the United States Navy in the Atlantic while still en route to Cuba . The U.S. Navy would have blocked the ships with missiles en route .
 Chairman Khrushchev wanted to announce the deployment during an official visit to Cuba in November 1962 . Chairman Khrisschev wanted the announcement during a trip to Cuba .
 Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro were to sign an intergovernmental agreement on military cooperation between the U.S. and the Republic of Cuba . The agreement was part of an agreement between the two countries .
 Soviet and Cuban officials initialed that agreement in Moscow at the end of August 1962 . Soviet-Cuban officials initially agreed to the deal in August 1963 .
 Signatories were to reveal Soviet nuclear forces in Cuba in order to present the U.S. with a fait accompli . Once the agreement was signed, the signatories would reveal Soviet forces . The United States would then be presented with the Soviet nuclear weapons .
 On October 14, 1962 an American U-2 spy plane took aerial photographs of the San Cristobal area when overflying western Cuba . The U.2 plane was overflying Cuba when it was captured .
 CIA analysts concluded that a unit of R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles was being deployed in that area . CIA analysts said the missiles were being deployed .
 Washington increased efforts to identify other areas in Cuba where missile units might be deployed . Washington subsequently increased its efforts .
 The findings prompted a decision by the U.S. leadership to introduce what the White House described euphemistically as a “quarantine” of Cuba . The White House has described the situation as a "quarantine"
 In practice, the United States established a 500mile blockade zone around Cuba to prevent the further shipment of offensive weapons to 7 Kokoshin, Razmyshleniya .
 The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 3 the island . The island is home to the Belfer center for science and international affairs at Harvard Kennedy's Kennedy School .
 President Kennedy announced this decision in an address broadcast on radio and television in the evening of October 22, 1962 . President Kennedy made the announcement in a broadcast broadcast on television and radio .
 There is no one simple answer to this question, but two factors facilitated detection of the missile positions . Two factors aided detection of missile positions, including the fact that the U.S. knew the missile position .
 The terrain in Cuba was not favorable for concealment . Soviet commanders did not consider this during preparation for deploying missiles on the island .
 The units should have been equipped with specialized means of concealment that would most naturally fit into the Cuban landscape . The Cuban military should have had a better means of concealing itself .
 Only a very narrow circle of generals and officers of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the U.S. knew about the pending deployment of missile units in Cuba .
 None of the officers were missile specialists and none possessed sufficient knowledge of how to camouflage missile hardware, which required specific skills . None of these officers were missiles specialists .
 The U.S. mistakenly assumed that the standard means of concealment available in missile units would be sufficient to camouflage assets deployed Cuba . The Cuban government mistakenly assumed it would be enough to camouflage .
 The camouflage nets that were brought to Cuba did not blend into the local landscape . Indeed, the camouflage nets were brought into the country .
 These nets were designed to disguise missile hardware in the coniferous forests . The nets are designed to hide missile hardware from the forest .
 The Soviet missile crews had to deploy their missiles in Cuba’s palm groves . Unfortunately for them, the Soviet missiles were deployed in the palms groves of the palm trees .
 The hardware had to be positioned in a strictly linear fashion in order to erect missiles in the vertical position on the launch pads .
 CIA analysts identified activities in the San Cristobal area as deployment of a Soviet missile unit . The characteristic line-up of activities enabled CIA analysts to identify the activities .
 Analysts compared the Cuban photographs to those taken during reconnaissance overflights of missile units armed with the R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles in the Soviet Union . The analysts compared the photos to those of Soviet missile units .
 One U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers was shot down in the skies above the city of Sverdlovsk on May 1, 1960 . These flights stopped only after one of Powers' shots down .
 The Soviet missile units were forced to deploy with haste, increasing the chance they would violate proper concealment procedures . The missile units deployed with haste increased the chance of violating proper concealments procedures .
 The Soviet leadership set an unrealistic deadline of November 1, 1962 to complete deployment of the missile units . The deadline was set for the Soviet leadership to deploy missiles .
 The late arrival of missile units to Cuba and lack of engineering equipment—needed to perform excavation 9 Powers was captured, tried, and convicted by a Soviet court . 9 Powers captured and tried in Cuba .
 Increased seasonal rainfall drenched the missile sites in October 1962 .
 The increased workload, coupled with the torrential rain, led to heightened fatigue . This increased workload led to the missile crews’ focus on ensuring proper concealment measures for the hardware .
 The U.S. detected five out of the six missile units deployed in Cuba by October 27, 1962 . The two factors allowed the United States to detect five of the missiles deployed .
 If missile specialists had been involved in planning preparations for deployment of the missile division to Cuba, the missile units would have had a far better chance of concealing their missiles from U.S. reconnaissance overflights .
 Khrushchev did not see the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba as an end in itself . The Soviet Union did not want to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 His ultimate goal was to deter the United States from attacking Cuba by deploying nuclear missiles on this Caribbean island . He did not want to go as far as going to war with the Americans, he said .
 President Kennedy assured Chairman Khrushchev that, in return for withdrawing Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba, the United States would not invade Cuba . The Soviet leader thus decided to remove the missiles when President Kennedy .
 The United States also made a confidential pledge to eliminate its missile bases in Turkey and Europe a few months later . The U.S. also pledged to eliminate missile bases .
 McNamara issued a secret directive to render the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey unusable . The U.S. Jupiter missiles were launched in Turkey after the Soviet missile divisions began dismantling their launch sites in Cuba .
 McNamara also ordered this process be photographed to personally verify the execution of his October 29, 1962 order . McNamara ordered the execution be photographed .
 Washington considered these aircraft to be offensive weapons that could launch nuclear strikes against the U.S. homeland . Along with ballistic missiles, these aircraft were considered offensive weapons .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev’s agreement about American nonaggression toward Cuba were formalized in the form of an inter-governmental agreement . In 1970, the United States State Department and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.R. exchanged appropriate notes .
 Nixon said the U.S. committed as a state to refrain from aggression against Cuba as long as it did not deploy offensive weapons on that island . Then-President Richard Nixon officially confirmed that the United States. did not . not .
 Both countries believe in each other's military doctrines, including the U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama and Hillary Clinton believed in their respective doctrines .
 Soviet and American leaders realized that there could be no winners in a nuclear war . Having found themselves on the edge of nuclear abyss during the CMC, Soviet and U.S. leaders decided not to go nuclear .
 No one could guarantee against the deaths of millions more as a result of the subsequent environmental catastrophe caused by nuclear war . Millions more could be killed if a nuclear war broke out .
 The Kremlin-U.S.R. relations between Russia and the United States was created in 1963 . The two countries had a direct communications link between the White House and the Kremlin . The link was created to prevent a military confrontation between the two countries .
 The countries signed the Agreement on Measures to Reduce the Risk of Outbreak of Nuclear War between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics in 1971 and the Agreement between the U.S. and the . Union of . Soviet Socialist Republics on Prevention of Nuclear
 These agreements are open-ended and they continue to contribute to maintenance of strategic stability and international security to date . These agreements continue to be open ended and contribute to security and stability .
 In a nuclear confrontation, both sides must compromise in order to find a mutually acceptable solution . Both sides need to compromise to find an acceptable solution, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The United States and U.S.R. only found a way out of the CMC when both sides expressed a willingness to compromise and make mutual concessions . Both sides agreed to compromise in order to avoid a repeat of the conflict .
 This created a window of opportunity to find mutually acceptable solutions rather than cornering the opposing party with ultimatums . This created an opportunity for the opposition party to work together .
 Both sides gradually formed views on how to ensure strategic stability and that was reflected in a number of official Sciences .
 Make sure there is clear and timely communication between you and your adversary during a crisis . Make sure that you communicate with your adversary in a crisis.
 It also illustrated the need for timely communication of those decisions to an opposing side . The decision was made in a timely way to communicate with opponents .
 A number of setbacks occurred in decisionmaking process of the United States and U.S.R. that made resolution of the CMC far much more difficult . The U.N. and the U.K.R.'s. had been involved in the process of resolving the C
 Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy that the U.S.R. would withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba if the United States would guarantee that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy received a private letter from Khrushchchev on the evening of October 26, 1962 .
 The American president and his entourage began to draft a reply to Khrushchev . They agreed to offer a guarantee of non-aggression to Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy then received another letter from Khrushchev on the morning of October 27 . Kennedy received a letter from the Soviet leader on October 26 .
 Americans believed to be a follow-on to the letter he received on October 26 . This message changed the whole atmosphere of the negotiations . Americans believed it was a follow on to a letter received by President Obama .
 The Americans began to think that either there had been a coup in the Kremlin or that Khrushchev had come under strong pressure from Kremlin hawks that he had had to abandon his conciliatory position . The U.S. began to believe either there was a coup or Khrush
 In reality, the ‘second’ message that Kennedy received on October 27 was supposed to have been first . Kennedy received the 'second' message that was meant to be first .
 It was only due to the sluggishness of employees of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs who delayed sending the original letter . Kennedy read the conciliatory follow-on letter first .
 The confusion over the sequence of Khrushchev’s messages could have led to disastrous consequences if were not for Robert Kennedy, brother of the American president and U.S. Attorney General .
 Robert Kennedy met with Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the U.S. on the evening of October 27, 1963 . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 Both U.S. and Soviet intelligence agencies made mistakes when drawing conclusions from their analysis of the situation during the crisis . The United States and the Soviet Union made mistakes in their analysis .
 Erroneous intelligence analysis led to erroneous decisions that increased the chances for the outbreak of hostilities . The U.S. has not been able to predict the start of hostilities in advance of war .
 General Thomas Power, head of the U.S. Strategic Air Command, issued an order on October 24, 1962 to put subordinate units on full alert, even though the situation did not require this . The situation in the United States did not need to be on alert .
 General Stepan Grechko gave the order to open fire at an American U-2 spy plane . The order was issued on October 27, 1962, by Soviet forces in Cuba .
 Two missiles launched from the Dvina air defense system hit the reconnaissance plane, killing the pilot . The plane was hit by two missiles fired from the air defenses system . The pilot was killed in the attack .
 This study is intended neither to be exhaustively comprehensive nor to represent the ultimate truth . It is intended to be neither exhaustive nor representative of the truth .
 It is the result of the author’s purely personal reflections, inspired not only by his memories as a direct participant in the menacing events of 1962, but also by the information on these events that has become available to him .