 Subscribe to the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation's Sunflower newsletter and Action Alert Network . Join the group to see the latest from the nuclear age peace movement .
 We were fortunate to have survived that crisis, thanks largely to the restraint shown by President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev, says President Kennedy .
 There is no immediate crisis such as that in 1962 over Soviet nuclear-armed missiles being placed in Cuba . Now, fifty years later, there are no immediate crises such a crisis like that .
 Approximately 95 percent of these weapons are in the arsenals of the U.S. and Russia . The weapons are believed to be in the United States' arsenals .
 Some 2,000 of them are kept in a state of high alert, ready to be launched upon an order to do so at any moment of any day or night . Some of the world's most powerful military forces are in the Middle East .
 We run an unacceptably high risk of our bluff again being called and finding ourselves, once more, teetering on the brink of the abyss . We run a high risk that our bluff is being called again, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Each individual risk may be small, but taken together over an extended period of time, the risk becomes unacceptably high . "Each individual risk is small. But taken together, the risks become unacceptable high," says author .
 Blair addresses issues including high-alert nuclear weapons, a United States China conflict, the history of U.S. arms control treaties and the modernization of United States nuclear forces . Blair says he believes the abolition of nuclear weapons is the only way to ensure national and global security .
 U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy Militarizing Nuclear Security Militarizes Nuclear Security . Rep. Rep. Joe McCarthy says the U.N. should not have been allowed to use nuclear weapons .
 A bill seeks to militarize security at nuclear weapons production sites . House Armed Services Strategic Forces subcommittee chairman unveils the bill .
 Turner's legislation proposes shifting responsibility from the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration to the United States military . Turner's bill would shift responsibility to the U.S. military .
 Turner's legislation was largely triggered by an incident in July, when an 82-year-old nun and two other peace activists infiltrated the Y12 National Security Complex in Tennessee . Turner's bill was triggered by a July incident in which a nun, 82, and two others, infiltrated the
 The law was passed in 1878 during the Reconstruction era . It prevents the armed forces from working on U.S. soil to enforce domestic law .
 Guarino, Douglas, "Plan to Militarize Nuclear Security Could Face Legal Obstacles, Critics Say,"" Global Security Newswire .
 Funding for a new nuclear bomb plant at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico was terminated by a Continuing Resolution passed by Congress and signed by President Obama .
 The envisioned nuclear bomb plant would have given the U.S. the capacity to produce 80 plutonium pits for nuclear weapons each year . The plant would be called the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement Nuclear Facility .
 CMRR's estimated cost was found to run between $4 to $6 billion nearly six times more than the initial price tag . Government Accountability Office review conducted by the GAO found the cost was $4-6 billion .
 Local and national groups, including the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, worked to stop this facility from being built . Many local and national . groups, . including the . Nuclear Age . Peace Foundation .
 There appears to be no funding currently in the pipeline for the CMRR, but it could potentially resurface at any time .
 United States to allow New Zealand naval ships to dock at United States bases . United States lifts ban that forbade New Zealand ships from docking at U.S. bases . New Zealand navy ships can now dock at US bases .
 The ban was imposed in 1984 in retaliation for New Zealand's nuclear-free policy . The ban is now in place in place of the country's nuclear policy .
 New Zealand restricts U.S. ships that carry nuclear weapons or are nuclear-powered from entering New Zealand waters and ports . New Zealand also restricts United States ships carrying nuclear weapons . The United States is prohibited from entering the country's waters or ports from entering its waters .
 Whether New Zealand will reciprocate the gesture by easing its anti-nuclear law toward the United States appears unlikely, however, however .
 Mongolia was officially recognized as a single-state nuclear weapon-free zone on September 17 . Mongolia has been officially recognized by the United States as a nuclear-weapon-free state .
 A declaration pledging to respect the nuclear weapon-free status of Mongolia was signed by the UN ambassadors for the United States, the United Kingdom, China, France and Russia . The five permanent members of the UN Security Council signed the declaration .
 Mongolia has identified itself as a non-nuclear weapon territory for the past 20 years . Mongolian territory has been identified as a nuclear-armed territory for 20 years.
 Because it is landlocked between Russia and China, the country was prevented from joining a regional nuclear weapon-free zone . However, because it is physically landlocked, it was prevented .
 Mongolia's ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency said it was recognition of the country's neutrality in nuclear power politics . The recent declaration was ""tantamount to recognition of Mongolia's neutrality" in nuclear powers .
 The conference is to take place in Helsinki, Finland, sometime in late 2012 or early 2013 . The conference has support from the Obama administration and many countries around the world . It will be held in Finland .
 Shaul Horev, director of the Israeli Nuclear Energy Committee reporting directly to Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, expressed his sentiments against the conference at the 56th general convention of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 Israel would not partake in a nuclear weaponfree Middle East due to the 'volatile and hostile situation' in the region . Israel would also not partake into a nuclear weapons-free Middle Middle East .
 Amir Oren: "Israel Rejects U.S.-Backed Arab Plan for Conference on Nuclear-Free Mideast" Oren, Amir, wrote in 2012 that Israel rejected Arab plan for conference .
 Exxon Mobil and its Russian partner, Rosneft, are taking steps to begin drilling in the Kara Sea . The Kara Sea is a remote body of water north of Siberia in the Arctic Ocean . Exxon to Drill for Oil in Nuclear Waste-Infested Waters .
 The Arctic seabed is next to the location where the Soviet navy dumped its nuclear reactors . 17,000 containers of radioactive waste were dumped over the span of 25 years .
 Even more dangerously, a K-27 submarine with a nuclear reactor that was discarded by the Soviet navy in 1981 lies at the bottom of the sea . Even more dangerous, it is thought to be a submarine that could be found in the same place .
 There is currently no sign of increased radiation from the submarine . Norwegian and Russian scientists are worried that corrosion of the submarine will damage its nuclear reactor and lead to radioactive releases .
 Greenpeace members and other activists are preparing to campaign against Arctic drilling . Exxon Mobil and Rosneft issued statements assuring that ecological protection norms will be followed . Greenpeace members say they will campaign against drilling .
 Gismatullin, Eduard, "Arctic Oil Near Soviet Toxic Waste in Exxon-Rosneft Plan,"" Bloomberg Businessweek, September 25, 2012 .
 The United States has announced the completion of nuclear weapons tests at the Nevada Test Site (now known as the Nevada National Security Site) and Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico . The tests have been completed at both Nevada and New Mexico sites .
 Bush declared a moratorium on United States full-scale nuclear testing in 1992 . Bush declared the moratorium on U.S. nuclear testing after 1992 .
 The test in Nevada took place in September at the Joint Actinide Shock Physics Experimental Research Facility .
 Scientists use data from the tests to determine how plutonium would react under specific pressures, temperatures and strain-rates . NNSA: Data from NNSA will be used to determine the reaction of plutonium .
 The tests at Sandia Lab used the ""Z Machine" to mimic the fusion reactions of nuclear warheads . The machine allows scientists to analyze plutonium reactions under conditions similar to those of a detonating nuclear bomb .
 Kazumi Matsui, President of Mayors for Peace, wrote a letter of protest to President Barack Obama . Matsui is a former mayor of Tokyo, Japan, and is a member of the Japanese city of peace .
 He wrote, "These repeated tests compel us to believe that the U.S. intends to cling to its nuclear stockpile indefinitely"
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu calls for a 'clear red line' to be drawn on Iran to prevent nuclear weapons . Netanyahu made a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on Iran .
 Israel, the only country in the Middle East that has nuclear weapons, believes that Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons capability . Israel is the only Mideast country that has a nuclear weapon .
 All known intelligence reports say that Iran ceased pursuit of nuclear weapons in 2003 . Iran is believed to have been pursuing nuclear weapons since 2003 .
 The report explains that disarming Trident, the UK's submarine-based nuclear weapons system, is not an impossible task . Disarming Trident is not a 'impossible task' says the report .
 The report examines votes on select nuclear weapons issues by the nine countries that possess nuclear weapons . The U.S., Russia, United Kingdom, France, China, Israel, India, Pakistan and North Korea also voted on the issue . Iran and Japan voted on select weapons issues .
 This report makes it easy to compare these countries' positions on specific issues . It also maps how each country's position toward the issues has changed over time .
 Report provides information on the military exploitation of science, on the responsibility of science to serve society, and the demand for a peaceful orientation of universities . The report also discusses the need for peaceful orientation in universities .
 The video details the catastrophic global consequences of even a 'limited' regional nuclear war on the other side of the planet . The video was released in March .
 The Nuclear Age Peace Foundation will honor Senator Tony de Brum of the Marshall Islands with its 2012 Distinguished Peace Leadership Award on October 21 .
 Senator de Brum has worked tirelessly for peace and justice on behalf of his country . He has been described as a 'traveller' who has dedicated his life to the cause of peace .
 Marshall Islanders seek a peaceful world, free of nuclear weapons, says Marshall Island leader . He and his fellow Marshall Islanders want a peaceful, free world, he says . The Marshall Islands seek to end nuclear weapons .
 They have directly experienced the impact of 67 powerful nuclear weapon tests – the equivalent explosive power of one-and-a-half Hiroshima bombs daily for 12 years . The impact of the 67 tests has been directly experienced by them directly .
 They know first-hand about the tragic effects of a world that uses and maintains nuclear weapon systems . They know how citizens of the world can make an impact to end the nuclear-weapon threats that confront us all .
 It furthers its mission by shining a light on peace leadership and raising awareness and support for important education and advocacy work . The Peace Foundation is a non-profit organization dedicated to peace .
 NAPF's Geneva representative delivered a statement at the 21st session of the United Nations Human Rights Council . Christian N Ciobanu delivered the statement to the council on September 13 .
 U.S. atmospheric nuclear weapons tests conducted between 1946 and 1958 on Marshall Islands . Marshall Islanders continue to be adversely affected by the tests . The statement called on the United States to respect the human rights of the Marshall Islanders .
 NAPF Peace Leadership Program Director Paul K Chappell recently appeared as a guest on the nationallysyndicated David Pakman Show . War Does Not Bring Peace does not bring peace, he says .
 Paul discusses his new book Peaceful Revolution . Paul explains the theories that underlie his work with NAPF's Peace Leadership Program . Paul also discusses his involvement in the Peace Leadership program .
 Click here to see the full ten-minute clip of Paul's appearance on the David Pakman Show . Click here for the video .
 Paul will be traveling around the U.S. throughout the fall giving lectures and workshops on peace leadership . Paul is traveling to the United States to give lectures, workshops and lectures . Paul will also be on a tour of peace leadership in the fall .
 A new park should serve as a monument to Japanese American friendship that rose from the ashes, rather than a celebration of a technology that has brought such destruction to the world . Quotes: "If there was going to be a new park, it should serve . as a solemn monument to
 Failure to recognize this dimension, even in its first iteration, really is a significant injustice."" -Rep. Tom Coburn .
 Dennis Kucinich spoke about the failed bill to create a National Park to commemorate the Manhattan Project . The bill was passed by a House of Representatives .
 "I’m grateful to him for formulating his stance so clearly because he has once again proven the correctness of our approach to missile defense problems," he said .
 The most important thing for us is that even if he doesn't win now, he or a person with similar views may come to power in four years . Even if they don't win, they could be in power in the next four years, he says .